Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his comprehensive briefing today.

Let me align myself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, but let me also
make some comments in my national capacity.

These are historic times for Afghanistan. We have
all been closely watching the key events of the past few
months. Further development cannot be achieved in any
country in a politically unstable environment. We call
upon the Afghan political leaders to engage in mutual
dialogue and to uphold the commitments they have
undertaken. Only a leader with a stable mandate and
internal political support will be suited to address the
remaining challenges the country is facing.

The acceptance of the election results, fulfilment
of commitments and formation of the Government of
national unity are the means of setting the country on
the right track. An inclusive political concept reflecting
the diversity of the Afghan population is crucial. We
therefore welcome the candidates' joint statement
addressed to the NATO summit pledging to form a
national unity Government.

Political stability and economic prosperity are
inseparably linked. Economic situations are sensitive
and reflect political realities, while investors carefully
observe any political mistrust. Despite the continuing
challenges that will require the immediate attention of
the new Government, we have faith that the steps needed
to promote the licit economy and achieve a transparent
and balanced budget will be taken in a timely manner.

The parameters of post-2014 international security
support should be agreed upon as soon as possible,
especially in the light of current events and the mandate
of the International Security Assistance Force coming
to the end. The extremist groups never refrain from
taking advantage of any political crisis. We commend
the work undertaken by the Afghan National Security
Forces in the challenging current circumstances. It will
be crucial to further focus on developing their quality,
loyalty and professionalism. The Slovak Republic is
determined to further participate in that process, be
it through training of the Afghan National Security
Forces or direct financial help.

Apart from the engagement of the international
community in the areas of peace and security,
comprehensive development assistance remains vital
for the country's stability. International assistance
should be multifaceted, long-term and tailor made. It
should encompass humanitarian aid, investments in
institutional and economic development and the rule of
law. Internationally targeted projects aligned with the
priorities of the Afghan Government can improve the
daily lives of the Afghan people.

For Slovakia, Afghanistan remains among the
top three priority programme countries for Slovak
official development assistance. The target areas of
our assistance for the upcoming years are threefold:
the improvement of education, the modernization of
the agricultural sector, and the building of capacities
in the area of security sector reform. However, lasting
success will be very difficult without Afghanistan's
neighbours actively engaging in regional cooperation.
The common interplay between Afghan stability and
regional security is obvious. A stable Afghanistan is a
precondition for a secure region. Durable constructive
engagement by regional partners is a precondition for a
stable Afghanistan.

The pivotal role of the United Nations remains
essential, and we encourage Afghan political leaders
to profit from the huge potential that lies in effective
cooperation with the United Nations. Nevertheless,
outside support itself cannot guarantee progress or a
democratic transition for the country. The ultimate
responsibility for the citizenry rests upon State leaders.
In recent months, the Afghan people demonstrated an
extraordinary amount of bravery when, despite the
threats and attacks of extremist groups, they cast their
votes.

Against the current backdrop of political
uncertainty, let us not forget about all the tremendous
progress the country has achieved in its democratic
transition, from assuming security responsibility to
taking steps towards gender equality. Those important
victories represent the base our future efforts can be
built upon.

Let me conclude by expressing our sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Kubis, for their dedication
and leadership. I congratulate the United Nations
for its action that it undertook in supervising the
unprecedented election audit. I also wish to thank
the team of the Mission for their professional work in
uneasy conditions and reiterate the full support of my
country for the irreplaceable role of UNAMA.

