Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his very
accurate briefing.

The political, historical and religious relevance of
Jerusalem for Israel and Palestine, as well as Christian,
Jewish and Muslim believers all over the world, is
the reason that it has been given a special status. My
Government issued a statement yesterday, which I am
now going to read out:

"The Government of Uruguay reaffirms its
support for General Assembly resolution 181
(1947), which provided for the creation of a Jewish
State and an Arab State in the Palestinian territory,
with Jerusalem as corpus separatum subjected to
a special international regime, while at the same
time as expressing its commitment to Security
Council resolution 478 (1980). In that connection,
the Government of Uruguay expresses its concern
and objection with the decision of the Government
of the United States, which does contribute to
the essential climate of peace and mutual respect
needed to reach a fair, complete and lasting solution
in Middle East."

Uruguay voted in favour of General Assembly
resolution 181 (1947), and reaffirms once more the
special status of the city of Jerusalem according to all
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Security Council.

As stated yesterday by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, the final status of Jerusalem is an issue that
is yet to be resolved. Therefore, the sovereignty and
the boundaries of Jerusalem must be agreed by Israel
and Palestine in bilateral negotiations. As we have
done since 1947, Uruguay underscores the right of
Israel and Palestine to live in peace, within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in an atmosphere of
renewed cooperation and free of any threat or act that
endangers peace.

The two-State solution continues to be the only
viable option to end the conflict. To that end, it will be
necessary to resume direct, bilateral negotiations at the
earliest opportunity so that all pending issues can be
clarified in order to reach a peaceful, fair and lasting
solution to this long-standing conflict.
Exactly 37 years ago today, in this very city and
not very far from here, John Lennon was murdered. In
one of its most famous songs, Lennon, a self-declared
pacifist, imagined a world in which humankind could
live in peace, sharing the whole planet, without reasons
for killing or dying. Lennon was a dreamer, but he was
not the only one. I hope that, one day, his dream will
become a reality.

