Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): A
few days ago, the United States and a few other
countries, sidestepping the Security Council, launched
military action against Iraq in the face of the opposition
of an absolute majority of the international community.
Such an action constitutes a violation of the basic
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
international law. War is bound to bring about
humanitarian disasters. It has already caused civilian
casualties and loss of property in Iraq. War will also
have a negative impact on safety, stability and
development in the region and beyond. This is a matter
of profound concern to us.

The Chinese Government has always advocated a
political settlement to the problem of Iraq within the
United Nations framework. It has also demanded that
the Iraqi Government implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in a comprehensive
and genuine manner. At the same time, we believe that
the international community should respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.

Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), which
was adopted unanimously last November, is an
important basis for the political settlement of the
question of Iraq. It is the universal View of the
international community that achieving the goal of
peacefully disarming Iraq of its weapons of mass
destruction is possible through the strict
implementation of that resolution. China, along with
other concerned countries, has made tireless efforts to
realize that goal. However, to our profound regret, the
weapons inspections being carried out by United
Nations inspectors were suspended at a time when they
had been making steady progress.

The Security Council is entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are in favour of
and support the continued important role of the
Security Council on the question of Iraq. At present,
the Council is undertaking intensive consultations on a
draft resolution concerning the adjustment of the oil for
food programme, on the basis of the proposal put
forward by Secretary-General Annan, with a View to
mitigating the humanitarian emergencies of the Iraqi
people.

The Chinese Government has participated in the
relevant consultations in a positive and constructive
spirit in the hope of achieving a consensus very soon.
The humanitarian relief supplies provided by the
Chinese Government to Iraqi refugees will be shipped
to Jordan in the coming days. China will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance within the limits of its
capabilities.

Opposition to war and the maintenance of peace
are the common aspirations of the world's peoples. The
Chinese Government has been consistently committed
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
advocated the settlement of international disputes by
political means and opposed the use or threat of force
in international affairs. We strongly call on the
countries concerned to halt their military action and to
return to the proper path of the political settlement of
the Iraqi issue.

