Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs for his briefing. I would also like
to thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.

The Council's consideration today of the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
once more gives our delegations an opportunity to
address the events that are unfolding in that region,
events that elicit more fears than hopes, despite the
efforts of the United Nations and the international
community. We will limit our remarks in this debate to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the situations in
Yemen and Syria.

With regard to Syria, while we can welcome the
fact that in the space of a week the Security Council
has succeeded in adopting two resolutions (2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012)), on sending a supervision
mission to that country, that does not make the
situation on the ground any less precarious. Togo
remains concerned by the fact that the parties'
declarations of good intentions are not always followed
by actions that reflect respect for the commitments
they have made, in this case to implementing the six-
point plan of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, Mr. Kofi
Annan.

The Council is nonetheless doing all it can to get
them to do so and to throw all its weight behind a
settlement of this crisis, which has, unfortunately, left
thousands dead, destroyed major parts of the country's
infrastructure and imperilled national unity. The
establishment, two days ago through resolution 2043
(2012) of the United Nations Supervision Mission in
Syria (UNSMIS), is manifest proof of those efforts. In
the final analysis, we continue to hope that the
presence of observers on the ground will promote the
speedy implementation of the Joint Special Envoy's
proposals, even if we see violations of the ceasefire
every day. Togo once again urges every element of the
Syrian Government and opposition to work to bring an
end to the violence and to agree to sit down at the
negotiation table in order to map out together a new
future for their country with the international
community's support. We believe that Mr. Annan's
mission offers Syria a unique opportunity to return to
peace. We urge the country's political class to work to
that end.

On the question of Yemen, we are pleased to note
that the situation there has seen a period of calm since
the holding on 21 February of the presidential election.
The success of that election is a credit to the Yemeni
people and a genuine sign of their willingness to end
the crisis situation that prevailed there and to work
towards finding peace in a fraternal and inclusive
spirit.

While in its presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/8)
of 29 March the Security Council expressed its concern at
the deterioration in cooperation between the political
actors in the country and about the dangers that poses for
transition, it is nonetheless encouraging to note that a
month later the country has seen no major regrettable
developments. Togo welcomes this situation and urges
the Yemeni people to spare no effort in committing their
country to the road to peace, security and prosperity.

My country also encourages the new leaders to
work together with the opposition and representatives
of the various interest groups to bring peace to the
country. In that context, the international community
and the United Nations should continue to support the
legitimate authorities in their fight against the armed
terrorist groups that are proliferating in several regions
of Yemen and that threaten the country's unity and
territorial integrity.

Such support is all the more urgent in view of the
fact that famine and malnutrition continue to ravage
the country. Given that food insecurity, Togo can only
encourage the humanitarian organizations that are
already aiding those who are most helpless in the face
of the conditions of insecurity that obtain in the
country to continue their work, and to invite countries
that possess the means and capacity to support that
work in the most appropriate manner possible. My
country also believes that it is imperative that the
international community help the Government of
Yemen to initiate projects aimed at helping young
people in order to ensure that this important segment of
the population does not fall into despair, violence or
the quest for easy money.

Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we are
compelled to conclude that there has been no
significant progress made in several months. The only
positive note on the military front last month was the
ceasefire agreement between the Islamic Jihad and
Israel that halted the cycle of violence in the Gaza
Strip. On the political front, after the suspension of the
series of direct meetings between Israel and Palestine
begun last January under Jordan's auspices, it is
encouraging to note that the two parties have once
more committed to returning to negotiations. The new
exploratory meeting of the two countries' authorities,
held in Amman on 4 April after the January discussions
had produced no concrete results, is also evidence of
Jordan's continued efforts to relaunch the negotiations
that, as if we needed reminding, have been deadlocked
since September 2010.

Furthermore, the meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of the Quartet and the Secretary-General,
which took place on 11 April in Washington, DC, in
the presence of Special Envoy Tony Blair and Jordan's
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Nasser Judeh, is also
an example of this willingness to restart direct talks
between the two parties. Togo believes that the Quartet
should put pressure on the parties to return to direct
negotiations so that the issues that separate them can
be resolved in favour of a definitive settlement of the
conflict.

Peace in the Middle East depends on a resolution
of the Palestinian question. The international
community should continue to work unflaggingly to
seek appropriate solutions to the conflict and to support
every initiative made in that direction. My country,
which maintains good relations with the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority, encourages both
to commit intensely to direct negotiations, which are
the only route, ultimately, to the creation of a viable
Palestinian State living side by side with the State of
Israel within clearly defined and internationally
recognized borders. Togo also calls on the entire
Palestinian political class, and in particular the most
radical groups, to transcend their rigid positions and to
work together towards direct negotiations with the
State of Israel.

After several decades of conflict that have left
thousands dead on both sides, it is disturbing to note
that the time for peace is being perpetually and
indefinitely postponed. The United Nations and the
international community have the heavy responsibility
of working towards that peace between Palestine and
Israel, and, beyond that, throughout the Middle East.
However, they cannot reach that goal unless all parties
directly concerned commit to working in good faith to
promote peace and security for their peoples and the
nations of the region.

