Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to
lead the Council this month. Thank you for the
opportunity to address the Council on the role of
business in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-
conflict peace-building.

The debate on the role of business in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building is long overdue. As members are aware, my
own country, South Africa, is celebrating 10 years of
freedom this month. Among the many significant
contributions made to our freedom struggle was the
role that businesses, both local and international,
played in practising corporate and social responsibility
in South Africa. Some businesses began by hiring
black and white people to work together, performing
the same functions, thereby acting as bridge-builders
across the racial, social, ethnic, political, economic and
regional divides in our country. Other businesses
provided resources to community organizations, which
helped to create social conditions in which people
could live and work together as neighbours. By the
time the political negotiating process led to a political
solution, the people of South Africa had learned about
the possibility of living together in peace, and by then
some of the businesses were ready to engage in a
reconstruction and development programme aimed at
creating a democratic society.

It has now become generally accepted that there
is an inescapable linkage between peace and
development, particularly economic development.
Without peace, there can be no sustainable
development, which is an important antidote against
conflict. There is further agreement that the role of the
private sector is very critical to economic development.

However, in a conflict situation, or even in a
post-conflict reconstruction phase, the private sector is
reduced to a minor role. The international community
and donors have the main responsibility to prevent
conflict and ensure peace-building. Only once there is
peace can the private sector come in and make its
contribution towards creating growth and prosperity.

The challenge has always consisted in trying to
define a role for the private sector in those processes.
This is complicated by the fact that the private sector is
not limited only to the vast majority of businesses that
play a positive role in contributing to peace and
development. The businesses that trade in conflict
diamonds in Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are a part, albeit a negative part, of the
private sector as well. The individuals who participate
in the informal sector, selling light goods and fruits, are
part of the private sector even though they do not
contribute to the tax base of that particular country.
However, for the purposes of this debate, we are
limiting ourselves to what may be called "the regular
businesses", those that make a difference in the lives of
countries emerging from conflict.

It is thus clear that the private sector cannot, on
its own, substitute for the international community and
the development partners in addressing the issues of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction. However, business has a decisive role
to play, if that role is well articulated and understood.

Allow me to share some of the experiences we
gathered in Guinea-Bissau and Burundi, as members of
the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory
Committee for African Countries emerging from
conflict.

In both countries, the eruption of conflict drove
the international private sector away. The local
businesses, however, did not have the option of leaving
their own countries and were forced to find ways of
continuing to operate under difficult conditions. The
local business owners faced a collapsing economic
infrastructure, limited - if any - access to credit,
deteriorating transport systems, communication
deficiencies, evaporating energy supplies and other
disruptions to production that result from conflict.
Eventually, many of these businesses were forced to
close, while others barely survived.

Meanwhile, the rising conflict did not prevent
Governments from demanding contracts for the supply
of products and services from local businesses, even
during the conflict. Those Governments were in no
position to meet their commitments under the contracts
they signed, and that resulted in the build-up of
substantial arrears carried by the local private sector.
As those countries begin to emerge from conflict, it has
become one of the high priorities for the incoming
Governments to receive assistance in settling debts to
the local businesses. The international community has
to find a way to assist the new Governments in
fulfilling these obligations in order to avert widespread
bankruptcies with the resultant job losses and shrinking
business bases in these countries emerging from
conflict.

Settling the outstanding government debts to
local businesses also provides a much-expected
injection of money back into the economy. It allows the
local private sector to gain access to desperately
needed capital, which enables it to expand and take
advantage of the new opportunities offered by the
return to peace and stability. Often it is the local
businesses that offer employment opportunities to
demobilized fighters who are forced to disarm as part
of the reconstruction and post-conflict resolution.
Successful disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement or repatriation need a substantial and
sustained local economy to absorb the demobilized
fighters.

Furthermore, a healthy local private sector is an
attraction and prerequisite for the involvement of the
international private sector in a country emerging from
conflict. To put it more bluntly, foreign businesses are
reluctant to move into countries where local business is
not investing its own money in its own country. The
partnership between local and international business is
a critical confidence-building step for a country
emerging from conflict. It contributes to the success in
post-conflict reconstruction and development by
becoming an engine of economic growth.

The international community is the most
important player in creating the political environment
in which the private sector can do business. As
business is driven by the profit margin, it needs peace
and stability in which to operate. That can be best
achieved by a concerted effort by the international
community through a clear commitment to
peacekeeping and the deployment of peacekeepers in
situations of conflict.

Bilateral and multilateral incentives such as
investment guaranties and lending policies could play a
role in spurring economic activity. However, those
actions and instruments have to correspond to the
challenges of the specific situation. In the case of
Guinea-Bissau and Burundi, the clear priority, as stated
by representatives of the private sectors we met in both
those countries, is for the international community to
provide budget support to the two Governments so that
the State institutions can pay their arrears to the private
companies contracted by them during the times of
conflict.

