Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his very informative
briefing on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the
current developments in the region.
Poland noted many positive developments in West
Africa and the Sahel during the reporting period. We
commend Benin, Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria and Senegal
for holding generally peaceful elections and having
experienced the alternation of power. Against this
positive backdrop, pre- and post-electoral periods
continue to be characterized by tensions, antagonistic
confrontations and disputes. We therefore encourage
national authorities and stakeholders to work together
to ensure conditions conducive to peaceful, inclusive
and credible elections.

In that context, the equal participation of women
and youth in political, social and economic processes
is of the utmost importance. While welcoming the
progress made in the adoption and implementation of
gender-parity legislation in several countries in the
region, we call on national authorities to enhance the
participation of women and youth through national
peace, security and development strategies.

We remain gravely concerned by the deteriorating
security situation in West Africa and the Sahel, resulting
in spiralling terrorist activities and Violent extremism.
The serious humanitarian consequences, including a
lack of access to basic services - especially health,
education, food and markets - are a matter of serious
concern. We are also concerned about the increasingly
visible involvement of extremist groups in several
West African countries. It is necessary to help these
countries build resilience to new threats, including
ethnic and religious conflicts inspired by extremists.
It is equally important to support local Governments in
the prevention of inter-tribal conflicts and to fight the
dissemination of stereotypes, the aim of which may be
to marginalize certain social and political groups and
destabilize the situation in the region.

We therefore call on national, regional and
international partners to intensify their efforts aimed at
addressing the root causes of insecurity and instability
in the region, including poverty and inequality,
exclusion and marginalization, the lack of access to
social services and economic opportunities, human
rights Violations and the impact of climate change.
The cross-border character of these threats requires
transnational responses. In this context, we commend
the efforts being made by countries participating in the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to address
the multifaceted challenges in the region.

The challenges in West Africa and the Sahel are
complex and multidimensional and require a sustained
and holistic approach from all stakeholders. In this
regard, we commend the engagement of all partners
in addressing these challenges, including through the
implementation of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery
and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko
Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, the G-5 Sahel
Priority Investment Programme, the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel. Accordingly, we also wish
to commend the Governments of West Africa and the
Sahel, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the G-5 Sahel, the Mano River
Union, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake
Chad Basin Commission, for their engagement and
cooperation with UNOWAS.

Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
as well as the staff of UNOWAS, for their continued
efforts to advance peace and security in West Africa
and the Sahel.

