Mr. Al-Nasser: I am honoured to speak here today
to tell the Security Council about the efforts of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in promoting
peace and tolerance through a special focus on youth.
I wish to thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for
organizing this important meeting, which has particular
importance for the maintenance of International Peace
and Security. The fact that Crown Prince Al Hussein
bin Abdullah II presided over this meeting earlier
illustrates Jordan's great leadership as an active member
of the Security Council.

For me personally, as well as in my capacity as
High Representative of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, placing the world's young people at the
forefront of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts
is crucial at both the level of prevention and in post-
conflict situations. We know from our experiences
in supporting youth-led initiatives on the ground that
peaceful and inclusive societies cannot be sustainably
built without the participation and engagement of
young people. Two thirds of the world's population are
comprised of youth. Furthermore, in most conflict-
affected and post-conflict countries, young people
account for more than 50 per cent of the population.

However, I find that, to date, our discussion on
youth, peace and security has been limited, both in
its focus and the degree to which it actually engages
young people. The cultural dimension is essential when
addressing youth issues, in particular to safeguard their
hearts and minds from the influence of radicalization.
I know how this body, the Security Council, has
spearheaded the world's thinking on a number of
critical matters regarding global peace and security.
For youth, however, the international community still
lacks a comprehensive position and holistic policy,
commitments, priorities and responsibilities to fulfil
the aspirations of young people around the world.

That is where the role ofthe Alliance of Civilizations
comes into play in order to complement the efforts of
United Nations bodies and of Member States. We are
able to do so through practical projects and activities
thanks to the financial support of Member States,
specialized non-governmental organizations and
corporate-sector partners. Let me start by mentioning
our fellowship programme.

Through the programme, every year, we sponsor
young people from Western and Eastern countries and
conduct country visits with them. That programme
enables young people to understand other cultures and
traditions, to believe in the importance of living with
the others and to encourage them to reject Violence
based on culture or religion. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Jordan for hosting the fellows
earlier this year, along with Morocco and Qatar. I look
forward to receiving the support of other countries that
wish to do the same.

The Youth Solidarity Fund, through which the
Alliance of Civilizations has reached more than 10,000
youth-led organizations and hundreds of thousands of
young people around the world with its grant-making
and capacity-building workshops. Another example is
the Intercultural Innovation Award, which is a model
example of public-private engagement between the
Alliance of Civilizations and BMW Group, through
which we support innovative grass-roots initiatives that
advance cross-cultural dialogue. A more recent example
is Entrepreneurs for Social Change. There are other
programmes as well, including Plural+, which gives
young film-makers a platform to speak about identity;
and the annual Summer School, which brings together
young activists and social innovators from around the
world for a week oftraining exercises here in New York.
All of those Alliance of Civilizations programmes are
oriented around the recognition of one fundamental
truth: that the primary agents of change - not just in
the future, but in our present - are young people.

Over the last decade, the world's attention to
terrorism and Violent extremism has brought a sharp
focus to the role of youth in the commission of terrorist
acts. We all know that, through media and the use of
information and communication technologies, youth
are exposed to new and emerging threats to global
security, but also to themselves. Sadly, recent dramatic
events have demonstrated that young people can
indeed be seduced into committing heinous crimes
and unspeakable violence, while also being Victims of
such acts and environments. I feel deeply for them, in
particular those who live in zones of protracted conflict
and whose only mistake is having been born there.

Many countries with a high proportion of young
people have not suffered violence, due to a high gross
domestic product and social welfare. In fact, research
suggests that a higher risk of Violent conflict exists in
countries where youth "bulges" coincide with periods
of long-term economic decline, limited educational
and employment opportunities, exclusion from social,
cultural and political participation, and an absence of
equal opportunities. Most young people do not engage
in Violence unless they were taught to do so by someone
older, even in conflict settings. To be effective in our
work, we need to recognize that fact.

Many young people suffer high levels of relative
deprivation, discrimination and exclusion, and many
young men do not fit the social standards of manhood;
and yet most do not engage in Violence. Studies
suggest that strong communities and young people's
involvement in community associations expand their
sense of belonging, and that such opportunities act as
important deterrents to engagement in violence. We
need to partner with young people to assert positive
group identities, and sweep the rug from underneath
extremists who try to provide them with one. But
that is not the headline. For me, the headline remains
that young people are an extraordinary force of
social progress, development and, eventually, human
advancement. Young women and men are important
drivers and agents of change in the reconstruction and
development of their societies.

Today, young people are often more open to
change, feedback and learning, and tend to be more
future-oriented. Today they are more idealistic, creative
and innovative, and perhaps more willing to take risks.
Their ability to interact with one another and with
adults, and to communicate, is also unprecedented.
How do I know that? I know that because of various
activities. We have hundreds of successful examples
of young people who started their lives as activists
in the area of innovation, promoting coexistence
among faiths, opposing social injustice and addressing
sectarian violence and tensions in their countries
through meaningful activities and venues.

Giving young people a stake in their societies
during the transition period after violent conflict
is important for long-term peace and security. That
said, we must also recognize that in conflict-affected
countries, youth structures, systems and networks,
where they exist, often have limited political influence,
weak capacity and are poorly resourced. Youth policies
tend to be underfunded and under implemented. Few of
them make specific contributions to peace and security,
such as the need to prevent the engagement of youth
in violence, to protect young men and women from
violence and to promote meaningful participation in
political processes.

Overall, the evidence suggests that in the context
of peace and security, many Member States do not
pay sufficient attention to their youth population.
There is sometimes a lack of trust and understanding,
political will and, in some cases, limited capacity
and resources to act. But this debate is a sign that the
tide is turning. Under the initiative of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, the Security Council is boosting
the role of young people as partners in peace, security
and in countering violent extremism. To recognize the
positive role young people can play, several entities of
the United Nations - the Peacebuilding Commission,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund, UNICEF, the Alliance
of Civilizations and others - in partnership with such
civil society organizations as Search for Common
Ground, World Vision and the United Network of
Young Peacebuilders, published the Guiding Principles
on Young People's Participation in Peacebuilding last
year.

In conclusion, I firmly believe that those principles

should guide our discussions in the Council today and
in the future. Young people's participation is essential
to successful peacebuilding. Around the world, young
people are already leaders of today, not just leaders
of tomorrow. We must use this platform to help them
amplify and scale up their efforts. I am personally
committed to doing so, and the Alliance of Civilizations
stands ready to work with the Council and engage
further with the United Nations system to address these
questions. In the face of Violent extremism, partnering
with young people and enhancing their dedication to
peace must be part of the solution.

