Mr. Imran Khan (Pakistan): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We extend our special thanks to Foreign
Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado for presiding over
the meeting. I also extend our thanks to the briefers for
giving us insight on the issue.

Today's meeting is a manifestation of the
importance that we all attach to the issue of climate
change. As the single-biggest challenge the world faces
today, climate change is indeed a defining issue of our
time. The sheer scale of the problem has the potential
to dictate the future of our discussions, business and
financial flows and, above all, the way we live.

Climate change is a threat multiplier for Pakistan.
Besides the tragic human and material costs,
climate-induced threats impede our ability to achieve
national priorities, promote sustainable development
and growth and ensure economic prosperity for our
people. It is also a dilemma of our time that the ones
who have contributed the least to climate change are
suffering the most. For example, Pakistan's per capita
emission of greenhouse gases is one of the lowest in the
world, yet we are the eighth most vulnerable country
in the world. We are home to one of the world's oldest
civilizations, which developed around great rivers, and
yet, as a lower-riparian State, we are suffering from
a water-stressed situation, which has the potential to
devastate the breadbasket of not just Pakistan but the
whole of South Asia.

Climate-induced threats to the peace and security of
our planet are no secret. The Council has been discussing
them since 2007. The latest Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change report also acknowledges that
climate-related risks to human security will increase
with global warming. The question is how to deal with
that to avoid conflicts. We believe addressing the root
causes of climate change is the solution, as by merely
curing the symptoms we cannot cure the disease.

Over decades we have developed principles and
frameworks supported by scientific evidence. Now it
is time for action. Collectively, we must strengthen
exchanges and cooperation to respond to climate change
and provide assistance to developing countries through
technology transfers, capacity-building and financing.

We believe that discussions on climate change must
acknowledge the long-established principles developed
under the relevant conventions, the most important of
which is the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change. Lastly, we also believe that actions on
this issue should be undertaken under the confines of
the mandates of the relevant bodies.

