Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I wish to convey our appreciation
for the opportunity to participate in the Security
Council's open debate on small arms.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report,
contained in document S/2008/258 of 17 April 2008.
The report highlights various aspects of the issue of
small arms, with emphasis on the negative impact that
illicit small arms continue to have on security, human
rights and socio-economic development, in particular
in areas of crisis and in post-conflict situations. The
issues raised remain a major challenge to the
international community and require multidimensional
responses.

The complexity of the issue of small arms
challenges the mandate of the United Nations. Nigeria
would therefore continue to support the collective
action of Member States to advance the achievements
made since the adoption of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects in 2001. However, if the
Programme of Action is to be successfully
implemented, there is a need to integrate national,
subregional and regional strategies to complement the
international dimension of the problem. In addition,
collaborative efforts between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission
in integrating a framework related to the issue of small
arms and light weapons should be devised.

Nigeria remains convinced that the best and most
effective strategy for achieving our goals is through the
elaboration of a legally binding global instrument to
stem the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms,
including the full implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. We further believe in the
development and implementation of other international
instruments, such as the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons; and instruments on trade, brokering
and end use. The United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and Security Council embargoes
should also be included.

Furthermore, we reiterate Nigeria's support for
the enforcement of Council resolutions on arms
embargoes and believe that the maximum cooperation
of Member States in providing requisite information on
violation of those embargoes would strengthen the
common resolve to address the problem. It is not
insignificant in that regard to point out the role of
producers in furnishing accurate data on their trade in
those weapons with Member States.

Nigeria also wishes to emphasize the importance
of ensuring the effective collection of weapons, their
storage and destruction in post-conflict situations in the
context of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes. The inclusion of
DDR programmes in the peacekeeping mandate for
States emerging form conflict situations will serve the
early integration of the affected States. We are
confident that those programmes will continue to form
part of future mandates of peacekeeping operations in
order to avoid relapses into conflict.

The adoption of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons
is indicative of what can be achieved when political
will is backed by action. For the Nigerian Government,
that could only be a stopgap measure. We reiterate that
only a legally binding international instrument on the
transfer of small arms and light weapons would satisfy
the yearnings and aspirations of victim States and
peoples. We appreciate General Assembly resolution
60/81 of 8 December 2005 establishing a group of
governmental experts to enhance international
cooperation on brokering.

We are pleased to note that the group of
governmental experts set up pursuant to resolution
61/89 of 6 December 2006, entitled "Towards an arms
trade treaty: establishing common international
standards for the import, export and transfer of
conventional arms", has commenced its deliberations,
and we await its findings.

Nigeria's efforts in those matters are reflected in
its firm commitment to regional cooperation, as well as
to the implementation, jointly with other countries in
the subregion of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), of the ECOWAS
Convention on Small Arms. Together with States
members of the Community, we have converted the
moratorium into a legally binding instrument. We trust
that the support of the international community for
those efforts will remain strong. That, in the end,
would constitute for our countries an endorsement of
the path that our leaders have chosen to tread, as well
as a contribution to peace, security, stability and
development in our region.

Let me conclude my remarks by emphasizing the
need to strengthen international cooperation, assistance
and capacity-building. We hope that we can count on
our international development partners in that regard.

Finally, we want to thank the Security Council
and South Africa for convening this meeting.

