Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, for his informative briefing and personal
commitment to the matter at hand. I also thank the Swiss
Ambassador, Mr. Jiirg Lauber, who is doing extremely
useful work as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. I also thank Ms. Fatima
Mohammad, Permanent Observer of the African Union,
for her important statement.

Today I want to focus on three points: first, the
preparation of the 2020 elections; secondly, the human
rights situation; and, thirdly, the role of the international
community in supporting Burundi.

First, I will address the elections in 2020. France
would like to welcome the recognition last week of the
Congres national pour la liberte, led by Agathon Rwasa,
as a political party, which allows it to participate in the
upcoming elections. That is a step in the right direction
and confirms the approach initiated by President
Nkurunziza last June in committing to not stand for
re-election.

We are indeed convinced that Burundi will find
its way back to stability by holding free and inclusive
elections in 2020, in accordance with the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement. It is now time for
Burundi to prepare, without delay, for those elections in
the best possible way. The positive momentum that has
been kick-started must now be maintained by ensuring
that all political parties have fair and equitable access to
the elections. The democratic space must be preserved
and open to all, and civil and political rights must be
respected to allow for a peaceful debate.

To that end, I encourage the Burundian authorities
to continue the inter-Burundian dialogue, which
is a key dialogue between the authorities and the
opposition. In that regard, I would like to acknowledge
the personal involvement of the facilitator mandated by
the East African Community, former President Mkapa,
whose determination to stay on course deserves to be
commended. We must build on the work he has done
and find ways together to continue his efforts.

Secondly, with respect to human rights, France
respects Burundi's sovereignty but remains particularly
vigilant and expects Burundi to take additional and
concrete measures to respect human rights. After the
unfortunate closure of the Burundi office of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, we wish to reiterate our call on the authorities
of Burundi to engage in fuller cooperation with the
United Nations human rights protection mechanisms
and to fight impunity. We stand ready to support the
Burundian authorities in the resumption of dialogue
with United Nations entities.

France is closely monitoring the humanitarian
situation and the fate of internally displaced persons
and refugees. It is important that refugee returns
take place on a voluntary basis and in a safe and
dignified manner, in accordance with the principles
of international humanitarian law. We count on the
Burundian authorities to ensure that refugee returns
take place in the best possible conditions and we are
ready to assist them in so doing.

Finally, the international community must remain
fully mobilized to support the people of Burundi. Next
year's elections will be a crucial and sensitive time.
We must not abandon Burundi in midstream. It is up to
the East African Community and the African Union to
continue their work to provide the best possible support
for the preparation of the elections and the emergence
of the country from crisis. The United Nations will of
course have an important role to play in providing the
best possible support for the process at the regional level.

We are also increasingly concerned about the
increase in violence in the Great Lakes region. We
would like to express our concern at the possibility that
increased tensions could lead to further destabilization
at the regional level. Nevertheless, we note the desire
for peaceful change that has been expressed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the course of the
recent presidential elections, which reflects a collective
aspiration for greater stability and prosperity. We
hope that this positive development will inspire all the
countries of the region and we are ready to support
them as they move in that direction.

In conclusion, we would like to say that the mission
of Mr. Kafando and his team remains necessary and
we encourage the Special Envoy to continue his
consultative work in order to rapidly present the Council
with options on the role that the United Nations could
play in support of regional efforts.
