Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank Judge Fausto Pocar,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Ms. Carla del Ponte,
Chief Prosecutor of the ICTY, for their comprehensive
reports and briefings and for outlining the
achievements and challenges that the Tribunal is facing
at this stage of its activities. The Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has studied with due attention
the reports submitted by the President of the Tribunal
and the Prosecutor.

I would like to assure the Security Council that
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities remain
committed to continuing their full cooperation with the
ICTY. That was re-emphasized by all representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the post-election context
during the recent meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council in Brussels. Needless to say, that approach is
of the utmost importance for the strengthening of our
judicial system and is firmly linked to our aspiration to
Euro-Atlantic integration.

Throughout the post-conflict period, the ICTY
has played a prominent role in strengthening the rule of
law in our region by investigating and bringing to
justice indicted war criminals and by helping and
inspiring our national courts to do the same.
Furthermore, I have the honour to inform members that
my country has just become a member of the
Partnership for Peace programme. That achievement
should be seen as an additional impetus for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to cooperate fully and closely with the
ICTY.
Thus far, the authorities at the State and entity
levels have undertaken every possible effort to locate
and arrest those indicted war criminals who are still at
large. That goal, unfortunately, has not yet been
achieved. Our intelligence agencies have carried out
many activities to identify and track the networks for
harbouring war criminals who might be on our
territory. Of course, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
prepared to redouble those efforts in the forthcoming
period to try to achieve more concrete results.

Nevertheless, I would like to remind Council
members that, so far, the most wanted indictees have
been arrested outside the territory of my country. To
date, neither international nor domestic intelligence has
provided any traces within the borders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that could lead us to the whereabouts of
those whom we are trying to arrest. We will continue to
undertake all possible measures to ensure that all
perpetrators of war crimes on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, if they are located in Bosnia, are
brought before the Tribunal or before our national
courts with the Tribunal's consent. That is the only way
that the cause ofjustice can be served.

1 would also like to inform the Council that the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is fully
committed to the goals that have been set for the ICTY,
discussed this issue at its fourth regular session, held
on 13 December 2006, and reached the conclusion that
the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina should
continue to fully support the work of the ICTY. The
presidency stated that all persons accused of war
crimes must be brought to justice.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has completed its
judicial framework to deal with war crimes. It is an
important part of our national judicial system, aimed at
ensuring that intermediate- and lower-ranking indictees
are tried in accordance with rule 11 bis of the Tribunal.
I am pleased to inform members that the War Crimes
Chamber of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been processing the significant number of cases
referred to it by the ICTY, as well those raised by the
Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is noteworthy
that the project to extend the recently formed Detention
Unit of the War Crimes Chamber is under way.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
to the international community for the assistance
provided to train and equip our judicial staff. I would
also like to thank the international personnel who are
helping our staff to carry out their duties in accordance
with the highest judicial standards.

