Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes adoption of resolution 2428 (2018), which
renews the sanctions regime on South Sudan for one
year. France nevertheless listened attentively to our
colleagues from Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea,
and shares their desire for the Security Council to
remain united in supporting the political process and
initiatives led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and African Union.

The resolution is not intended to undermine
negotiations conducted by IGAD. Its goal is to protect
civilian populations. It enables the establishment of an
arms embargo that France has been urgently calling
for several years. By limiting the flow of weapons
towards South Sudan, the arms embargo is one of the
most important measures that the Council can adopt
to protect South Sudanese civilians. Furthermore, by
adopting individual sanctions against two important
military leaders from both sides, the Security Council
is sending the clear message that impunity for acts of
violence against Civilians and violations of the most
basic human rights and international humanitarian
law can no longer be tolerated. Those who seek to
prolong the conflict in contempt oftheir our own fellow
citizens must be made aware that they will suffer the
consequences of their actions.

The situation in South Sudan will improve in
concrete terms only when the conflict is ended. France
is encouraged by recent progress in the political process.
France welcomes the commitment of IGAD and calls
on the South Sudanese parties to finalize an agreement
as soon as possible so that weapons are laid down once
and for all and that the South Sudanese people can
finally return to living their lives in the peace to which
they aspire. Members may rest assured of France's
determined commitment to that end.

Lastly, let me conclude by welcoming our
new colleague from C6te d'lvoire, His Excellency
Mr. Kacou Houadja Leon Adom. It gives me great
pleasure to welcome him here. Let me take this
opportunity to commend the outstanding work of His
Excellency Mr. Djedje, who successfully carried out his
interim duties following the passing of Bernard Tanoh-
Boutchoue, who is sadly missed but whose memory is
very much alive for us all and will remain a source of
inspiration for the Council and myself - and whom I
will never forget.

