Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Having voted against the
draft resolution today, I would like to briefly share with
the Council the reasons that compelled us to do so.
First of all, I wish to recall and underline that the
partnership State established by the 1959 London and
Zurich Treaties in the shape of the Republic of Cyprus
and the Government of Cyprus collapsed in 1963,
when the Greek Cypriots forcefully expelled the
Turkish Cypriots from all State institutions, including
the Government. Since that day, there has not been a
joint and constitutional government representing the
whole of Cyprus, either legally or functionally, and the
two peoples have been living separately under their
own administrations.

As Council members know, resolution 186 (1964)
setting up the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) following the Greek Cypriot
armed offensive against the Turkish Cypriots and the
subsequent Council resolutions extending the mandate
of the Force could not be accepted by the Turkish
Cypriot side or, as one of the guarantors of Cyprus, by
Turkey.

The main reason for that has been the references
made in all of these resolutions to the Government of
Cyprus, which, in reality, has been representing only
the Greek Cypriots since 1963. As a direct
consequence of this, consent of the Turkish Cypriot
side has never been formally sought, whereas
UNFICYP should have functioned with the open
consent of both parties on the island. Actually, this
wrong approach - to consider the Government of
Cyprus as the sole Government of the whole island -
has unfortunately been the main obstacle on the way to
finding a just, lasting and comprehensive solution for
over 45 years.

Turkey has never objected to the intent behind the
establishment of UNFICYP, which was to protect the
Turkish Cypriots. Our objection has always been to the
way these resolutions are adopted and the language
they contained. Yet, thanks to the spirit of goodwill and
cooperation displayed by the Turkish Cypriot side,
UNFICYP has been functioning in the northern part of
the island, in accordance with the modalities set by the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
09-35343

It is for these reasons of principle that Turkey felt
the need to vote against the resolution. As to the text
itself, we have already shared with the members of the
Council our detailed views and objections regarding
several aspects of the resolution, so I will not repeat
them. I have also conveyed them in writing to the
presidency of the Council in our previous
consultations.

We look forward to the day when the Cyprus
issue is solved along well-established United Nations
parameters on the basis of a new partnership within the
framework of a bizonal, bicommunal federation in line
with the political equality of the two parties. The
09-35343
Turkish Cypriots, by voting "yes" in the referendum in
2004, have proven that they want a just and lasting
comprehensive settlement. Once again, they are
prepared not to spare any effort to achieve a durable
and equitable solution. We very much hope that the
Greek Cypriots will respond positively to the call of
the Turkish Cypriots.

