I would like to start by thanking Mr. Pedersen for his briefing and Ms. Mustafa for her moving briefing. At the end of March, Mr. Pedersen made a call that comprised three main elements: the need for an immediate nationwide ceasefire, the need for the large-scale release of detainees, and the need for full humanitarian access (see S/2020/254). These elements are indeed essential - also in the fight against coronavirus disease - and we continue our support with a view to fully implementing efforts on those elements. Let us be clear: during the last month, infections have doubled in Syria. Although the numbers are low, the fact that the pandemic has been spreading throughout the country is worrying, especially as testing capacity remains limited. The prevention of this spread must be an absolute priority for Syria, as the virus may not only entail a health crisis, but it could also lead to a further worsening of the dire socioeconomic conditions that Syrians across the country are facing. We are relieved about the relative calm in the north-west of the country since the Russian-Turkish ceasefire arrangement was implemented at the beginning of March. However, recent attacks illustrate the fragility of the situation. We repeat that any counter-terrorism activity should respect human rights and international humanitarian law. The risks for hundreds of thousands of vulnerable civilians in this region are enormous. We therefore urge all parties to refrain from violence, reduce tension and exercise maximum restraint. The United Nations should play a central role in the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, as well as in its monitoring. The recent protests in the south and elsewhere in the country are a symptom of a far greater crisis. Little progress has been made on the political level. However, after nine years of violence and brutal suppression, the long road to peace can only pass through an inclusive political process. We therefore encourage all parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, to fully engage in the upcoming planned meeting of the Constitutional Committee. The political track must urgently be reinvigorated, in line with an immediate and full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). Tangible progress must also urgently be made with regard to political prisoners and missing persons. It is high time to move beyond one-for-one prisoner exchanges. It is high time for the Syrian authorities to release those arbitrarily detained and to share information on all missing persons. Access to detainees must be ensured in line with international regulations. As Ms. Mustafa has said, families of the disappeared continue to suffer from the lack of information about their missing loved ones. They grieve emotionally, but they also have to face the consequences of continuous administrative and judicial restrictions that affect their lives on a daily basis. We therefore encourage the sustained engagement of the Special Envoy in this regard. We also salute Ms. Mustafa's courage and actions with respect to accountability. In order to break the cycle of violence, justice must take place. Belgium fully supports all accountability initiatives, including the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and its support for criminal proceedings in national and international courts Finally, the current state of the Syrian economy is a consequence of nine years of war, corruption, mismanagement and oppression. European Union sanctions are targeted at those who ordered or carried out attacks and acts of torture against their own people, made or used chemical weapons, or built their personal fortune on the war economy. These sanctions are carefully crafted to avoid any adverse humanitarian effects or unintended consequences for persons who are not targeted. The European Union and its member States have continuously supported the Syrian people and are collectively the largest humanitarian donor to Syria, as was clearly evidenced at the last Brussels Conference at the end of June. Indeed, we have contributed over €17 billion since the beginning of the Syrian war.
