Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to express our gratitude to the United
States for its efforts in preparing resolution 2321 (2016),
adopted today. We thank China for its diplomatic
and political efforts aimed at restoring stability and
ensuring security on the Korean peninsula, and for its
support for the resolution.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2321 (2016)
sends a very strong and firm signal from all members
of the Security Council that we will not accept the
latest measures adopted by the Democratic People's
Republic ofKorea, especially following its fifth nuclear
test on 9 September, which represents a violation of the
country's commitments under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and resolutions of international
legality. The test also undermines the non-proliferation
regime as a whole.

Resolution 2321 (2016) strengthens sanctions
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We welcome the balanced drafting of the resolution,
which takes into account the political process and the
importance of resuming the Six-Party Talks aimed at
denuclearizing the Korean peninsula. The resolution
also seeks to avoid exacerbating the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We do not seek to impose sanctions on the people of
North Korea or to deprive them of the humanitarian
assistance and development projects carried out in
their country by the United Nations and its specialized
agencies and other donors. Furthermore, the sanctions
should not have an adverse effect on the work of
embassies in Pyongyang, in accordance with the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 and the
Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963.

Today, Egypt believes that resolution 2321 (2016)
represents a step forward on a path that will not
undermine the non-proliferation regime based on the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). Egypt has always warned against double
standards and double criteria when it comes to nuclear
non-proliferation and denuclearization in our region. A
single country in the Middle East has not yet become
a member of the NPT. This is an issue that Egypt and
other countries of the Middle East have not accepted
and are never going to accept. Today's adoption of
resolution 2321 (2016) represents an opportunity to
remind the international community and members of
the Security Council of that reality, and we urge the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities in this regard.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the prominent role
played by the Security Council and the importance
of its unity and of working constructively within the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and its Group of Experts in order to implement
the resolutions of the Security Council and to preserve
international legality and the Council's authority.

