Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I thank Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Kairat Umarov of Kazakhstan, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, and Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for
their valuable briefings and input.

To promote its political-security conditions and
socioeconomic development, Afghanistan needs
sustained international support. From that perspective,
the recent Geneva conference on Afghanistan
demonstrated the international community's unwavering
support for the country in its endeavour for peace,
stability and prosperity.

In the political field, the holding of the parliamentary
election was a successful development despite the
security threats. It strengthened and will continue to
further consolidate the foundations of democracy in
the country. We congratulate Afghanistan on that
achievement, which must be complemented by the
presidential election in April 2019. Iran stands ready to
extend all possible assistance for the successful holding
of that election.

We also welcome the renewed efforts for peace
and reconciliation in Afghanistan. Currently, there is
a strong national, regional and global consensus that
there is no military solution in that country. Therefore,
the time is ripe for an inclusive political solution, which
should be owned and led by the Afghan Government
and people. The complementary Kabul, Tashkent
and Moscow formats attest to that momentum, which
must be seized. The international community should
facilitate intra-Afghan dialogue and inclusive and
comprehensive talks. Genuine strong international
support and domestic and regional inclusion are the key
to success.

Furthermore, in order to lead to a durable solution,
such efforts need to take into account the underlying
causes of instability and insecurity in the country over
the past four decades. One such cause of instability is
the presence of foreign forces, which has traditionally
provided a recruiting ground for extremists. That
is why we have never believed that such forces have
contributed to Afghanistan's peace and stability.
We therefore continue to urge that all foreign forces,
regardless of their mandate and structure, be withdrawn
from Afghanistan in a time-bound and responsible way.
Instead of deploying foreign forces, every effort should
be made to support and strengthen Afghanistan's
military and security forces. That is one of the main
requirements for the long-term stability of Afghanistan
and should therefore be pursued as a high priority.

It is particularly essential to combat terrorist groups,
such as Daesh, whose introduction into Afghanistan
has led to increased bloodshed and dangerous sectarian
tendencies. That alarming and horrific trend needs to
be stopped before it reaches catastrophic proportions.

Since terrorism and drug trafficking have
always been mutually reinforcing in Afghanistan, a
two-pronged strategy to simultaneously fight drug
trafficking and terrorism should be adopted. That is
essential given the rise in terrorist activities, as well
as the fact that, according to the Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2018 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, opium poppy cultivation is still at the second-
highest level since 1994. At the same time, in order
to fight the drug threat effectively, the international
community should continue to support Afghanistan's
economic development. In that regard, we will continue
our assistance to promote Afghanistan's socioeconomic
development. Currently, certain efforts are under
way to ensure that such measures are carried out in a
systematic and sustained manner.

We support the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and underline
the need for a strong partnership between the United
Nations agencies and the country.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the resolve of
the people and the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to continue their support to the fraternal people
and the Government of Afghanistan in their search for
peace and prosperity.

The meeting rose at 2 pm.
