Mr. Mielus (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun and
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their informative briefings on recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau.

Reported delays in preparations for the holding
of legislative elections raise our deep concern. The
credible conduct of the legislative elections is a crucial
step towards the resumption of peacebuilding and an
important element of the Conakry Agreement. That is
why we welcome the recent decision to hold elections
on 10 March 2019. We reiterate our call on the Bissau-
Guinean authorities to provide firm political direction
and assume leadership in the electoral process, as well as
empower the electoral management bodies to implement
appropriate solutions for holding credible elections.

Poland believes that maintaining the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) with its current strength and
mandate throughout the upcoming months is crucial
to ensuring the mission's full capacity to support the
electoral process, including by providing good offices
to national actors and coordinating efforts with the so-
called Guinea-Bissau P5.

It is also important to ensure that the UNIOGBIS
exit is managed in a way that would help maintain the
gains achieved so far. In that regard, we fully support
the Secretary-General's recommendation to establish
a streamlined good offices special political mission
following the end of the electoral cycle. It is equally
important to ensure that ECOWAS and individual
regional leaders maintain Guinea-Bissau on their
agenda not only during the critical electoral period, but
also beyond that period when the country will need the
assistance of the international community to implement
a reform agenda. In that regard, the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission will also be indispensable.

In conclusion, it is important for the United Nations
to remain engaged in Guinea-Bissau throughout the
transition and exit of UNIOGBIS, and beyond, to help
mobilize the international community in supporting the
institutional reform agenda. Finally, let me express our
full support to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the personnel of UNIOGBIS and the United
Nations country team for their dedication.

