Mr. Rugeles (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for having convened this debate. I welcome the briefers, especially Father Francisco de Roux, President of the Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition of my country. Colombia has been a significant reference point in the implementation of transitional justice. Through the signing of the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace in 2016, the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition was created in order to realize the rights of the victims.That system was created on the basis of the lessons learned not only from international examples but also from processes involving other illegal groups in Colombia. The processes involving the United Self- Defense Forces of Colombia, demobilized between 2003 and 2006 through mechanisms such as the law on justice and peace, as well as the agreements for truth contemplated in Law 1424, among others, allowed us to build the system. We have been learning from our own experiences for years now to ensure that transitional justice mechanisms contribute to the ultimate goal of peaceful coexistence among all Colombians. The Comprehensive System combines judicial mechanisms that allow for the investigation and punishment of serious human rights violations and serious violations of international humanitarian law, as well as extrajudicial ones that contribute to the clarification of the truth, the search for disappeared persons and reparations for the harm caused. Additionally, the System's mechanisms make it possible to progress in the fight against impunity, in helping ex-combatants transition to civilian life and in the reconciliation processes of Colombians. Here I would like to refer to some important points of these mechanisms. First, one of the lessons that we Colombians have learned is the need for such mechanisms to be complementary. Experience shows that the effectiveness of such measures is greater if they are applied in a coordinated manner. The idea of the implementation of a comprehensive system is for the measures to achieve a maximum level of justice and accountability, but also to contribute to the clarification of truth, reparation and historical memory. The complementarity between the various mechanisms must be the result of a detailed plan under which each mechanism has a specific purpose that contributes to an ultimate goal. Secondly, transitional justice does not have a single mould that is applicable to different contexts. Every effort to consolidate peace, including transitional mechanisms, must start from the principle of national ownership. Within the system, each mechanism has a clear objective, something that was necessary given the Colombian historical, legal and social context. Thirdly, it is important to emphasize that transitional justice cannot and should not be overloaded. Such mechanisms cannot alone address the causes of a conflict, such as inequality or lack of 71134 socioeconomic development. They must have their own objectives, which will also make it possible to manage the expectations of the population. Transitional justice must be coordinated with other measures that make it possible to address these causes. My Government respects and supports the work of transitional justice mechanisms, as noted in the most recent report of the Secretary-General to the Council. My Government is also is convinced that the participation of women in peacebuilding is a priority. Transitional justice mechanisms have a gender focus in their work and scope, but also rely on the principle of the parity and participation of women. An example is Colombia's Special Jurisdiction for Peace, where 53 per cent of the judges are women. The various transitional mechanisms that we are implementing have a higher goal, namely, to contribute to prevention, a guarantee of the non-repetition of violations, and peacebuilding. It is a challenge that will take time, but we are certain that the outcome of these mechanisms, as part of the legality-based peace policy that runs throughout our development plan, will lead us, by strengthening access to justice on equal terms, to sustainable peace. That is Colombia's dream.
