Ms. Amos: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Council on the regional
crisis that has resulted from the crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is a crisis requiring the sustained
and comprehensive engagement of the international
community. The security, economic, political, social,
development and humanitarian consequences of this
crisis are extremely grave, and its human impact
immeasurable in terms of the long-term trauma and
emotional impact on this and future generations of
Syrians. Family and community networks have been
destroyed and Syria's reputation for secularism and
tolerance has been eroded, with sectarianism on
the rise and the long-term consequences of internal
displacement and significant refugee flows unknown.
We are watching the destruction of not only a country,
but also its people.

When I last briefed the Council, I spoke of the
impact ofthis crisis on all Syrians. That remains the case
today, with rising levels of unemployment, the currency
in free fall, vital infrastructures destroyed, including
schools and hospitals, electricity and water supplies
disrupted, with damage to physical infrastructure, lack
of personnel and limited investment. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has repeatedly warned about the
heightened risks of communicable disease outbreaks,
including waterborne diseases such as diarrhoea,
typhoid, cholera and hepatitis. Vaccine-preventable
diseases such as measles have reappeared due to a drop
in national vaccination coverage. Some 6.8 million
Syrians require urgent humanitarian assistance;
4.2 million are internally displaced. Fifty per cent of
those requiring assistance are children. Syrian refugees
in neighbouring countries now exceed 1.7 million, and
High Commissioner Guterres will brief the Council
on this in more detail. Of the 525,000 Palestinian
refugees hosted in Syria, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East estimates that 420,000 require humanitarian
assistance. The most recent assessment of the World
Food Programme (WFP) and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations shows 4 million
people unable to meet their basic food needs. These
statistics hide an unfolding human tragedy.

Despite the worsening security situation, United
Nations agencies and partners continue to deliver
assistance to people in need. In May, WFP provided
assistance to 2.5 million people. The access of
2.4 million people to drinking water has been restored
with the support of tUNICEF. Some 1.7 million people
have directly benefited from health interventions, and
a vaccination campaign run by WHO, UNICEF and
the Ministry of Health reached more than 1 million
children.

Many of those who have received assistance are in
areas under the control of armed opposition groups or
in areas of active conflict. In May, 42 per cent of those
who received food assistance lived in such areas, and
delivery by cross-line interagency convoys continues.
Since the end of January, our teams on the ground have
reached more than 1.4 million people across conflict
lines. These are the most challenging of areas to reach,
but also where the needs are greatest.

It is important that recognition be given to the
humanitarian work being undertaken inside Syria
despite considerable constraints, but that help is
insufficient to meet the needs identified. While
humanitarian staff work tirelessly to assist affected
Syrians, gaps in the response remain considerable.
While we know where those considered most vulnerable
are located, humanitarian organizations are still not
able to get regular, consistent and unimpeded access
to millions of affected people. Some locations remain
inaccessible due to active fighting or insecurity, but
there are other areas, sometimes only a few kilometres
from our offices, including in Damascus and Homs,
where we are not granted authorization to enter. For
example, despite repeated requests, United Nations
agencies continue to be denied access to 25,000 people
in Al-Moadamyeh in rural Damascus.

In Al-Qusayr, with the exception of a UNICEF
generator that was delivered in the vicinity of the town,
the call of the Security Council on the Government of
Syria to enable immediate and unhindered humanitarian
access was rejected until the fighting had subsided and
most inhabitants had fled.

Last month, Government forces launched an
offensive in Homs. The old city of Homs has been under
siege by Government forces for well over a year. A large
number of different armed groups have established
positions in the area and are exposing civilians to
high risk. An estimated 2,500 civilians are trapped
in the old city and have not received any significant
humanitarian assistance over the past year. They lack
food, have no access to safe drinking water and their
health status is deteriorating. Opposition groups have
so far not enabled them safe passage to leave, and the
Government of Syria has refused to allow agencies to
deliver assistance into the old city. All attempts by aid
agencies to significantly assist or evacuate civilians
from Homs old city have so far failed. United Nations
agencies have pre-positioned supplies across Homs city
to assist 40,000 people, should the situation deteriorate
even further and access to those in need be granted.

We have also seen an escalation of conflict in
Aleppo, with reports suggesting that it has been
difficult for people to leave the area due to insecurity,
combined with a lack of fuel and public transportation.
A United Nations cross-line convoy arrived on Sunday,
with 15 trucks loaded with vital medicines, non-food
items and food. However, these supplies are insufficient
to cover deep and ever-growing needs, and many
civilians are still trapped in the city. Our team reported
a harrowing journey that took four days through some
of the most insecure parts of the country.

We are seeing a pattern replicated across
Syria - entire neighbourhoods and their inhabitants
put at risk, with Government and opposition military
positions being established in residential areas.
Indiscriminate attacks are repeatedly launched on
towns and villages. Parties to the conflict systematically
and in many cases deliberately fail in their obligation
to protect civilians. Reports indicate open and blatant
violations of the rules of war, with total disregard for
human life and dignity in a climate of generalized
impunity. The parties must be reminded that they will
be held accountable for their actions.

I have reported previously to the Council on the
bureaucratic procedures imposed by the Government
of Syria, which have impeded humanitarian efforts.
Partner United Nations agencies report some progress
in the issuance of visas, with many agencies receiving
visas in shorter time frames. However, others, such
as the Department of Safety and Security, continue
to face problems. Without sufficient security officers
and advisors on the ground, humanitarian partners
are restricted in their operations and reach. Lengthy
customs procedures still delay the importation and
distribution of vital humanitarian goods and equipment.

Two humanitarian hubs have been opened, but there
is no progress on the establishment of two additional
hubs requested more than a year ago. Implementing
capacity remains limited, and there are still only
14 international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) allowed to operate in Syria. The number of
national NGOs approved to work with United Nations
organizations has increased to 69, but problems persist
in the number of national NGOs allowed to operate in
areas with some of the greatest needs. For example,
in Idlib, Dara'a and Al-Raqqa, we are authorized to
partner with only three or fewer NGOs.

For the first time in many months, essential
surgical medical supplies were allowed into Aleppo.
We hope that distribution to all locations will be
permitted. The distribution of such items has been
restricted across conflict lines and opposition-held
areas, in direct violation of international humanitarian
law. The growing number of opposition groups also
poses serious difficulties in negotiating access in
opposition-controlled areas.

United Nations agencies have identified 2.8 million
people in the most affected areas who have been
difficult to reach with assistance over the past two years,
despite their desperate situation. We urgently need to
address this. We need a mix of approaches to address
the humanitarian challenges that face us in Syria.
We need designated, empowered interlocutors so that
agencies can engage with someone with the necessary
authority to address constraints - lifting bureacratic
constraints, as already mentioned; the granting of free
passage of medical supplies; and the demilitarization
of medical facilities. We need prior notification of
military offensives to civilians and aide convoys. We
need the designation of priority humanitarian routes,
including across front lines, to allow the safe passage
of convoys. We need the use of humanitarian pauses
in fighting in order to allow access to people and, as
appropriate, cross-border operations. Crucially, we
need the funding to support our work - an additional
$3.1 billion to meet the needs of people in Syria and
neighbour countries for the rest of this year.

We have all said repeatedly that only a genuine
political process can prevent Syria from sliding into
deeper fragmentation and chaos. We are looking to the
Council to exercise its leadership role in that regard.
I should like to conclude by echoing the Secretary-
General's call on the parties for a ceasefire during the
holy month of Ramadan.

