Mr. Pascoe: It is a pleasure to be with the
Council once again today discussing the important
issue of the Middle East. We are again at an important
juncture as the international community prepares to
step up its diplomatic engagement towards the peace
process. United States Envoy Senator George Mitchell
met with Prime Minister Netanyahu on 16 April and
with President Abbas the following day, midway
through a regional tour. We welcome his stated
commitment to vigorously pursue the creation of a
Palestinian State as part of a comprehensive regional
peace strategy of the Obama Administration which
aims to integrate and develop the Arab Peace Initiative.

The Quartet remains firmly committed to the goal
of a two-State solution. Quartet envoys met in the
United Nations office in Ramallah on 17 April to
discuss plans to advance the peace process and agreed
to hold regular meetings in the region. The Secretary-
General strongly supports a reinvigorated role for the
Quartet. Next week, King Abdullah of Jordan will meet
with President Obama during the first official visit by
an Arab leader to discuss the regional peace process.
Palestinian President Abbas is expected shortly
afterwards, and, in May, Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu plans to visit Washington following
completion of an internal Israeli review of national
security priorities.
The Secretary-General has welcomed the
formation of the new Israeli Government, which was
sworn in on 31 March. He stated his expectation that
the Middle East peace process will resume, with the
aim of achieving an independent and viable Palestinian
State living side by side in peace with a secure Israel,
and a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace as envisaged
in Security Council resolutions.

Allow me to turn to the situation in Gaza and
southern Israel. During this reporting period there has
been very little progress on the key elements outlined
in Security Council resolution 1860 (2009): the
commitment of the parties to a durable and sustainable
ceasefire; opening the crossings for humanitarian
access and materials for recovery; and intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. For the international community to
sustain its commitment to a resumption of the peace
process, those principles are indispensable.

While there has been a significant drop in violent
incidents this reporting period, the situation remains
fragile in the absence of a proper ceasefire regime.
Although there were almost two weeks without
violence, there were 30 rockets and mortars fired by
Palestinian militants at southern Israel, and the Israeli
military carried out two air strikes in the Gaza Strip.

The Israeli army reported on 13 April that a
Palestinian vessel laden with explosives exploded in
the vicinity of an Israeli naval ship without causing
injury. Egyptian efforts to combat smuggling continue,
and on 15 April the Egyptian police reportedly found
900 kilogrammes of explosives along Egypt's border
with Gaza. On 10 April, Egyptian security forces
arrested 18 people for allegedly smuggling weapons
and cash into Gaza.

The Israeli policy of near total closure of the
Gaza Strip, which has been in force since the Hamas
takeover in June 2007, has continued in the wake of
Operation Cast Lead. Over 73 per cent of all imports
during the reporting period consisted of foodstuffs and
cleaning materials. Basic needs for the population,
such as food and blankets, have largely been met. The
strict limitation on foodstuffs and other commodities
allows agencies to maintain basic relief services such
as food distributions, which remain at the same levels
this month as last month. The World Food Programme
is reaching 365,000 beneficiaries; the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is reaching 750,000.
09-3066]

While we welcome the Israeli Cabinet decision to
allow all kinds of foodstuffs into Gaza without
restriction, we note that each individual food shipment
still requires extensive coordination with the Israeli
authorities. I would also note that our assistance to the
people of Gaza should, of course, not be limited to
food, blankets and medical supplies. Broader
humanitarian assistance and early recovery are
impossible without Israel providing adequate entry of
fuel, cash and materials that are needed to repair
schools, clinics, sanitation networks and shelters.

The total ban on the import of petrol and diesel
has continued since 2 November 2008, with the
exception of small quantities delivered to UNRWA. In
the past month, Israel allowed the transfer of
approximately half of Gaza's power plants' industrial
fuel needs. As a result of the industrial fuel shortages,
most Gazans continue to experience intermittent power
cuts.

The ban on the import of spare parts necessary to
maintain the electrical network and bring it up to full
capacity exacerbates this situation. Some 10 per cent of
the population remains without any electricity due to a
lack of necessary materials needed to fix damage
sustained to the network during Israel's military
offensive. So far, only two truckloads of electrical
transformers and cables have been allowed entry into
Gaza since then.

Strict limitations on cash entering Gaza make
many humanitarian and relief programmes impossible.
On 7 April, Israel allowed in a transfer of only 50
million shekels out of 250 million requested to pay for
the salaries of 60,000 Palestinian Authority staff. The
total monthly cost of Palestinian Authority salaries in
Gaza is 120 million shekels.

There is still limited material for network repairs.
Only one truck of cement and a limited quantity of
plastic piping were allowed entry into Gaza in the past
month. They were used for some small-scale water and
sanitation projects. The importance of improving water
and sanitation is clear from clinical records at UNRWA
primary health-care clinics in the Khan Younis area.
Those records show that water and sanitation-related
infectious diseases are increasingly prevalent in 2009
compared to the year 2008.

The lack of access to Gaza is deeply frustrating.
At the 2 March donor conference hosted by the
Government of Egypt at Sharm el-Sheikh, the
09-30661

international community pledged some $4.5 billion for
the reconstruction of Gaza. The Palestinian
reconciliation process that we all hoped would provide
a framework for reconstruction has not, however,
moved forward. The United Nations has and will
continue to support early recovery and reconstruction
efforts in Gaza. To that end, we are working to ensure
our readiness to support programming once conditions
allow for it. In order to further those efforts, the
Special Coordinator and his Deputy are intensifying
their visits to Gaza. However, without the materials for
recovery and reconstruction the process cannot begin,
and that requires a substantial easing by Israel of its
policy of closure of the Gaza Strip, including steps to
return to the framework of 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access.

With regard to the Gaza Board of Inquiry, on
8 April the Secretary-General received the members of
the Board, who shared their conclusions and
recommendations with the Secretary-General and
informed him that they were still in the process of
finalizing their report. He expects to receive the full
report in the near future and to decide what to do at
that point.

Following Prime Minister Fayyad's early
resignation and the end of his Government's mandate,
President Abbas asked him on 31 March to remain in
office until a new Government was formed. Palestinian
reconciliation talks adjourned for the third time on 2
April. While some progress was reportedly made in the
talks, there has been no agreement on the composition
or political platform of a transitional Government.
Talks are scheduled to resume later this month. We
continue to support Egyptian efforts aimed at uniting
the Palestinian factions under one Government, under
the leadership of President Abbas, on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) principles.

The divide between Gaza and the West Bank
continues to grow at the expense of the population of
Gaza, as can be seen with health referrals outside of
Gaza. As a result of the Hamas takeover of the Referral
Abroad Department on 22 March, only patients with
referrals approved prior to that takeover and a small
number of patients whose referrals are facilitated by
the Peres Center for Peace and by Physicians for
Human Rights were allowed access to special medical
treatment. The United Nations is actively engaged with
the Palestinian Authority and Hamas in Gaza to
facilitate a resolution of that issue.
3

Five United Nations mine action teams continue
to work in Gaza, conducting risk assessments and
training in unexploded ordinance safety. There have
been no developments regarding the location of the
unexploded bombs that went missing in February 2009.
A number of issues continue to await approval from the
Israeli authorities, including agreement on a means by
which specialized equipment can be imported into
Israel. Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit remains in
captivity, despite Egyptian mediation efforts to secure
his release in exchange for a number of the 11,000
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails.

Let me now turn to the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority regarding institution-building and security
reform. The international community continues to
support those efforts and plans to convene the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in the next several weeks are being
discussed. During this reporting period, the Palestinian
Authority has begun revising and upgrading its budget
process in preparation for the 2010 budget and 2011-
2013 Palestinian Reform and Development Plan.
Nevertheless, challenges remain, including the absence
of timely and predictable budget support. Despite the
large sums of money pledged last month in Sharm el-
Sheikh, the Palestinian Authority still has great
difficulty paying monthly salaries, which severely
impacts its long-term planning process and undermines
the reform agenda.

On Palestinian security issues in the West Bank,
the reporting period has witnessed an increase in
activity by Palestinian Authority forces. They targeted
criminal gangs, making a number of arrests and
recovering a quantity of weapons and stolen cash, and
also shut down a reported explosives manufacturing
laboratory in a mosque in Qalqiliya. During the
reporting period, 10 Palestinians were killed in the
West Bank and 95 were injured as a result of clashes
with the Israel Defense Forces and settlers. Those
incidents included seven violent instances in which
Israeli settlers targeted Palestinians and their property,
which, however, was down from 26 such incidents in
the previous period.

On 2 April, a 13-year-old Israeli was killed in an
attack on a settlement, in which another Israeli child
was injured. On 8 April, clashes erupted between
approximately 200 Israeli settlers, some armed, and the
residents of the Palestinian village of Sofa, where the
killer had reportedly sought refuge. The Israeli army
intervened and 15 Palestinians were injured, including
11 by live ammunition from Israeli troops and settlers.
Six other Israelis were reportedly injured during the
period.

Elsewhere in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
Israeli settlement activity continues. Major
construction work is under way in the three settlement
blocs surrounding East Jerusalem to the North, East
and South. In addition to the construction of housing
units, road infrastructure construction is ongoing,
creating further obstacles to a viable, contiguous
Palestinian State. On 31 March, Israeli settlers from the
Efrat settlement began their own construction of a
road. As we have said repeatedly, settlement activity
runs contrary to the basis of the two-State solution and
must be frozen.

The number of obstacles to continued movement
in the West Bank remains constant at more than 600,
which continues to prevent normal social and economic
life. Also in the West Bank, the barrier continues to be
constructed within occupied Palestinian territory in
deviation from the Green Line and contrary to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
The Government of Israel has taken no action to
evacuate settlement outposts during this reporting
period in accordance with its Road Map obligations.

East Jerusalem remains an issue of serious
concern. Palestinian institutions there remain closed by
Israeli order and contrary to Israel's Road Map
obligations. During this reporting period, Israeli
authorities demolished two Palestinian structures, in
addition to the so-called deterrent demolition of the
family home of a Palestinian who carried out a terrorist
attack against Israelis on 2 July 2008. During that
demolition, a Palestinian man was shot and killed as he
drove his car into Israeli security forces. Three Israeli
border police were injured.

Turning to regional affairs, the Secretary-General
attended the League of Arab States summit on 30
March in Doha, which brought together 17 Arab
leaders. The summit recommitted the members of the
Arab League to the Arab Peace Initiative while calling
for Israeli steps towards the Initiative.

United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process Robert Serry met with
Jordanian Minister for Foreign Affairs Nasser Judeh,
on 8 April and on 15 April with Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs Walid Al-Moualem to discuss efforts to
move the peace process forward.
09-3066]
The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan was
quiet during the reporting period, although Israeli
settlement activity continues. One Syrian was detained
by Israeli security forces for crossing the Alpha Line in
the disengagement area on 14 April and returned to
Syria the same day.

In Egypt, it was announced that a cell of 49
persons led by an alleged member of Hizbollah had
been arrested in November 2008. The Egyptian
Government expressed its grave concern at external
interference on sovereign Egyptian territory. The
search for other members of this cell is reportedly
continuing.

On Lebanon, the overall situation there remained
stable during the reporting period, despite a number of
disconcerting security incidents. The assassination of
the Deputy PLO representative in Lebanon, Kamal
Medhat, on 23 March, which was reported in last
month's briefing, was the first targeted killing in
Lebanon since September 2008. On 27 March, a
shooting incident took place in Baalbek between
gunmen suspected of drug trafficking and the Lebanese
Armed Forces, resulting in the death of an alleged drug
baron. Subsequently, on 13 April, in what seems to
have been a related incident, armed gunmen ambushed
a Lebanese Armed Forces patrol in a nearby area,
leaving four soldiers dead and one critically injured.
The Lebanese Armed Forces are continuing their
search for the perpetrators. Syria has deployed troops
along the border between the two countries in order to
prevent fugitives from escaping across the frontier.

The five-week period for candidates to register
for the June parliamentary elections ended on 7 April.
Seven hundred and two candidates have been
registered, although, according to the electoral law,
they can withdraw from the race until 21 April.
Discussion of candidate lists continues within each of
the two major alliances contesting the election.

The construction of an additional 232 temporary
shelters in the area adjacent to the Nahr al-Bared camp
was completed in March, bringing the total amount of
temporary shelters built by UNRWA to more than 800,
housing some 650 families. Relations between the local
community and the Lebanese Armed Forces have
09-30661
improved in recent months following an easing of
access in areas adjacent to the old camp.

Following the establishment of diplomatic ties
between Lebanon and Syria on 15 October 2008 and
the approval by President Sleiman of the first Syrian
ambassador to Lebanon, the Lebanese ambassador to
the Syrian Arab Republic arrived in Damascus today.

The overall situation during the past month in the
area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has remained generally quiet.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces continue to
carry out intensive joint operations, with a particular
focus on possible rocket launching positions. Israeli air
violations continued on an almost daily basis during
the reporting period.

I cannot overemphasize the importance of
addressing the situation in Gaza and of implementing
the provisions of resolution 1860 (2009). Moreover, for
the sake of the people of the region, there must be
peace and not simply further process. We therefore
encourage the early resumption of the Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations on all core issues without
exception, as agreed by the parties and as called for in
resolution 1850 (2008).

The international community remains
fundamentally committed to and engaged in efforts to
achieve the goal of the two-State solution, the only
solution aimed at guaranteeing both the security of the
State of Israel and the creation of an independent and
viable Palestinian State. The framework for peace
remains unchanged: the establishment of two States
living side by side in peace and security on the basis of
the principle of land for peace and a just and
comprehensive regional peace consistent with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

