Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Envoy for his briefing this afternoon, and above all for
the work that he has done over the years in implementing
his mandate.

I will focus my statement on two aspects, the first
of which concerns the security, political, humanitarian
and human rights situation in the Great Lakes region.
Despite the excellent work done by the Special Envoy,
the overall situation in the Great Lakes region remains
complicated. On the security front, the progress
made through the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme should not distract from
the fact that the number of cross-border incidents
is increasing, particularly around Burundi but also
between Rwanda and Uganda.

Eliminating the threat posed by various negative
forces will continue to require an integrated regional
approach and strong political engagement on the part
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region as a whole. In the current political
context, we welcome the peace agreement recently
signed in the Central African Republic and hope that
the upcoming presidential and legislative elections in
Burundi will be credible, transparent and inclusive.

On the humanitarian front, the overall picture in the
most recent report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2019/229)
is still extremely gloomy, with more than 11 million
persons forcibly displaced in the Great Lakes region.
We remain deeply concerned by the epidemics such
as Ebola that have spread in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. While Ebola has so far not claimed any
victims across the border, we must continue to be very
vigilant. We are also still deeply concerned about the
human rights situation, particularly in Yumbi in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is unfortunate
that Secretary-General's report does not adequately
reflect the situation there.

On the other hand, some new opportunities are
emerging. We welcome the fresh political momentum
initiated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi. We hope that that
momentum can also help to give new impetus to the
full implementation of the agreement.

My second point concerns economic cooperation
in the Great Lakes region. Economic cooperation,
including in the area of natural resources, remains one
of the key elements of the framework agreement. The
report cites several initiatives proposed by the Special
Envoy, such as the holding of a conference in Kigali
to promote peace, security and shared natural resource
management in the Greater Virunga Landscape or the
organizing of the second Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region in November.
In that regard, we note that the level of cross-border
investment in the Great Lakes region unfortunately
remains too low, while the informal economic sector
continues to be widespread. We should perhaps consider
how the Framework Agreement could contribute to
improving that situation.

In conclusion, we believe that regional integration
is essential and, in reality, the only way forward in order
for the countries of the region to draw the maximum
benefit from all their resources while, at the same time,
strengthening peace.

