Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): We wish to
thank the Ukrainian presidency for having decided to
convene this open debate on conflicts in Europe. This
is obviously a very relevant topic, as is clear from the
various high-level debates on the issue and the robust
recommendations emanating from the 2017 Munich
Security Conference, which endedjust a few days ago.

I should like also to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres; Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Secretary General of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe; and Ms. Helga Schmid,
Secretary General of the European Union's European
External Action Service, for their outstanding briefings.

With an increasingly sophisticated peace and
security architecture, as described by the briefers in
great detail, and in spite of 70 years of relative stability
and economic prosperity, the European continent
continues to be rocked by various disputes, both intra-
and inter-State, which threaten international peace and
security. This is because, as the Secretary-General has
reiterated, so-called frozen conflicts in Europe, as they
continue to lack a definitive solution, could erupt at any
time.

To the unresolved conflicts in Cyprus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Nagorno Karabakh, Kosovo, Georgia and
in eastern Ukraine, we must add emerging threats such
as terrorism, violent extremism, transnational crime
and cybercrime, as well as increasing xenophobia and
religious intolerance.

We believe that the number and complexity of crises
on the European continent requires close cooperation
between the United Nations and its various partners,
first and foremost regional organization, which play a
crucial role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations in its Chapter VIII.

Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon rightly
emphasized in August 2015 that the United Nations
increasingly shared with regional organizations
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security.
That is why we welcome the existence of the various
regional organizations that play a part in the resolution
of conflicts on the European continent, including the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union, which play a leading role.

My delegation deems it important to continue
to reflect on the best way to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations, starting with the Security
Council, and European regional organizations, in the
spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union.

In this regard, Mr. President, we believe that the
suggestion you just made regarding the creation of a
working group on the prevention of conflicts in Europe
is deserving of consideration.

