Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to bring the
Security Council up to date on recent developments in
the Central African Republic following the issuance on
1 December of the report of the Secretary-General.

Although the situation in the Central African
Republic remains volatile - members will recall
the episodes of violence that took place in Bangui in
October - we note with satisfaction that the political
process is once again moving forward thanks to the
notable efforts of the mediator for the Central African
Republic, President Sassou Nguesso. An agreement
has been reached among stakeholders in the country,
the region and international partners to request the
mediator to extend the transition period by six months,
until August 2015.

In that context, preparations are well under way
for the Bangui forum on national reconciliation, to be
held early next year. In order to lay the groundwork
for this important national dialogue, a process of
local consultations coordinated by the Ministry of
Reconciliation has been initiated with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). From 29 November to 3 December,
transitional Government ministers representing the
Central African Republic's 16 prefectures met with
local Government officials and community leaders as
a first step towards engagement in the Bangui forum
and the country's longer-term reconciliation process.
Further consultations at the prefecture level are also
planned, the results of which will feed into the work of
a preparatory committee announced by the transitional
authorities that Will oversee preparations for the forum.

As the outline of the Bangui forum begins to take
shape, there is incontestably a growing consensus on
the need to address the full range of issues that lie at
the heart of the crisis in the Central African Republic,
including the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of armed groups and preparations for
security-sector reform, including the reconstitution of
the Forces armees centrafricaines, as well as issues
relating to political and economic governance and the
fight against impunity, which is a vital issue. Let us
not forget the situation of the approximately 1 million
refugees and internally displaced persons, many of
whom want to return to their homes.

In addition, the Bangui forum, which international
partners have been requested to support, should aim to
be the starting point for a longer-term reconciliation
process at all levels of society, with mechanisms put in
place to monitor the implementation of the forum's key
recommendations.

Various leaders of the increasingly fragmented
ex-Se'leka and anti-Balaka have held their general
assembly meetings and publicly expressed their support
for the national dialogue process, which will include
participation in the Bangui forum. On 29 November,
the national coordinator of the anti-Balaka, Patrice
Edouard Ngaissona, announced that his group would
transform into a political party named the Central
African Party for Unity and Development.

Let us be clear: a successful and timely Bangui
forum will be crucial in order to prepare the ground
for the planned constitutional referendum as well as the
legislative and presidential elections. Preparations for
the elections had been proceeding quite slowly until
agreement was reached to conduct the polls by August
2015. This is clearly an extremely tight time frame for
the elections. MINUSCA and its main United Nations
electoral partner, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), are reinforcing their support
capacities for the elections, with a particular focus on
the mobilization of additional logistical assets and the
swift recruitment of electoral staff. A UNDP project
document on the issue has also been agreed. However,
only three partners, namely the European Union,
France and UNDP, have pledged funds in support of
the electoral process.

For their part, the transitional authorities have
released a tranche of funds in the amount of 1 billion
CFA francs - approximately $2 million - for the
elections. The National Electoral Authority, with
support from MINUSCA, is finalizing the dispatch
of several missions to the region to appoint elections
officers in each of the districts. The National Electoral
Authority also conducted a mission to Cameroon to
assess voter-registration modalities for refugees there.
Further missions in the subregion are also planned for
the same purpose.

Despite all of these positive steps, we should not
forget that the holding of elections by August 2015
will be extremely challenging. The success of the
process will hinge on a significantly strengthened
commitment on the part of the Central African
Republic authorities and, I would reiterate, also require
the political, operational and financial support of the
international community. There is a critical need for
the national authorities to adopt the revised electoral
law and to agree on outstanding issues, including on
the sequencing of elections and the voter registration
methodology. The national electoral authorities must
launch a transparent voter registration process that
enables the full participation ofreturning and displaced
populations without delay.
Increased support of the international community
will also need to be strengthened in order to avoid
further delays. A conducive security environment will
also be required and necessitate progress in the political
process and the strongest possible resolve of all actors
to ensure the peaceful conduct of the electoral process
and a successful conclusion of the Transition.

In January 2015, the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support will review, with
MINUSCA and in consultation with Operation
Sangaris and the European Union Force in the Central
African Republic (EUFOR), the military and police
concepts of operations and make recommendations
regarding adjustments that may be required to the
agreed troop and police levels and their deployment to
achieve mandated tasks, in particular in the run-up to
the elections. We remain fully committed to ensuring a
phased approached in MINUSCA's deployment.

The security situation in the Central African
Republic remains volatile, as I have said, and the
presence of the State weak at best, and often essentially
absent. Civilians remain under constant threat and
impunity is still rampant. Following the violence
in October in Bangui, driven by the anti-Balaka and
during which civilians as well as MINUSCA, Operation
Sangaris and EUFOR personnel were actively targeted,
some ofthe ex-Seleka elements who had been regrouped
in three camps in Bangui since December 2013
threatened to explode a significant arms cache in one
of the camps unless they were provided with substantial
assistance. Approximately 900 ex-Se'le'ka elements
have since been relocated from these camps to their
communities of origin. There are also ongoing efforts
with the transitional authorities and the support of the
international community to complete the relocation of
the remaining camp residents and remove the arms and
munitions from the site.

On 24 November, an incident also took place inside
the Bangui central prison when inmates seized weapons
and shot and threw hand grenades at United Nations
peacekeepers who were on guard duty outside the
prison. Three United Nations soldiers and one United
Nations police officer were injured in the incident. It
must be said that all these serious security incidents in
the capital could have significantly escalated without
the robust efforts by MINUSCA, supported by Sangaris
and EUFOR, to restore order.

Our national counterparts are also taking
measures. On 3 December, MINUSCA, in cooperation
with Sangaris and EUFOR, supported by the Chief of
Staff of the Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA),
took action to verify and clarify the position of selected
FACA elements who will constitute the first company of
a static protection battalion to be put in place after the
Bangui forum. Each of the troops signed a declaration
of honour, a commitment of good service, and a pledge
to respect human rights and humanitarian law. I believe
that this is a symbolic and important step towards the
reoperationalization of FACA pending future efforts to
complete security sector reform.

Outside Bangui, there have also been violent
clashes involving factions of the ex-Seleka and
anti-Balaka, as well as other armed groups. On
24 November, 15 nationals of Cameroon and one
Polish priest held hostage by the Front democratique du
peuple centrafricain (FDPC) were released following
negotiations in Cameroon that resulted in the freeing of
FDPC leader Abdoulaye Miskine from detention there.
The remaining 10 Central African hostages still held by
the FDPC were liberated on 29 November.

Unfortunately, in the eastern and central parts of
the country, intercommunity violence, confrontations
between armed groups and violent attacks on the civilian
population continue. While the Lord's Resistance
Army remains a threat in the south-east of the country,
recently the Zemio area in Haut-Mbomou province
was a theatre of ethnic confrontations in which at least
5 people were killed and 13 wounded. In response,
MINUSCA expedited the deployment of the first troops
of a MINUSCA contingent assigned to the area, and
supported the creation of a reconciliation committee
composed of leaders from opposing communities.

Similarly, in the city of Bambari in Ouaka province,
bloody clashes took place once again between different
faiths. Several people were killed and houses burned
down over the past two weeks. On 5 December, three
United Nations peacekeepers were wounded in an
attack by anti-Balaka elements following the arrest
by MINUSCA of their local leader, John "Americain".
We do not know his real name. In the west, some
communities at risk remain confined to areas where,
it must be said, living conditions remain extremely
precarious.

For MINUSCA a critical priority in that context
clearly remains the protection of civilians; in that
regard, securing the full deployment of MINUSCA'S
troop and police contingents remains a top priority.
This month, MINUSCA will achieve 80 per cent of its
full troop deployment, and in January 2015, 9 out of the
10 of the formed police units will be deployed, with the
tenth to arrive very soon thereafter. In the framework
of MINUSCA's mandate of urgent temporary measures
agreed by the Government of the Central African
Republic, 217 people have been arrested by MINUSCA
and handed over to the local judicial authorities.

On 24 November near Bouar, MINUSCA arrested
the well-known anti-Balaka leader "Chocolat" - his
real name, too, is unknown to us - who was transferred
to Bangui. "Chocolat" is accused of a series of very
serious human rights violations. We will need to
follow up on his case. MINUSCA has also continued
to broaden and improve its capacity to monitor and
address threats to civilians and human rights violations
through enhanced training for MINUSCA troops and
the establishment of field offices outside Bangui. In
areas where there is no MINUSCA presence, close
coordination and communication with humanitarian
agencies has resulted in the dispatch of integrated
MINUSCA and United Nations agency teams to
threatened areas, for instance to Zemio and Yaloke.

It must be said that the Central African Republic
is entering a critical phase at a time when international
attention to the crisis is starting to wane. Still, the
risks remain high that additional disruptions to the
political process and to the security situation could put
the transitional process in jeopardy. The transitional
authorities, for their part, have reaffirmed their
commitment to ensuring that the Central African
Republic's transition is managed in an inclusive and
consensual manner. The Head of State of the Transition
herself has stated repeatedly her intention not to run
for the elections, in accordance with the provisions of
the Constitutional Charter for the Transition. However,
it must be clear that any further delays beyond August
2015 could undermine the transition itself. It is therefore
very important for the Central African authorities
to stay the course and for the country's regional and
international partners to remain engaged in a sustained
and coordinated manner in order to provide the Central
African Republic with the assistance necessary to
ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of its actions
and decisions.

