Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation
commends you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open meeting on the situation in East Timor.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report contained in documents S/2002/432 and
S/2002/432/Add.l, and Mr. Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council last week. My
delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Xanana Gusmao
for sharing developments in East Timor with us. My
delegation congratulates him on his recent election to
become the first President of an independent East
Timor. We were also pleased to listen to the briefing
made to the Council last week by the Chief Minister of
East Timor, Mr. Mari Alkatiri.

The work of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) is nearing its
completion. In a short span of time, UNTAET has
managed to lay down the necessary fundamental
structures for an independent nation. In that regard, we
commend the men and women of UNTAET for their
efforts. We also wish to join others in expressing our
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
remarkable contribution.

The successful presidential elections, the
adoption of the Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor and the handing over of most
executive and operational functions to the East
Timorese further consolidate the East Timor
independence process. The process will culminate in
high-level ceremonies and celebrations to mark
independence on 20 May 2002. Malaysia looks forward
to welcoming East Timor to the United Nations.

Malaysia would like to reiterate its support for
the proposal of the Secretary-General for a continued
United Nations presence for two years after East
Timor's independence. The continued presence of the
United Nations beyond the completion of the political
transition is important to ensure the smooth
implementation of the arduous process of nation-
building. The envisaged integrated successor mission
to UNTAET, the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET), will enable the United
Nations to complete the mandate set out in Security
Council resolution 1272 (1999).

The proposed mandate of UNMISET is pragmatic
and achievable, and is in line with the concept of the
successor mission that the Secretary-General outlined
to the Council at its 4403rd meeting, in October last
year. Malaysia believes that this proposal will be
acceptable to the Council, as the concept was already
endorsed by members of the Council as reflected in its
presidential statement issued following that meeting
(S/PRST/2001/32). We believe that the objectives of
UNMISET cannot be attained without the continued
and sustained support of the rest of the international
community. Malaysia is confident that the friends of
East Timor will lend the necessary support to the
United Nations in the early years after independence.
As a regional neighbour, Malaysia will play its part in
assisting the people of East Timor in their efforts to
build a progressive nation, within its ability to do so.

The two-year period provided by the continued
presence of the United Nations will enable the
institutions that are being built in East Timor-
especially the civil service - sufficient time to be
further consolidated and strengthened. This intervening
period is essential for the East Timorese people to
acquire the necessary skills and experience, especially
in the core functions in which local expertise is
lacking, so as to ensure a functioning and effective
governmental machinery in the post-United-Nations
period.

My delegation notes with concern the observation
made by the Secretary-General that the development of
a professional and effective public administration will
remain a major challenge in the coming years. The fact
that less than 50 per cent of management positions
have been filled thus far is a major concern. The
successor mission will have to explore ways to identify
qualified candidates to fill those critical posts. The
approach of training and mentoring potential
candidates is a step in the right direction, and should
complement the identification of qualified East
Timorese.

My delegation also notes that 71 candidates have
been recommended for recruitment to fill the critical
100 core functions as highlighted in previous reports.
Those are critical areas where the East Timorese are
lacking in expertise. My delegation hopes that the
candidates will be able to function well with their
Timorese counterparts. Their experience and skills will
be essential to help guide their Timorese colleagues.
The United Nations should avoid a situation where
these expert personnel would face limitations in
imparting their knowledge directly to local civil
servants. It is important to ensure that policies and
programmes are formulated on the basis of the
objective situation on the ground.

The process of nation-building and reconciliation
is a highly complex and sensitive matter. The return of
refugees is one of the important elements of that
process. In that regard, my delegation is pleased to note
that in March 2002 there was an upsurge in refugee
returns: in that single month it was recorded that 3,680
people returned. The effort by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue
to facilitate "go-and-see" visits and border
reconciliation meetings will contribute to increasing
refugee returns. The decision by the Government of
Indonesia to extend the deadline for assisted
repatriation until the end of August will allow East
Timorese to decide whether to return to East Timor
after its independence or to be resettled in Indonesia.
The continuing cordial and constructive contacts
between the leaders of East Timor and those of its
immediate and important neighbour, Indonesia, augur
well for the regional integration process.

The invaluable experience gained by UNTAET in
East Timor should be properly documented, and
valuable lessons should be drawn from it as a model of
a successful peacekeeping mission. In our view, one of
the most important lessons to be drawn relates to the
need for the active involvement of the countries in the
region, as was the case with UNTAET. The importance
of regional involvement is premised on the following
considerations: knowledge of the country, shared
cultural values, customs and language and an abiding
interest in ensuring regional stability. The success of
UNTAET can be attributed, inter alia, to those factors.

UNTAET has been able to lay down the basic
structures for an independent nation. UNMISET, the
successor mission of UNTAET, will have to
consolidate that effort by May 2004 and leave behind
strong and viable structures for a new nation. We are
confident of its ability to do so.

