Mr. Magriotis (Greece): As this is the first time
we are speaking under your presidency, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
your duties. I would also like to extend our
congratulations to the previous President, Guinea, for
their excellent work.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries - Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and
Slovenia - and the associated countries of Bulgaria
and Romania have aligned themselves with this
statement.

The European Union recognizes the increasingly
important role of regional arrangements and
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
security and welcomes the consideration of this issue
by the Security Council.

In recent years, a number of regional
arrangements, organizations and agencies have created
institutional capacities for early warning and conflict
prevention in order to respond to the proliferation of
internal disputes that may pose a threat to regional or
international stability. The European Union strongly
supports that development. Since 1999, it has been
making a concerted effort to develop its organizational
capability to respond effectively to the challenges
posed by internal disputes. Three principles are guiding
us in that endeavour.

First and foremost among those is the recognition
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and stability lies with the United
Nations. In developing a crisis management capacity,
the European Union aims to support the Security
Council in carrying out its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations. As we all know, those
responsibilities are onerous. Addressing the challenges
of conflict prevention, management and resolution
requires an array of political, military, economic, social
and cultural instruments. We in the European Union are
particularly conscious of that fact. Originating as an
experiment in conflict prevention in the aftermath of
two world wars, and determined to prevent regional
wars in the future, European integration brings our
member States together in a multitude of ways.

The second guiding principle of European Union
crisis management is therefore that crisis management
must include a wide range of instruments, military as
well as civilian. That is why we have placed as much
emphasis on the civilian side as on the military domain
in establishing priority areas and setting targets.

The third guiding principle of European Union
crisis response is that our efforts must bring real added
value to international crisis management. Our effort to
develop capacity can bring about benefits only if it
contributes to our collective global effort to respond
effectively to threats to international peace and
security.

Those principles have shaped our efforts since
1999. They underlie the establishment of four priority
areas for the European Union's civilian crisis
management capacity, namely, police, the rule of law,
civilian administration and civil protection. Those
capacities can be put at the disposal of the EU crisis
management operations or at the disposal of the
operations of the United Nations or the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

As a successful example of regional cooperation
that is itself contributing to peace and stability, the
European Union is committed to building and
sustaining mutually reinforcing and effective
relationships with the United Nations as well as with
other regional organizations in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts. That requires
action at the political level in terms of the capacity
building of partner organizations and through
operational interaction.

At the political level, dialogue with the United
Nations and other regional organizations takes place in
a wide range of contexts. Peace and security issues can
be raised in such discussions, although in the case of
regional organizations the scope will depend on the
specific mandate of the organization concerned.

With regard to capacity-building, a key aspect
continues to be the relevant needs of the regional
organizations in terms of early warning, conflict-
prevention and peacekeeping.

In relation to operational interaction, as foreseen
in its programme for the prevention of violent
conflicts, the European Union, through the European
Commission, is intensifying its practical cooperation
with the United Nations system and other regional and
subregional organizations. The list of possible
examples is long, ranging from support to United
Nations peace-building efforts through the Trust Fund
for Preventive Action in order to facilitate early United
Nations action in the whole range of preventive
diplomacy, to support for various regional projects like
the African Union's observer mission in Burundi and
the Horn of Africa initiative.

In that respect, a regional European Union
conference on conflict prevention entitled "Partners in
Prevention" was held at Helsingborg, Sweden, in
August 2002. The conference brought together the
United Nations, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and
NATO to discuss how to strengthen capabilities and
cooperation in order to prevent violent conflicts. The
conference was held in response to the call made by the
United Nations Secretary-General, in his report on the
prevention of armed conflict, for regional workshops to
discuss the regional dimensions of cooperation in
conflict prevention. High officials from the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) also attended the
conference. It aimed to stimulate increased interaction
between the United Nations and other organizations
and held out the possibility for similar meetings in
other regions. The chairman's conclusions were
forwarded to the Secretary-General. They will
contribute to the next high-level meeting between the
United Nations and regional organizations, which is
scheduled to take place in July 2003.

The list of European Union instruments directly
or indirectly relevant to the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts is long. It includes
development cooperation and external assistance,
economic cooperation and trade policy instruments,
humanitarian aid, social and environmental policies,
diplomatic instruments such as political dialogue and
mediation, and economic and other sanctions.
Ultimately it will also include the new instruments of
European security and defence policy.

In pursuance of each of our goals, we have set
ourselves targets to be achieved by the end of 2003.
Those targets involve concrete numbers of personnel
that member States have committed themselves to
providing. They also include concrete goals in order to
be able to respond quickly to crises.

The European Union Police Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is the first example of the practical
possibilities of cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union in crisis management
operations. We are committed to developing many
more. We are currently exploring modalities for
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU in
the police as well as other civilian crisis management
areas. We are also looking at cooperation in the
military domain.

The responsibility of the international
community, through the United Nations Security
Council, for peace and security is indivisible. While
supporting regional peace-building capacity, the
European Union and its member States significantly
contribute to United Nations peacekeeping through
actively supporting and participating in relevant
operations and activities throughout the world, from
the Balkans to Africa and Asia. We currently have
more than 30,000 women and men working hard for
peace in the United Nations and United Nations-
mandated operations. The EU member States have
troops, military and civilian police observers and
civilian staff in all current United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In addition to these
considerable personnel and other contributions, we also
provide over forty per cent of the total peacekeeping
budget. These figures manifest clearly our strong and
unwavering commitment to peacekeeping, while we
remain engaged in a continued dialogue with the
United Nations aimed at further strengthening our
partnership in peacekeeping.

The European Union supports regional and
subregional cooperation in Africa through assistance to
the African Union, ECOWAS, the East African
Community and SADC. We are also actively engaged
in various initiatives intended to enhance peacekeeping
capacities in Africa. We encourage a close relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations, inter alia, the Economic
Community of West African States, and we commend
the recent efforts of these organizations in
peacekeeping operations in Africa.
These actions require an assessment of needs,
information sharing and coordination. The European
Union welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat's
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to work
closely with all relevant actors in Africa at regional,
subregional and national levels, in particular for
enhancing the capabilities of troop contributors and for
capacity-building for regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome an active role for the
United Nations, specifically in the areas of sharing
information, promoting transparency, mobilizing
support and stimulating contacts between recipients
and donors of assistance, for example, in training,
equipment and logistics.

The European Union strongly supports United
Nations peace-building action that prevents the
recurrence of conflict and ensures peace and stability in
the future. In this context, we firmly believe that the
Organization should play a central role in post-conflict
Iraq, as well as in other post-conflict situations.

The European Union also believes that in order to
strengthen the collective security system of the United
Nations system, regional arrangements or agencies
should enhance their role in conflict prevention and
resolution. Since this requires closer and more
coordinated cooperation with the United Nations
system, we welcome any new developments in this
area.

