Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his clear and comprehensive
briefing.

Two months ago, in April, there was a
comprehensive consideration here of the situation in
Kosovo, and as we see it, what we have just heard
shows that over these past two months some practical
steps have been implemented which were designed to
further compliance with the goals of resolution 1244
(1999). We point out in particular the reaffirmation of
candidacies of the Serbian Return Coalition to posts in
the Kosovo government. We should also encourage the
efforts of UNMIK and the Kosovo forces in
strengthening law and order and rendering justice,
including the investigation of crimes committed by the
fighters of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army,
which was just mentioned by Mr. Guehenno. As I
understand it, at least one of those arrested is well
known, Mr. Haradinaj. More than a year ago in this
very Chamber, my delegation distributed information
showing that KFOR already had facts in its possession
that confirmed that this individual have been directly
involved in crimes. A decision could therefore had
been taken far earlier; but better late than never. We
repeat: encourage these efforts by the United Nations
and UNMIK.

We would also like to highlight the dedication to
peace and religious tolerance demonstrated by the
Head of the Mission, Mr. Steiner, and by Prime
Minister Rexhepi by taking part in the Orthodox Easter
service celebrated in the Pee Patriarchate. This is in
fact what is so sorely lacking in the current relations
between the representatives of the various ethnic
groups in Kosovo.

We would also like to note the progress made in
determining the fate of missing persons. In that regard,
we encourage all communities to cooperate with
UNMIK.

We support efforts by Belgrade and UNMIK to
find a solution to the problems in Mitrovica. It seems

that those efforts are beginning to yield their first
fruits. In our opinion, the idea proposed by Serbian

Deputy Prime Minister Covie to decentralize authority
is serious evidence that Belgrade is truly seeking a
constructive solution to this problem. I reaffirm in this
regard that there is no violent solution to the problem
of Mitrovica is possible.

However, while pointing out the positive steps
that have been taken, we must note that the basic
problems of a settlement to the Kosovo question have
hardly been solved - namely, the ongoing problem of
ensuring safety for all the inhabitants of the province
and the establishment of an atmosphere that truly
allows for significant minority returns. That also
includes continuing the fight against organized crime
and extremism on the basis of decisions taken by the
Special Representative. Of course, we still also face
urgent social and economic problems.

All of this falls within the purview of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the
Security Council and the Special Representative. But
we must truly make further efforts to achieve the
relevant goals. The benchmarks set out two months ago
at our meeting with Mr. Michael Steiner have in fact
been recognized as being tasks needed to ensure
conditions in the province conducive to a normal life
for all. I would once again like to emphasize that those
benchmarks can in no way be regarded as any sort of
road map to independence for Kosovo. In fact, at our
meeting in April we achieved a clear understanding in
that regard with Mr. Steiner.

We support efforts to gain positive experiences in
self-governance and to establish sound and solid
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. That policy
should be clearly reflected in the practical activities of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo. We also call on
the Special Representative and all his colleagues to
work vigorously to prevent any attempt to use the
benchmarks to put forth slogans on independence, as
well as to prevent any provocative activities similar to
the well known decisions adopted by the Kosovo
Assembly in May of this year - decisions which of
course have no legal force whatever. It is also
important to continue monitoring the activities of the
Kosovo Protection Corps.

Another matter that also requires a final solution
is the demarcation of the borders, pursuant to the
Agreement of 23 February 2001 between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Macedonia. The leadership
of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo should realize
the unquestioned legitimacy of the demarcation
process, and of the border itself, and that the process
has the support of the Security Council. We have only
the technical aspects to settle with regard to
implementing that bilateral Agreement between two
sovereign States, an Agreement that has received the
full support of the Security Council. Of course, those
technical aspects should be worked out between the
authorities of Yugoslavia and Macedonia. As far as the
Kosovo portion of the border is conerned, it should be
dealt with by the United Nations Mission in Kosovo.
We believe Mr. Steiner should now accelerate the
commencement of work on the demarcation of the
border between Yugoslavia and Macedonia and the
Kosovo part of that border.

We would also like to recall that, in our meeting
last April (see S/PV.4518), both Mr. Michael Steiner
and Nebojsa Covic' put forth the idea that the Security
Council should once again send a mission to Kosovo.
In considering that idea, we should of course bear in
mind the optimal time for such a mission. A Council
mission could help give Council members a closer and
more complete picture of the real situation in the
province at this stage, as well as of the dynamics of its
development.

