Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The discussion of the working methods of
the Security Council in an open format is an occasion
to hear an outside assessment of the current state of
affairs and be enriched by new ideas and proposals for
improving the procedural aspects of Security Council
activities, of course on the understanding is that the
working methods themselves, as well as decisions on
possible amendments thereto, are within the purview
of the Security Council itself. Today's meeting has
additional importance because it is presided over by the
delegation that heads the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and that
co-sponsored the best-known document on this matter,
presidential note S/2010/507.

We note of Japan's intention to update note 507,
which is of critical importance as a compendium of the
Security Council's working practices. For our part, we
stand ready to provide any necessary assistance to the
Japanese delegation with that important work. We also
note the contribution made by other non-permanent
Council members to revitalizing the Council's
working methods with new initiatives. We welcome
the statement on the Toledo formula, delivered by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the African
delegations. We also call on our European colleagues
to add this innovation to their toolkits. For instance,
some could associate themselves with the statements of
the United States delegation.

Note 507 is not only actively used by Security
Council members; it is also an important aid for
non-permanent members preparing to work on the
Council. That will be particularly relevant this year.
The new members elected by the General Assembly in
June will be able to attend Council meetings starting
on 1 October. In October, the Security Council will
be presided over by Russia. We stand ready to provide
these members with assistance in the smooth beginning
of their work on the Council, on the clear understanding
that their term begins only on 1 January 2017.

We note that, in recent years, the activities
of non-permanent members have increased
significantly - a development that we fully welcome.
Many of our non-permanent colleagues are not only
making contributions to resolving pressing issues on
the Council's agenda; in fact, they are also providing
substantive initiatives and taking the lead in enhancing
important areas of the Council's work. We are
convinced that the Security Council would benefit from
the further democratization of its work. In line with
that would be a more equitable distribution of duties in
informal leadership on country-specific and thematic
issues - the so-called penholdership. Certain Council
members should not regard countries or even regions as
their tutees and act as mentors on certain issues. This
is a vestige of a bygone era, entirely out of place in the
twenty-first century.

By definition, the reform and improvement of
the work of the Council should be increasing its
effectiveness and efficiency in order to facilitate a
fuller implementation of its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. One area requiring
our attention is the Council's documentation overload.
Each year, the Security Council distributes hundreds
of documents, and let us acknowledge it that not all
of them have added value. We are convinced that the
Security Council's decisions and statements to the press
should be terse, easy to understand and action-oriented.
We should avoid situations in which Security Council
resolutions contain up to 50 operative paragraphs and
press statements go on for three pages, while the bulk
of those documents contain repeated provisions from
other documents.

Resolutions are no place for micromanagement.
They should be concise and clear and their content
must be political. We need to take steps to lighten the
workload of the Council, which is already working
at full capacity. I do not think that we will be able
to reduce the number of meetings, particularly given
the growing instability in the world; however, the
Council's workload should be taken into account
by Council members when they decide to convene
meetings - especially thematic ones - and as they
consider the optimal format for such meetings and the
number of rapporteurs or briefers. At present, we are
hearing five briefers in some meetings. We think that
there should be no more than three.

The most important consideration should be the
added value of the event or meeting and how much it is
likely to improve the situation in practice. We believe
that the Council should not take up topics that it cannot
take decisions on. We also believe that the Council
should remain focused on country-specific issues; it
should neither encroach upon the mandates of other
United Nations bodies nor attempt to act in the stead
of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council or other organs.
Such initiatives could undermine the organization of
the United Nations system as a whole.

It is absolutely clear that the Security Council is

a favourite of global media, and it is tempting to use
the media for self-promotion, including to promote
domestic political agendas. We know that we cannot
expect Council members to behave like saints but we
would nevertheless ask them to act in the interests
of supporting international peace and security first
and foremost.

