Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation will not be able to
support draft resolution S/2018/156, proposed by our
British colleagues, on the extension of the mandate of
the Panel of Experts of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 19 of resolution 2140
(2014) on sanctions against Yemen, but we do not want
any misunderstanding in that regard. While we fully
endorse the majority of the draft resolution's provisions,
we cannot concur with its unconfirmed conclusions and
evidence, which will require verification and discussion
by the Sanctions Committee.

We agree with extending the embargo, and we did
everything we could to achieve adoption of the draft
resolution today, without proposing even a single
compromise on the wording. Unfortunately, however,
we were unable to get there. We are generally in
principle against a politicized approach to the technical
rollover of the Sanctions Committee's Panel of Experts,
one whereby their assistance is used to decide neither
technical nor expertise issues but geopolitical ones,
at a time when the situation in Yemen is far more
complicated than the frequent attempts to lead us to
believe otherwise would have it. Incidentally, we spoke
about the importance of continuing such expert work
just three days ago, when the Russian Federation sent
a request to the Secretariat to clarify certain details
regarding the use of arms in Yemen to which we have
not yet had an answer. During the expert consultations
we - and we were not the only ones - clearly explained
our disagreement with a number of provisions in the
draft resolution based on selective and contentious
conclusions of the Panel of Experts.

1 should point out that during the discussion of the
final report of the Sanctions Committee, there was no
consensus-based approach. We tried to convey to our
colleagues that assessing the conclusions of the Panel
of Experts before the 2140 Committee has formulated
a final evaluation of them is wrong and premature.
Unfortunately, our concerns, which we know are shared
by many delegations, were disregarded.

Voting on a draft resolution that does not have the
approval of all of its members divides the Security
Council at a time when it desperately needs unity. To be
blunt, the wording of the draft resolution proposed by
the United Kingdom could have seriously destabilizing
consequences, not just for the situation in Yemen but
for the entire region, which would inevitably escalate
regional tensions and opposition among key players.
We have frequently said that we see a grave danger
in playing fast and loose with geopolitical cards, and
that includes the highly volatile relations between
Sunni and Shiite within the Islamic world. Rather than
making relations in the Middle East more antagonistic,
we should be taking steps aimed at reaching agreement
through mutually respectful dialogue.

We have repeatedly proposed an alternative and
viable plan for united action that assumes that the focus
should be, not on sanctions or pressure, but on genuinely
concerted efforts to seek ways to resolve crisis situations.
We should begin by coming up with ways to launch a
dialogue. The Russian Federation previously proposed
an initiative for starting inclusive regional discussions
on confidence- and security-building in the region of
the Persian Gulf. The course of events has shown that
such a format would be valuable for the entire Middle
Eastern region as well. Security should be reciprocal,
regional and indivisible. We should also point out that
the potential of resolution 598 (1987) is still unrealized.
It directs the Secretary-General to work collaboratively
with all interested parties to devise an architecture for
security in the region.

In order to avoid undermining the Security
Council's unity, its resolutions should be unpolitical
and predominantly technical in nature. We support
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts. However,
provisions that can potentially lead to action under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations must
be rooted in verified facts. The Committee should be
given more information, and in that regard the Panel's
work should continue. As an alternative, therefore,
we propose adopting a technical draft resolution on
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts of the
Sanctions Committee for Yemen that we request be put
to a vote today.

