Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Tanin, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in Kosovo. We also welcome the presence of the Serbian
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Dacie, and thank him for
his statement. We also thank Ambassador Citaku for
her statement.

Our position on the issue at the hand has always
been anchored in our commitment to contributing to
peace between the parties. We reaffirm our support for
the peaceful and amicable resolution of all outstanding
issues between Belgrade and Pristina, in accordance
with the Brussels Agreement.

We also welcome the ongoing efforts of the
European Union in facilitating the dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo. We have been encouraged by the
renewed commitment of the leaders of both sides in the
reporting period to undertake a new phase of dialogue
to normalize their relations. In that regard, we take note
of the resumption of the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina at the
presidential level in Brussels and in New York. We
also welcome the agreement they reached on the final
steps for the full implementation of the agreement on
the judiciary.

Nonetheless, we understand from the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/911) that, despite progress
in implementing the judiciary agreement, important
gaps remain, and it is our hope that they will be filled
soon - particularly the lack of progress on some of
the key provisions of the EU-facilitated agreement,
including, inter alia, on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, which continues to be a social concern.

It is our hope that the new leadership in both Belgrade
and Pristina will continue to engage in dialogue and
maintain the momentum in a positive and constructive
spirit with a View to addressing outstanding issues and
disagreements through peaceful means. That demands
that both sides refrain from actions and statements that
could cause ethnic discord and that they exert in-State
efforts to create an atmosphere of trust and confidence
conducive to dialogue.

Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has been undertaking to discharge its
mandates in line with resolution 1244 (1999). Its
engagement with municipal authorities and community
representatives in support of the efforts to protect the
rights of communities and to promote inter-community
reconciliation and trust-building is commendable, as
are the efforts by Kosovo authorities to implement
measures aimed at preventing violent extremism
and radicalization by constructively engaging youth
and women.

It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to promote
political dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation
and ensure security and stability in Kosovo and in the
region. We also recognize the significant role of the
European Union on matters concerning Kosovo, and
we commend the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force for their valuable
contributions in the areas of rule of law and security.

In conclusion, I wish to state that security and
stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately be
ensured when there is political will and resolve from
both parties. We once again encourage both to remain
committed to dialogue and negotiation with a view to
finding a mutually acceptable solution.

