Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine voted in
favour of resolution 2356 (2017), which designates
additional North Korean individuals and entities for
inclusion into the relevant control lists, in response to
the recent provocative ballistic-missile launches by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We welcome
the efforts of the delegations involved in drafting
the text.

At the same time, in the context of its almost
weekly missile launches and rapid progress in the North
Korean missile programme, Pyongyang continues
its aggressive rhetoric and steadily evolving tricks to
evade existing prohibitions and restrictions. We must
admit that the current sanctions regime needs to be
strengthened. We are all aware that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea continues to acquire
technologies, materials, equipment and financial
resources for the further development of its nuclear and
missile programmes. Every single launch or test makes
it increasingly difficult for the Security Council and the
international community at large to put an end to that
sinister process.

We share the need to address the North Korean
nuclear threat collectively and decisively. We must
not allow Pyongyang to continue destabilizing the
situation and discrediting the role of the Council in the
light of global non-proliferation efforts. Only robust
steps taken by the Council can stop the systematic and
flagrant violations of international law and move us
closer to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We call upon the Council's members to stay united in
further tackling the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea issue to ensure the full compliance of Pyongyang
with the Council's decisions and demands. Only a
consolidated and firm stance will bear fruit and bring
about positive change in the current tense situation in
the region.

I had hoped to conclude my statement on that
optimistic note. Unfortunately, the statement of the
Russian delegation a few minutes ago added some
doubts that now make it difficult to do so.

