Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thank you and
your delegation for holding a large number of public
meetings. We believe that in the eyes of the
membership of the Organization, this is a healthy
practice. I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe for the
briefing he gave us and to welcome the presence of the
representatives of Israel and Palestine.

The last time that the Council debated the
situation in the Middle East, the population of Gaza
was experiencing dramatic days. Today, we face a
different scenario, characterized by relative calm.
Despite that, the humanitarian situation in Gaza is still
deplorable, and my delegation must once again
condemn the terrorist attacks against the territory of
Israel and the air attacks on Gaza.

In this context, we recognize the importance of
acts of solidarity with the affected peoples, especially
the intervention of Egypt which little by little has
contributed to reducing tensions and has played a
fundamental role in reaching the first agreements.

For Costa Rica, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza calls for particular attention. A high percentage of
the population there depends on humanitarian
assistance. The United Nations must have all the
facilities needed to provide humanitarian assistance
and to carry out its programmes with no obstructions.
Besides that, Gaza's reconstruction and normalization
of life for its population are of great importance to us.

The National Early Recovery and Reconstruction
Plan for Gaza presented by the Palestinian Government
is a general framework to reactivate the Gaza economy,
which should guide the actions of the international
community. In this context, the commitments made
during the Sharm el-Sheikh conference of 2 March are
a major contribution towards the reconstruction of the
territory, which has lost 14 per cent of its infrastructure
and 75 per cent ofits arable land.

However, the beneficial effects of these
contributions for the reconstruction of Gaza will not
translate into sustainable results as long as the
negotiations are not resumed and as long as no
concrete agreements are reached on substantive issues,
leading to permanent political solutions, including a
permanent ceasefire.

Today it is important to call once again for full
respect by the parties for their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law.
Accordingly, normalization of border crossings is a
major objective. Although there has been an
improvement in the entry of basic necessities in recent
weeks, the levels of goods entering Gaza are still much
lower than those of July 2008. The levels of
humanitarian assistance continue to be far lower than
what is urgently needed.

The opening of the crossings is vital, in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of
resolution 1860 (2009). It is also important to put a halt
to the illicit traffic of weapons and ammunition and to
prevent them from entering Gaza freely. Costa Rica is
pleased welcomes the international agreement signed
on 13 March in London by representatives of nine
countries, in which an action plan was established to
respond to the ongoing concerns about the smuggling
of arms into Gaza.

Costa Rica is also concerned at each new
settlement built in occupied Palestinian territories. The
Council should stress the need to put an end to the
continued expansion of illegal settlements. We are not
unaware of, and the new Government of Israel should
not ignore, the broad consensus in the international
community on the need to put a halt to the growth of
illegal settlements that go against the commitments that
have been made.

Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of great
importance for the return to a peace process in which
all Palestinian political actors will take part. It is
imperative for Palestinian factions to find common
ground, which will make it possible for them to work
in a constructive fashion and provide their people with
the hope for a life lived in peace and safety.

We know that, among the efforts to improve the
situation in the Middle East, those being made by the
League of Arab States are decisive. We hope that, at
the coming Doha summit, there will be strengthened
initiatives to reach lasting peace in the region, leading
to the consolidation of an independent Palestinian
State, the strengthening of Israel's security and creative
coexistence benefiting both peoples.

Costa Rica commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General to mandate the Board of Inquiry to
investigate the incidents that affected United Nations
personnel and installations in Gaza during the recent
conflict, and we hope to receive its results in the near
future. We believe it important for the credibility of our
Organization that all acts of hostility against United
Nations installations and its personnel be investigated
and that the responsibility for such acts be assigned.

We hope that the Security Council will be part of
the solution leading to a last peace between Israel and
Palestine and to an environment of peace in the Middle
East. The international community must continue to
show its commitment by supporting the parties and
facilitating their goal of reaching a permanent solution
to the conflict and of two States coexisting in peace
and security. To that end, we call for fulfilment of the
commitments adopted in the peace process on the basis
of the Madrid principles, the Road Map, the resolutions
of this Council and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Similarly, we recognize the work of all agencies
and organizations of the United Nations, in particular
that of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

