President Kabila (spoke in French): The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is glad that the
Security Council has convened this special meeting on the
war of aggression imposed on it by Rwanda, Uganda and
Burundi since 2 August 1998. Indeed, only the strict
observance by every member of the United Nations of the
principles enshrined in the Charter, as the Council well
knows, makes it possible to establish and maintain
international peace and security, which is the paramount
purpose of the United nations, as explicitly set forth in
Article I of the Charter.

I welcome the Security Council's awareness of this
situation after more than 18 months of breaches of peace
and security and violations of the political independence,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of a United
Nations Member State by other Member States.

Before continuing, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the American presidency of
the Security Council in the month of January 2000 for
taking this welcome initiative.

In 1997, the brave Congolese people, under my
leadership and under that of many other compatriots who
had the same beliefs, put an end to 32 years of the most
corrupt dictatorship in Africa. We did not take on this act
of salvation in order to prolong the suffering of our
people; we did it so that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo could resume its seat in the concert of nations, at
a time of unprecedented regional and global change.

Despite the aggression against my country, I was
bold enough to sign the Lusaka Agreement because I am
a man of peace and because the Congolese people want
peace. I am here in New York today, visiting for the first
time, because the Lusaka Agreement is deadlocked. The
Agreement is not working, and the Congolese people's
thirst for peace has not been quenched.

 

Even though history has not always been kind to my
country, we are a people that knows how to forgive, and I
am here today once again to offer my hand of
reconciliation to those who have done us harm. For this
goodwill to be effective, it must be mutual. Here, I would
like to highlight that the Lusaka Agreement has failed to
achieve its objectives. The Agreement, which is based on
Security Council resolution 1234 (1999), will not be able to
restore peace to our region unless it demands, first, a real
and immediate ceasefire; secondly, a deployment of United
Nations forces that would systematically replace the troops
of the aggressor countries; thirdly, the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the uninvited aggressor forces;
and, lastly, the positioning of United Nations forces along
the borders between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the aggressor countries.

The Congolese people and their Government therefore
hope that during the course of this special meeting, the
Council will be able to achieve agreement to end the
occupation of a part of our national territory by the
occupying armies of Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, in
conformity with the provisions of resolution 1234 (1999),
which, in paragraph 2,

"Deplores the continuing fighting and the
presence of forces of foreign States in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in a manner inconsistent with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and calls upon those States to bring to an end the
presence of these uninvited forces and to take
immediate steps to that end".

Together with our allies in the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), we are currently trying
to ensure respect for the principle of the maintenance of the
territorial integrity of our country. We are not doing so in
a spirit of ill will towards our neighbours, even though they
are occupying a large part of our territory.
Let us recall that Article 2, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations requires Members to settle
their international disputes by peaceful means. It also calls
on them to refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes
of the United Nations. Those are the words of the United
Nations Charter.

As soon as we came to power, we announced a
political democratization programme, designed to lead to
the organization of free and transparent elections within two
years. Only the war prevented us from completing that
programme, parts of which had already begun, in
particular the elaboration of a draft constitution by a
commission on institutional reform and the convening of
a constituent assembly.

As for the argument about our pursuit of the
Interahamwe and other armed groups that are present in
our territory, I should like to say here and now that that
argument is as fallacious as others that have been made.
I should simply like to say to this Council that my
Government cannot ally itself, and will never ally itself,
with people who carry out genocide. We condemn the
genocide that took place in Rwanda in 1994, just as we
strongly condemn the massacre of hundreds of thousands
of women, children and elderly people during our struggle
against the dictatorship of Mobutu by my former allies,
who today are invading my country. They have never
answered to that charge.

On the other hand, the evidence provided by
prisoners of war and Rwandan deserters, corroborated by
the reports of certain non-governmental human rights
organizations, have exposed the forcible recruitment by
the Kigali authorities of Hutu prisoners and adolescents to
serve as cannon fodder in their nefarious war against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Is there anyone who has not heard of the massacres
in Kasika, Makobola, Ngweshe, Burinye, Kamituga,
Kasala, Budi and Mwenga? All of us have witnessed the
fighting in Kisangani, in Congolese territory, between the
Rwandan aggressors and their Ugandan accomplices -
confrontations during which, in addition to killing 200
Congolese, who were outnumbered, the aggressors
intentionally destroyed more than 300 million doses of
anti-poliomyelitis vaccine, thereby putting more than 6
million Congolese children in occupied territory at risk of
contracting that lifelong disease.

Is there anyone here who is unaware of the
systematic plundering of Congolese resources on and
below the ground by the Rwandan, Ugandan and Burundi
occupiers? Their booty - wood, diamonds, gold, cobalt
and zebras - is all being sold on the open market,
including in some of the countries represented here today.

I do not need to continue with this macabre
enumeration of atrocities of all kinds committed in the
past, and still being committed, against our country by the
forces of aggression, which, unfortunately, are being
encouraged by the silence of the international community.

 

The fundamental question now is how we can put an
immediate end to this situation, which is so intolerably
humiliating to our people. Everyone must realize that there
is now an urgent need to halt the illegal occupation, which
is a flagrant, constant and ongoing violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. Under these circumstances, is the
Security Council justified in relying exclusively on the
Lusaka Agreement to try to re-establish peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo? Are we not entitled to
ask what has happened to the great hopes raised by the
signing, on 10 July 1999, of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement?

As far as we are concerned, we signed the Lusaka
Agreement in order to regain peace and stability in our
country and in the Great Lakes region. We are here today
to determine the extent to which the Agreement can be
made more effective.

We have proposed a solution aimed at restoring our
security and that of our neighbours and at addressing the
desire of the Congolese people to see the uninvited forces
leave our territory, as stipulated in the Agreement. The
Congolese people is eager to implement the initiative I
launched about a year ago to convene a national debate.
That initiative is now enshrined in the Lusaka Agreement,
in which it is called the national dialogue.

What are the prospects for our country and the Great
Lakes region? As soon as we came to power, we undertook
various initiatives to consolidate peace and stability in our
country and region. Domestically, we decreed a
"revolution" to pardon all the former dignitaries of the old
regime, whom we called upon to help us rebuild our
country. In order to end ethnic antagonism in the eastern
part of our country, we established a peace commission to
maintain a climate of understanding and dialogue among
the rival communities. In April 1999, we convened the
national debate to enable the Congolese to speak among
themselves and to define the basic principles on which the
new democratic political order was to be based. We issued
a general amnesty to allow political exiles and so-called
rebels to return to the country and to begin rebuilding it
with us.

At the regional level, aware of the danger posed to the
peace, security and development of our region by the
existence of uncontrolled armed groups, in May 1998 we
organized, with the support of the specialized agencies of
the United Nations, particularly the United Nations
Development Programme, a conference on security and
development in the Great Lakes region. Unfortunately, the
conference failed to take place, as it was boycotted by
those who are committing aggression against us today.

In the interests of peace and of respect for our
international commitments in the field of human rights, I
launched the convening of a pan-African forum on the
demobilization and social reintegration of child soldiers,
held from 6 to 10 December, in which 25 countries
participated.

It was this desire for peace, respect for human rights
and the democratization of our country that led us, in the
context of the Lusaka Agreement, to accept the holding
of the inter-Congolese dialogue. The dialogue' s objectives
are the same as those of the national debate that we
convened in April 1999: to re-establish the people as the
primary sovereign power and the sole source of
legitimacy; to establish the rules to be applied to the
exercise of power; and to outline the framework for the
operation of political parties. In a word, it is a question of
preparing the bases for the new democratic political order
of which our people have so long been deprived.

In this respect, I wish to point out that, as our people
understand it, the inter-Congolese dialogue is precisely
and solely as I have described it. The Government
encourages the initiatives of the Congolese religious
denominations, which have proposed convening national
consultations on the national dialogue on 21 February
2000, and we invite the international community to
support them in this.

We are resolved to working together with any
individual who shares our values of democracy and
development in order to raise our country and the Great
Lakes region from poverty, insecurity, instability and war.

We call on this institution to persuade our aggressors
of the need to make similar efforts to establish peace
within their own countries, a prerequisite to the
establishment of peace throughout our region. That is why
we welcome the incorporation of our proposal to convene
an international conference on the Great Lakes region into
Security Council resolution 1234 (1999).

As far as I am concerned, I am ready to begin the
national dialogue today. The Congolese people and I
await the imminent arrival in Kinshasa of the new
Facilitator, the former President of Botswana, Sir
Ketumile Masire. We wish to assure him of our support
and encourage him to establish contact with the religious
groups and all those who seek peace so that, together,

 

they can clear the way for the holding of the national
dialogue.

We certainly need the United Nations, despite the fact
that we had a bad experience with the Organization at the
time of our independence. We recognize that, in the
interim, the United Nations of which we are all Members
has gained almost 40 years of experience in peacekeeping.

I myself wish publicly to express my support for the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We had a few problems and
misunderstandings early on in their deployment. I therefore
wish to reassure the Security Council and the Secretary-
General that my Government will do its utmost to ensure
their security and to support the members of the Joint
Military Commission when it is established in Kinshasa. I
wish to reiterate in all solemnity that any Congolese who
wishes to come to Kinshasa to participate in the national
dialogue will be able to do so in full security.

My Government and I seek only peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region. We therefore seek the establishment of a system
based on democratic principles and prosperity founded on
the sound management of the economy and of my country's
significant resources. On behalf of my Government and the
Congolese people, I wish most sincerely to thank the
President and members of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General for having given us this opportunity to
meet with a View to restoring peace and justice to my
people.

I should like once again to reiterate to all members of
the Security Council my country's full respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter, by which we are
all bound.

To my friends, the heads of State present here today,
I wish to say in all sincerity that they can count on me and
my delegation to discuss openly and seriously the ways and
means of putting an end to this tragic war, so that together
we may rebuild a region in which our peoples can live in
peace.

