Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing. Amid the difficulties caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), Special Envoy Huang Xia has actively carried out good offices to promote improved relations among the countries of the region and strengthen regional cooperation in order to overcome the challenges. He has done a great deal of work to support the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. China commends such work, and we will continue to fully support the Special Envoy in performing his mandate. In recent years, through the joint efforts of States of the region and the international community, the situation in the Great Lakes region has stabilized and improved. The region has a rare window of opportunity for peace and development. The past six months have seen the strengthening of that positive momentum. The general elections in Burundi took place smoothly. The reform agenda of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has moved forward steadily. Relations among States of the region are gradually improving, along with a greater willingness to resolve disputes peacefully. The countries of the Great Lakes region share common interests and a common future. Threats to the security of any country may spill over to its neighbours, and one country's crisis may become a challenge for the region. COVID-19 and Ebola have highlighted the urgent need for regional cooperation. China calls on the countries of the region to build consensus, strengthen cooperation and turn challenges into opportunities with a view to achieving regional peace, stability and common development as soon as possible. In that regard, I wish to stress the following four points. First, with regard to joint cooperation to earnestly implement the Framework, countries of the region should respect each other's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. That is necessary for the implementation of the Framework and a precondition for regional peace and stability. China encourages the countries of the region to continue to resolutely fulfil their commitments under the Framework and enhance mutual trust and good-neighbourliness. China calls on the international community to respect the leadership of countries of the region in dealing with their own affairs and support regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the East African Community (EAC), in playing their respective important roles. Secondly, with regard to steadily advancing national political agendas, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi have successfully completed their political transitions. Tanzania and Uganda will hold general elections this and next year, respectively. With their political situations stabilized, the focus of governance in various countries has gradually shifted to national reconstruction and increased reform. The international community should create an enabling external environment and actively help countries of the region strengthen capacity-building and improve national governance. The political and security situation in Burundi has significantly improved and no longer poses a threat to regional peace and security. The time is ripe to remove Burundi from the agenda of the Security Council. China welcomes the visit by the Secretariat to Burundi, as requested by the Security Council. We look forward to its report, which we hope will objectively reflect Burundi's progress in the political and security fields and put forward realistic proposals with regard to future cooperation between the United Nations and Burundi. Thirdly, on the issue of attaching importance to resolving the underlying issues that lead to conflict, the root causes of the protracted turmoil and frequent conflicts in the Great Lakes region are complex and chiefly due to the lack of development. Countries of the region should jointly consider the issue of how to turn the benefits of natural resources into a driver for development rather than tension or conflict. China supports such countries in strengthening consultations and cooperation so as to jointly resolve the problem of the illicit exploitation of, and illegal trade in, natural resources, while increasing its investment in socioeconomic development, thereby creating more jobs and means of subsistence. China anticipates that the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities being developed by States of the region can contribute to that goal. We welcome the fact that Special Envoy Huang Xia has been advocating the convening of a conference on trade and investment in the Great Lakes region. We commend such work to assist States of the region in scaling up their marketing efforts and attracting foreign investment. The first conference was a great success, and we look forward to the second one soon, if conditions allow. We hope that such a platform will bring new development opportunities to countries of the region. Fourthly, with regard to joint efforts to address common challenges, the security threats and humanitarian challenges that countries of the region face are closely interlinked. Currently, the pandemic has led to the region facing new and complex issues, which have resulted in severe challenges to its economic development. Strengthening regional cooperation and promoting regional integration can help to provide impetus forthe developmentofcountries and bring lasting stability to the region. China welcomes the cooperation among States of the region in monitoring the pandemic, diagnosis and treatment under frameworks such as the ICGLR and supports the harmonized guidelines on trade and transportation facilitation adopted by the EAC and SADC. We welcome the progress made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda in their bilateral security cooperation. As a good friend and partner of countries of the Great Lakes region, China has always steadfastly supported countries of the region in advancing peace processes, actively participated in United Nations peacekeeping operations in the region and done its utmost to help States of the region strengthen capacity-building. China stands ready to work with the rest of the international community in our continued resolute effort to contribute to achieving peace, stability, prosperity and development in the Great Lakes region.
