Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing. I should also like to thank the representative
of Somalia for his statement. I would like to reiterate to
Mr. Ould Abdallah that he has the full support of
France in carrying out his difficult task.

We welcome in particular that Mr. Ould Abdallah
has made proposals to the Security Council for an
integrated strategy. We believe that the Somali crisis is
an overarching crisis - a political, security and, of
course, humanitarian crisis. And as Mr. Ould Abdallah
has pointed out, the crisis poses a threat to the security
of the entire region. My delegation would like to
emphasize what we believe to be three areas for action
that must be addressed simultaneously.

The first is the humanitarian situation. There is
today an urgent need to respond to the humanitarian
tragedy in Somalia. As described to us by Mr. Ould
Abdallah, and as Mr. Holmes pointed out 10 days ago
(see S/PV.5792), the situation is continuing to
deteriorate. More than 600,000 people fled their homes
in 2007, and at least half of the inhabitants of
Mogadishu have left the city for shelter in improvised
camps along the roads. Fighting in the capital
continues. Attacks and killings by insurgents are
sometimes answered with artillery fire by Ethiopian
forces and forces of the Transitional Federal
Government. We recall that the Transitional Federal
Government has a responsibility to protect the civilian
population and that all combatants must respect
humanitarian law.

France hopes that humanitarian aid will be
increased, that access to people in need will be
guaranteed and that working conditions for
humanitarian staff will improve. That goes also for
other international personnel working in Somalia. In
that regard, I am thinking in particular of journalists
and, especially today, of our fellow citizen Mr. Gwen
Le Gouil, who was kidnapped on Sunday in the
Puntland region. France demands his immediate release.

France is continuing to provide military
protection for vessels of the World Food Programme,
which is providing essential food aid for Somalis. Two
rotations have already taken place, with a third rotation
under way. France's commitment will continue until 16
January. These operations have made it possible to
significantly improve the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We are in contact with several of our
partners to ensure that these operations can continue
beyond 16 January.

Secondly, France has, however, not lost sight of
the fact that the crisis will not be resolved without
political dialogue. Once he has established his new
governing team, the first task of the new Prime
Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein, will be to launch a
dialogue between the Transitional Federal Government
and the opposition in Somalia and elsewhere. That
dialogue must be as inclusive as possible and include
those who have taken up arms, with the exception, of
course, of some extremists with an international
agenda. The Security Council must lend its unreserved
support for Mr. Ould Abdallah's efforts to bring on
board all parties to the conflict. After 16 years of chaos
and conflict, France supports in particular the idea of
bringing together small groups of decision makers to
address specific issues in order to establish an
environment conducive to a genuine political process.

The third area is security. The question is how
best to respond given the situation that I have outlined.

Mr. Ould Abdallah has referred to an ad hoc force to
supplement the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). The idea of such a force under a United
Nations mandate deserves to be considered. There are
also other options that could be envisaged. Whatever
the case, the situation is such that, in our View, the
Security Council cannot rule out any option, whether it
be to provide support for AMISOM. or to consider
mandating an ad hoc force or a possible peacekeeping
force. We therefore ask that the Secretariat address all
those options, including the speedy deployment of a
technical assessment mission, and provide regular
updates to the Council on its work.

For the short term, my delegation notes that all
credible scenarios call for greater political dialogue
and the speedy deployment of AMISOM. France pays
tribute to the African Union and to the Ugandan
contingent on the ground. We have participated
actively in the training of the Burundian contingent.
We welcome the announcement made Friday by the
Special Envoy of the African Union that the first
Burundian battalion would be deployed very soon,
namely, in the second half of December.

In the light of what I have said, it will come as no
surprise that France supports the idea that there is a
need to change course. Given the humanitarian
catastrophe taking place before our very eyes, complete
disengagement by the international community is
clearly out of the question. Nor is the status quo an
option.

I would like to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for the
suggestions he made this morning. We hope that the
Security Council will be able to quickly consider those
options by working together substantively with all the
relevant services of the Secretariat.

