Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Allow me to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council. I also would like to thank
His Excellency Jalil Abbas Jilani, as President of the
Security Council, for having organized this important
debate and for the tremendous role Pakistan has always
played in peacekeeping operations.

Rwanda is a committed contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that we
can continue to share our experience in international
peacekeeping and national peacebuilding, in order to
enrich the debate on the future role of multidimensional
peacekeeping.

Rwanda's commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security is based on our
responsibilities as a contributing member of the
international community and on a moral obligation
shaped by the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi and
the failure of the world to intervene. Our active
participation in peacekeeping missions began in 2004,
in Darfur, with the African Union Mission in the
Sudan, and today Rwanda is the sixth major troop- and
police-contributing country in the United Nations and
the largest troop- and police-contributing country in
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), with a presence in seven other
United Nations missions.

Having embarked upon our own path of
reconciliation and nation-building, my country is of the
firm belief that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
two sides of the same coin and that the nexus between
the two should continually be enhanced as the scope of
mandates continue to expand, along with the tasks of
peacekeepers.

I applaud the draft resolution (S/2013/27),
which Rwanda has co-sponsored. It reiterates
the interdependence between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and encourages progress on a coherent
approach to addressing all stages of the conflict cycle.
Addressing critical peacebuilding priorities will
facilitate the successful undertaking of peacekeeping
mandates and ensure a coherent and effective response
to peacekeeping, stabilization and recovery. It is time
to give peacebuilding a legitimate place in both the
budgets and the mandates of peacekeeping operations.

As peacekeepers endeavour to address the
challenges at hand, they should not seek to take over
security and governance responsibilities; instead, they
should seek to build local capacity to address those
challenges.

In that regard, let me address a few areas of focus
that were outlined in the concept note (S/2013/4, annex)
prepared by Pakistan for this debate, namely, quick-
impact projects, training and partnerships.

Now more than ever, the first boots on the ground
need to be able to perform early peacebuilding tasks,
in addition to maintaining the ceasefire and protecting
civilians. In order to ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers can deliver and engage effectively with
their civilian counterparts, a training mechanism in post-
conflict community development for United Nations
peacekeeping forces would benefit the peacekeeping
process as a whole, including the peacekeepers and
local populations.

In addition, the unique comparative advantages of
the United Nations in the field of peacekeeping can be
optimized by enlisting troop- and police-contributing
countries with experience or expertise relevant
to the needs of a particular mission, including
appropriate language skills at all levels, in order to
be able to communicate without interpretation with
local authorities and local populations. Moreover,
preparedness, such as stand-by forces with earmarked
trained personnel, is key. Hurriedly collecting troops
from different countries with various levels of training,
ethics and commitment is not the best way to put
together a peacekeeping force.

Furthermore, any previous national experience
with early peacebuilding and capacity-building should
be emphasized in force requirements. In addition to
traditional predeployment training, Rwandan troops
often participate in post-conflict peacebuilding
workshops before deploying to peacekeeping missions
and have first-hand national experience with small-
scale community development projects.

For example, improved energy-saving cooking
stoves, which use less firewood than traditional stoves,
were introduced in Rwanda in 2000 in order to preserve
trees and the environment. Now Rwandan peacekeepers
have brought such stoves to Darfur, where women and
young girls live in fear of getting raped every time they
venture outside camps for internally displaced persons
or their villages to collect firewood for cooking. Apart
from saving the lives ofwomen who risk being raped or
killed while collecting firewood, the improved stoves
also allow troops and police who were previously
escorting them to focus on other mandated tasks.
Rwandan peacekeepers have also built classrooms and
clinics, planted trees in Darfur, and led community
clean-up programmes in several Haitian towns that
have since become permanent fixtures.

Quick-impact projects help to lay the foundations
of locally-owned long-term development, capacity- and
institution-building. Products such as the stoves, as
well as the construction of classrooms, clinics, police
stations and basic sanitation infrastructure have had
a positive impact on Rwandan society during post-
conflict reconstruction. I hope that the budgets for
quick-impact projects continue to increase as they
become integral to peacekeeping operations.

It is crucial that partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
especially the African Union, continue to be enhanced
and strategically coordinated. Multilateral partnerships
will help to ensure that troops are deployed to
missions that are endowed with resources matching
their mandates, and to prevent restrictions or caveats
imposed by some troop- and police-contributing
countries on the use of their personnel. The political
backing, concrete support and legitimacy provided by
such groups to United Nations peacekeeping operations
are as important today as they have ever been.

Planning processes should, from the initial stages,
consider early peacebuilding tasks that can and should
be implemented along with a mission's traditional
mandate. Adequate training, meaningful partnerships
with all stakeholders and early infrastructure projects
owned by the host State are a few of the tools that can
help to pave a road to sustainable peace and security in
areas of the world where that is necessary.

Responding to the call of the Secretary-General
to contribute needed enablers, Rwanda has recently
deployed military utility helicopters to the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
and we hope that our aviation unit will enhance
the Mission's ability to implement its mandate. We
again reiterate Rwanda's commitment to supporting
the multidimensional approach to United Nations
peacekeeping, and pay tribute to the women and men
serving in peacekeeping missions, as well as those who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the name of peace.

