Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): We
welcome your presence, Mr. Foreign Minister, at this
important debate. Canada welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the prevention of armed conflict,
introduced this morning by the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Louise Frechette, this morning. It is a
thorough and well-crafted report that makes clear the
progress that has been achieved in developing our
Organization's capacity to prevent armed conflict,
while also providing practical recommendations on
how that capacity can be further enhanced. We will
participate wholeheartedly in efforts to give life to the
report.

As the Secretary-General states, conflict
prevention is at the moral heart of the mandate of the
United Nations, as expressed in the Charter and
throughout more than 55 years of efforts to maintain
international peace and security for the people of the
whole world. Member States have primary
responsibility for preventing violent conflict, and they
have a key role to play in strengthening our collective
capacity to avoid future tragedies like those in Rwanda
and Srebrenica.

Preventing the outbreak and escalation of armed
conflict requires action by both the General Assembly
and the Security Council. We must identify ways for
these two organs better to coordinate their efforts in
this area. We should not lose time to jurisdictional
arguments. There is urgent work to be done by both
bodies.

Other actors, such as regional organizations, the
international financial institutions and civil society,
also have an important role to play in supporting the
efforts of Member States to strengthen their capacity to
respond to factors such as exclusion and inequality,
which, if left unchecked, can spark violent
confrontations.

Appropriately, the report also recognizes the
positive role the private sector can play in promoting
conflict prevention and sustainable human
development. Corporate and other non-State actors can
prolong and intensify war by, for example, engaging in
illicit trade in natural resources. But they can also play
a positive role and help stave off conflict by, for
example, providing employment to young people who
might otherwise be tempted to take up arms. Canada
supports further study into the positive roles the private
sector can play in vulnerable conflict-prone areas,
including through conflict prevention activities such as
early warning and post-conflict reconstruction.

Effective conflict prevention is as much an issue
of economics and governance as it is of diplomacy. It
requires engagement over the long term, beginning
with the moment when the possibility of armed conflict
appears and continuing throughout the period when the
embers of conflict risk being reignited. Emergency
assistance, reconstruction and peace-building all form
part of conflict prevention.

(spoke in English)

Next month, Member States will have an
opportunity to achieve real progress in an area vital to
the prevention and mitigation of armed conflict:
controlling the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. We share the Secretary-General's conviction
that small arms proliferation is not simply a security
issue but also an issue of human rights and
development, and we agree that measures to address
the demand for, and misuse of, small arms and light
weapons are necessary to prevent armed conflict.

We therefore support a comprehensive approach
to the July 2001 United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. It is essential that there be broad support
among Member States for practical disarmament
measures. Canada echoes the call for greater
participation by Member States in disarmament-related
early warning and transparency mechanisms as well as
for the inclusion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration provisions in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-building operations,
where appropriate. It is particularly important that
these recommendations are reflected in the programme
for action of the July 2001 United Nations Conference.

The Secretary-General's report also underscores
the need for a gender-sensitive approach to conflict
prevention and peace-building efforts on the part of the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole.
Canada is firmly committed to the implementation of
the Security Council's landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
on women, peace and security. We also strongly agree
that a gender-sensitive approach, with the full and
equal participation of women in the planning and
implementation of peace support operations, will
contribute to more effective United Nations missions.

A gender-sensitive approach to peace support
operations requires appropriate training. Over the past
two years, Canada and the United Kingdom have
developed a Gender Training Initiative - GTI - for
military and civilian personnel involved in peace
support operations. The materials continue to be a work
in progress and continue to be available to the United
Nations and Member States.

Canada also recognizes the importance of
addressing the situation of war-affected children.
Children are not only victims in today's conflicts but,
sometimes, are also perpetrators of violence. The
International Conference on War-Affected Children
held last September in Winnipeg, Canada, produced an
agenda for war-affected children that outlines priorities
for international action. Many of these are reflected in
this report of the Secretary-General. The General
Assembly special session on children to be held in
September 2001 provides another opportunity to work
towards broadly defined conflict prevention.

Finally, Canada strongly supports the suggestion
by the President of the General Assembly that
following the Assembly's discussion of this report next
month, a short procedural resolution be adopted
forwarding the report to all relevant organs within the
United Nations system and other relevant actors for
their consideration and further recommendations.
These bodies should also be invited to report back to
the Assembly during its fifty-sixth session, at which
time the Assembly could consider the report and all
recommendations in a comprehensive manner.

We support generally the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General and look forward to
discussing them more fully at the time of the General
Assembly debate.

