Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/624) and for the
additional information he has given us.

It is clear that Libya is now experiencing the most
critical phase to date of its modern history. Libya's very
existence as a united, independent and sovereign State
is threatened due to the greed and whims of its children
and the conspiracy that certain countries promote for
their own purposes. It is also due to terrorism, which
does not even believe in the existence of Libya except
as a State that finances a multinational entity - one
where the faithful are beheaded or crucified, the law of
the jungle rules and the devil is the leader. Undeniably,
the Secretary-General's report before the Council
highlights some of the dimensions of that very gloomy
picture. Despite all that, we still hope that Libya will be
saved by its own people.

The Libyan people have recently begun to feel
that the country's crisis can be settled. However, such
optimism is linked to the formation of a Government of
national accord and reconciliation. Such a Government
must count on a minimum of knowledge, including
about the management of State affairs. It must be
familiar with the rules of good governance and be able
to communicate effectively with all parties. At the same
time, experts harbour doubts as to the success of forming
such a Government because of the absence of criteria to
be met for the selection of its members - a view quite
different from public opinion. That is why the roles of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and of the Security Council are vitally important at this
stage, as they must guide the participants in the political
dialogue so that they can work to set aside the failures
of the past four years. The ultimate goal should be to
choose new leadership for the country that is free from
partisan and personal interests. The progress achieved
in the political dialogue thus far has been an undeniable
success, which could provide the foundation for peace
and security during the remaining transitional period
before adoption of the constitution.

However, that success could vanish owing to the
intransigence of a particular party that is obstructing
the process, a party we are all familiar with that does
not respect the future of Libya or the lives of Libyans
as long as it has enough weapons and foreign support
to block consensus. That is why Libyans await a firm
position from Mr. Bernardino Leon and from the
Security Council so that they can put an end to the
procrastination and futile, deliberate delays that are or
could be adopted by a party to the dialogue. Libyans
want to work towards a Government of national accord
and to create the necessary conditions so that it can
begin its work from the capital, Tripoli, as soon as
possible.

However, the formation of such a Government is
not the end of the process, because it would perhaps
be a Government that is not better than previous
Governments. But the direct engagement of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to provide
support in establishing State institutions and offer
advice on good governance could change that. Such
support could serve to improve the performance of the
Government and allow it to diffuse the current crisis
in Libya. The Security Council must also be ready to
take all the necessary measures to help the Government
to extend its control over all of Libya's territory and
to fight extremist groups that resist disarmament when
the time comes.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
fact that all efforts made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General could be futile if we do not
clearly define the map of terrorism in Libya and if we do
not identify the sponsors of terrorism as terrorists who
provide weapons. I say that because paragraph 81 of the
Secretary-General's report shows that the situation on
the ground is critical. There is currently a ceasefire in
Benghazi, now that the city hosts the largest terrorist
force in Libya, which is resisting army operations to
free the city from terrorism and to guarantee the return
of its citizens.

A few days ago, some described Derna as being
a place free from terrorism, a free city. The city is
in fact occupied by Al-Qaida, which has been the
case since the adoption of resolution 1970 (2011). I
visited Derna in January 2012, during which I noticed
that public State institutions were not flying the
Libyan national flag. I believe that is still the case,
as Al-Qaida has not changed its tactics to date. For
the past six months, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), or Daesh, has controlled Derna with the
support of Al-Qaida. There remain differences when
it comes to the respective interests of the two groups,
but Al-Qaida has taken over Derna. We all know that
the sole difference between Al-Qaida and ISIL is the
nature of their respective criminal activities. Members
of the Council should know, if they do not already, that
the scope of the danger posed by Al-Qaida in Libya
goes beyond the danger posed by ISIL: whereas ISIL
terrorists are present in specific, limited areas of the
country, members of Al-Qaida are found in many parts
of Libya and call themselves rebels and revolutionaries.
Unfortunately, that terrorist group has manipulated a
great number of young people who have joined them
in their fight without really knowing the reality of the
group. I am convinced that Al-Qaida is going to return
to the forefront and put up ferocious resistance once it
believes it is to be disarmed.

I hope that all States will have a very clear position
when choosing between support for the Libyan people
or support for terrorists, regardless of their names.

