Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me commend you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting. My country welcomes the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica, The
Honourable K. D. Knight, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Bahamas, who have expressed their
concern with respect to the problem of Haiti, which is
so close to those countries. Argentina has expressed its
support for the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Plan of Action, and we regret its rejection by the
Haitian opposition.

We believe we should also mention resolution
CP/862 of the Organization of American States (OAS),
which calls on the Security Council to take necessary
emergency measures and reaffirms support for the OAS
special mission in Haiti. We also believe it important to
note that that resolution seeks to ensure coordination
and complementarity in the roles of the OAS and the
United Nations.

My country, which is current Chairman of the
Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) affirmed
on 18 February, that the Governments of MERCOSUR
and its associated States, deplore the acts of violence in
the Republic of Haiti. Unfortunately, there has been no
resolution of those events, which have only increased
and worsened. We consider it essential to help Haitian
society reach a political agreement that will bring about
an end to the violence and confrontation, within the
framework of institutional law.

Argentina condemns the bloodshed perpetrated by
armed gangs that have risen against the Government.
At the same time, we regret the inability of the
Government and the opposition to reach an agreement
on the basis of the CARICOM. Plan of Action. We also
join in calling on the parties to show restraint. We
believe that the solution must involve dialogue between
the Government and the opposition, while respecting
constitutional order and the principles and values
embodied in the Inter-American Democratic Charter.

We also support the initiative of France, to invite
the parties to Paris, for negotiations as soon as
possible.

Argentina calls on all the forces in Haiti to
respect human rights. We believe that the international
community must insist that human rights be fully
respected and that violations cease, before it is too late.
There have already been too many victims in this
confrontation.

Similarly, we are facing a serious humanitarian
and security situation that we see deteriorating with
each passing hour. There is the risk of a major
catastrophe. It is thus urgent that the international
community provide humanitarian assistance. In that
connection, Argentina is ready to send an aeroplane
with three tons of food and medicine and qualified
emergency personnel, as part of a White Helmet effort.

For years, the international community has been
acting in support of Haiti. The Security Council, the
General Assembly and subsidiary bodies of the United
Nations have all had the situation in Haiti on their
agenda. Missions have been created in the past and
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General have
been appointed, including one from Argentina.
Unfortunately, regional organizations and States that
have actively supported Haiti, such as our country,
have not been able to change the situation. In spite of
all the international measures, crises in Haiti continue
to reoccur. This shows that international efforts have
fallen short in terms of finding a solution to the
political conflict.

The situation in Haiti is not simply a result of
disagreement among political factions that are unable
to get along democratically. There are also expressions
of disillusionment and frustration due to the injustice
and the extreme poverty in which the Haitian people
have long been living. Those conditions are not
exclusive to Haiti; unfortunately, many areas of Latin
America and the Caribbean - along with a large part
of the planet - are in a similar situation, where
extreme poverty threatens democratic stability and
peace. We need to understand the impact the realties of
desperate social conditions and poverty have on the
viability of democracy in nations. That is a fact that we
need to address through appropriate measures.

The most urgent task is to end the terrible conflict
taking place in Haiti. But it will not be a short process.
We will not resolve this situation overnight with an
international presence. To bring about a genuine
solution, we must have true international cooperation,
increased development assistance and the creation of
economic conditions that provide for equal and non-
discriminatory participation in the world economy. The
economic and social dimension of the conflict in Haiti
calls for all members of the international community,
particularly the richest and most powerful, to work
with the United Nations to put an end to a situation
which today affects all humanity.

