Ms. Purdy (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to join others in thanking
Ambassador Mufioz for his briefing today. The United
Kingdom greatly appreciates the commitment that he
has shown to the Committee through his visits
overseas. Those visits have raised awareness of the
work of the Committee and highlighted the importance
of implementing its actions on the ground. He was
worked tirelessly and successfully to enhance the
international standing of the Committee. I would also
like to join others in thanking the team that
Ambassador Munoz has in his Mission - in particular
Mrs. Carla Serrazi, for her significant contribution to
the work of the Committee - as well as the
Secretariat, for its vital supporting role. The
Monitoring Team also deserves our thanks for its input,
analysis and dialogue with Member States, all of which
are invaluable to the Committee. We have just received
the Monitoring Team's second report, and we look
forward to studying it and its recommendations in
detail.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
two issues of central importance to our work in the
Committee. The first is the list of terrorist
organizations and individuals.

I would like to welcome the work that has begun
on improving the quality of the consolidated list and
the enthusiasm shown for that task by the Monitoring
Team and Member States. The list is vital to the ability
of the Committee to achieve its objectives, and we
must all strive to ensure that it is as accurate, complete
and useful as possible. As part of that process, we must
continue to encourage all Member States to propose
names for inclusion on the list. The threat from Al
Qaeda remains urgent, serious and common to all
States. By submitting names for inclusion on the list,
Member States can demonstrate a clear commitment to
fighting terrorism and provide an important way for the
international community to be able to take concrete
action against terrorism.

Secondly, I would like to join others in
welcoming the dialogue that the Committee has
established with other experts organizations, such as
INTERPOL. The United Kingdom fully supports
increased Committee interaction with international
organizations and believes that that type of cooperation
will benefit all Member States in ensuring the
effectiveness of the sanctions at the operational level.
In parallel, we look forward to the development of an
active dialogue between the Committee and Member
States through visits and/or expanded dialogue in New
York. The relationship with States will also be one of
the important areas for coordination between the
Committee and other relevant committees of the
Council, in particular the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). In that context, I would like to
support what others have said about the importance of
coordination between Council bodies.

Finally, I would like to look to the future. The
Committee has been committed to discussing issues of
substance under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Mufioz, and I am quite sure that that will continue to be
the case under his successor. The United Kingdom
hopes that a draft programme of work for the
Committee can be agreed early in the next year, to
focus the Committee's attention on pending issues.

The comments I have heard today demonstrate
our continued collective commitment to the fight
against terrorism and the importance we all place in the
work of the Committee in that context. The United
Kingdom has enjoyed a positive working relationship
with current Council members and looks forward to
working constructively in the Committee with the
members that will be joining us in the new year.

