Mr. Jurica (Croatia): We deeply appreciate His
Excellency President Jose' Ramos-Horta's personal
participation in and contribution to today's debate. I
thank him for his update on the situation in Timor-
Leste. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his views on the situation in Timor-Leste as well.

Croatia aligns itself with the European Union
statement to be delivered later in this open debate by
the Czech presidency of the Union.

The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) is playing a vital role in restoring and
maintaining stability, as well as in the crucial areas of
democratic governance, socio-economic development,
rule of law and security sector reform in Timor-Leste.
We also recognize the significant contribution the
international security forces made in 2008 towards
maintaining stability in the area.
09-24239

We are encouraged by the Secretariat's
assessment of the political and security situation in
Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis and the return to
normalcy following the events of 11 February 2008.
While this progress confirms that a positive momentum
has been established, its fragility should not be
underestimated. Although Croatia was relieved to see
that there were no further significant security incidents
in 2008, the assassination attempts last year still serve
as a stark reminder of the importance of addressing the
unresolved root causes of the 2006 crisis and the
multifaceted challenges still facing Timor-Leste. These
challenges include strengthening political dialogue and
reconciliation, consolidating peace, democracy and the
rule of law, and achieving durable social and economic
development.

On the issue of political dialogue, UNMIT has
proved to be a valuable conduit for fostering a more
inclusive and participatory consultative process at all
levels of society in order to address critical political
and security-related issues facing the country. We
welcome the ongoing good office efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Khare to
promote an enhanced dialogue between the main
stakeholders, including through the expanded High-
level Coordination Committee and the Trilateral
Coordination Forum. We also commend President
Ramos-Horta for his role in creating opportunities to
reinforce these and other consultative approaches with
the opposition on questions of national interest. These
practices can only help to build much-needed trust
among the political leaders and allow the opposition a
constructive role as set out in the political party accord
signed on 25 May 2007.

The upcoming local elections in 2009 will serve
as another important benchmark in the country's
progress towards a culture of political dialogue and
democratic governance. We hope that the Timorese will
continue to take full advantage of the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and UNMIT's expertise in order to further build on the
positive momentum achieved to date.

The ongoing review and reform of the security
sector is of paramount concern. Fully cognizant of the
long-term commitment that this comprehensive process
entails, we appreciate the central role that UNMIT is
playing to further strengthen institutional capacities,
policies and processes. To ensure that the security
sector will act in a professional, impartial manner and

with due respect for human rights, a clear distinction of
roles between the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-
Leste (F-FDTL) security force and the National Police
Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is needed, coupled with
a strong legal framework and shored up by civil
oversight, the rule of law, transparency and
accountability mechanisms for both security institutions.

Fully developed and effective national capacities
are essential for the consolidation of future
peacebuilding efforts in Timor-Leste. The long-term
consolidation of peace in Timor-Leste cannot take
place in the absence of a viable environment for a
credible and functioning judiciary and penal system in
which the rule of law prevails, impunity is fully
overcome and perpetrators of the serious criminal
offences committed in 1999 and 2006 are brought to
justice. Timorese recognition of the need for justice
and commitment to implementing the recommendations
of the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry is a
very encouraging sign.

We warmly welcome the resolve of the
Government to address two major residual consequences
of the 2006 crisis, namely, the issues of the F-FDTL
petitioners and of the internally displaced persons. The
onus now lies with the Government to ensure the
sustainability of returns by providing a secure and
stable environment and by establishing legal, social
and economic frameworks that will allow for their
reconciliation and reintegration into society.

Perhaps more focus could now be given to
peacebuilding efforts aimed at social inclusion and
cohesion for all Timorese people through their
employment and empowerment in an inclusive and
sustainable economy. These efforts could produce vital
opportunities for the Timorese people to support
themselves and develop more productive livelihoods
given the serious social and economic challenges the
country faces in trying to alleviate poverty and meet
the Millennium Development Goals.

Finally, Croatia supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the UNMIT mandate for a
further 12 months at the current level. We believe that
the Mission's presence is necessary to enable the
Timorese leadership to effectively address the outstanding
challenges to the peace consolidation process, ensuring
a solid foundation upon which a Timorese-led
peacebuilding process can be built in the future.

