The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(cote d'lvoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern at the events which occurred in Cote
d'Ivoire at the end of March and at the current
impasse in the peace process defined in the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council recalls that it endorsed
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, which is the only
solution to the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council reaffirms the individual
responsibility of each of the Ivorian actors to ensure
the full implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. It reiterates its complete readiness to
take any necessary further steps, against individuals
who block the full implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council takes note of the report
of the commission of inquiry of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
events that occurred in Abidjan on 25-26 March
with deep concern. It expresses its appreciation for

the work by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in Cote d'Ivoire,
including those that occurred in Abidjan on 25-26
March, and expresses its determination to ensure
that those responsible for all these violations are
identified and that the Ivorian Government brings
them to justice. The Security Council expects
President Laurent Gbagbo to comply fully with the
commitment he has made in this regard through the
letter sent by the Permanent Representative of Cote
d'Ivoire to the Security Council on 20 May 2004.

"The Security Council requests, therefore, the
Secretary-General to establish, as soon as possible,
the international commission of inquiry, as
recommended by the commission of inquiry of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and requested by the Government of Cote d'Ivoire,
in order to investigate all human rights violations
committed in Cote d'Ivoire since 19 September
2002, and determine responsibility. The Security
Council calls upon all the Ivorian parties to
cooperate fully with this international commission
of inquiry.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand
for the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to bring to
justice those responsible for these violations of
human rights. In this regard, it expresses its
complete readiness to encourage possible
international assistance to the Ivorian judicial
authorities to this end and requests the Secretary-
General to submit recommendations on the various
possible options for such an assistance.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned by
slogans and declarations of hate, in particular those
addressed against the personnel of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), and
urges all the Ivorian actors to refrain from any
action or statement, especially in the media, which
put at risk the security of United Nations personnel
and, more globally, the process of national
reconciliation. The Security Council recalls the
obligation of all Ivorian actors, in particular the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire, to cooperate fully in
the deployment and operations of UNOCI, which is
there at the request of the Government, in particular

by guaranteeing the safety, security and free
movement of all United Nations personnel.

"The Security Council requests UNOCI to
establish without delay its broadcasting capacity, as
mandated in its resolution 1528 (2004) of 27
February 2004.

"The Security Council recalls that it decided,
on the basis of the commitment of all Ivorian
political forces to implement fully and without
conditions the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, to
deploy UNOCI to support the process of peaceful
settlement of the crisis, which is to lead to the
organization in 2005 of open, free and transparent
elections.

"The Security Council underlines that no
concrete progress can be made in the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
until the Government of National Reconciliation
composed on 13 March 2003 and completed on 12
September 2003 meets again under the authority of
the Prime Minister.

"The Security Council is therefore deeply
concerned by the recent announcement by President
Gbagbo that he would dismiss opposition ministers.
The Security Council also reiterates its concerns at
the continuing non-participation of the opposition
parties in the Government of National
Reconciliation. The Security Council considers that
such decisions undermine the normal functioning of
Ivorian institutions and resumption of dialogue
between Ivorian parties which is the basis of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of having all relevant Ivorian parties
participate fully in the Government of National
Reconciliation. In this regard, the Security Council
calls on all Ivorian parties to apply faithfully all the
provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement,
including those regarding the composition and the
functioning of the Government of National
Reconciliation, and to immediately resume political
dialogue, with a view to ensuring the effective
functioning of the Government of National
Reconciliation.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support to the Prime Minister, Seydou Diarra, Head
of the Government of National Reconciliation, and
encourages him to carry on his task until the
completion of the peace process, as foreseen in the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council recalls the importance
it attaches to the early and full adoption of the
constitutional and legislative reforms provided for
in the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council takes note in this
regard of the renewed commitment of President
Laurent Gbagbo, in his message to the nation on 18
May, to fully apply the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and his request addressed to the
Parliament to accelerate the achievement of the
legislative reforms. It is now expecting these
commitments to be fulfilled in order that concrete
steps can be undertaken to restore confidence.

"The Security Council also reaffirms the
urgency of disbanding militias and armed groups
and proceeding with operations to regroup the
opposing forces in order to permit the start of
disarmament and demobilization, which must
precede their reintegration into the regular army or
civilian life.

"The Security Council firmly rejects the
assertion that disarmament can be delayed until
after the 2005 elections and calls on all parties to
move immediately to begin this process.

"The Security Council underlines the
responsibilities of the Monitoring Committee as the
guarantor of the implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and expresses its
appreciation for further efforts it may undertake in
order to overcome the current impasse in the peace
process as well as in supporting UNOCI to carry out
its mandate.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
take immediate action to implement the steps above
and emphasizes that these measures are essential to
enable Cote d'Ivoire and Ivorians to return to the
path to peace, stability and economic development."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.rn.

