Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Allow me first to
commend you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
the initiative you have taken in holding today's debate.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, for their respective statements.

As previously stated in the Council, debates of
this nature present opportunities to reflect on ways of
reinforcing cooperation in areas of common interest
to the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and on how to strengthen cooperation
in maintaining international peace and security as
provided by Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union (EU) is one of the most advanced
cooperation schemes in place between the United
Nations and other regional organizations and it covers
the vast array of activities related to the maintenance
of peace and stability, including conflict prevention,
mediation, crisis management, peacebuilding,
development, humanitarian relief, the promotion of the
rule of law, assistance and political cooperation.

There is no doubt that the EU has become an
important institution that promotes peace, security and
stability in all its aspects around the world, particularly
in Africa. We value the partnership between the
European Union and the African Union in various fields,
including logistical support and capacity-building. We
believe that the annual meetings between the AU Peace
and Security Council and the EU Political and Security
Committee are important tools in supporting AU efforts
in the areas of peace and security.

In Somalia, the EU is playing a very important role
in supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia and
stabilizing that country and in fighting the piracy off
the coast of the country. We particularly commend the
EU for organizing the donors conference on Somalia in
Brussels last year and we believe that the pledges made
at the conference will help Somalia to strengthen its
institutions.
In the Central African Republic, Rwanda
welcomes the continued commitment of the EU to
protect civilians, as demonstrated by its decision to
deploy up to 1,000 troops in that country to assist
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA), which includes
troops from Rwanda, and the 400 troops that France
has announced it is adding to strengthen Operation
Sangaris, in the ongoing effort to stabilize the Central
African Republic, which has been torn by horrendous
crimes and ethnic cleansing, mainly against the
Muslim community. We also welcome the EU decision
to allocate approximately €75 million as support to
MISCA. All of those contributions are clear indications
that the EU understands the concept of burden-sharing
between the United Nations and regional organization
in the maintenance of peace and stability.

Rwanda also acknowledges the EU's involvement
in building State institutions in Mali, where about four
battalions of the Malian armed forces have already
received training through the EU training mission
in Mali. That training will certainly help the Malian
army to sustain peace and stability. We look forward
to seeing further support from the European Union in
that regard.

Outside the continent, we commend the European
Union for its important contribution in promoting the
rule of law in Kosovo through the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and for its role in mediating
between Serbia and Kosovo. That mediation led to the
signing ofthe historic 19 April 2013 First Agreement on
normalization of Relations between Serbia and Kosovo.

We also acknowledge the critical role played by
the EU, including through the E3+3 Governments in
the breakthrough in the negotiations on the Iranian
nuclear problem, as well as its role in the Middle East,
the destruction of the Syrian chemical weapons and its
valuable contribution to humanitarian relief in Syria.

Despite those significant developments, like most
other regional organizations, cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU has yet to reach its full
potential. Increasingly, EU missions are deployed
where the United Nations is already engaged. Both
organizations are often deployed in the same countries,
but do not necessarily coordinate with each other,
which in some situations creates parallel or co-located
missions, where cooperation between the two
organizations is minimal or even non-existent. In that
regard, we can give the examples of Afghanistan, with
the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan and
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the European
Union Advisory and Assistance Mission for Security
Reform in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the
European Union Police Mission in Kinshasa and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Somalia,
with Operation Atalanta and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia.

We believe that enhancing cooperation between
the two organizations, as stressed by the presidential
statement that was just adopted (S/PRST/20l4/4), will
increase efficiency and avoid the duplication of efforts.
It is only through enhanced cooperation with other
actors, both at Headquarters and on the ground, that
such cooperation will have great potential to achieve
success in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
my country's appreciation for the European Union's
role in assisting many countries in addressing the
root causes of conflict in post-conflict reconstruction,
including its support for poverty alleviation, capacity-
building, education, the promotion of the rule of law
and good governance. We believe, however, that mutual
accountability and respect will contribute to greater
effectiveness of development assistance and to stability
and development in recipient States and entities.

To conclude, as this is the last briefing to the
Security Council by the EU High Representative
in her current capacity, Rwanda would like to state
that it appreciates the personal role she has played in
promoting EU/United Nations cooperation and to peace
and security in various parts of the world, in particular
on the African continent.

