Mr. Gertze (Namibia): First of all, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
open debate on the question of non-proliferation. This
debate promotes transparency and inclusivity. Let me
also congratulate the delegation of the State of Bolivia
for its successful work of presiding over the business of
the Security Council during the month of June.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

On many occasions, the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, has expressed that
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a
threat to international peace and security. That was
demonstrated when the Security Council sent out a
strong message in 2004 by adopting resolution 1540
(2004), which offers a response to the growing risk that
weapons of mass destruction could fall into the hands
of, and be used by, non-State actors and terrorist groups.

Resolution 1540 (2004) provides an opportunity to
deepen cooperation among the countries of the world
so as to access technology and the required capacity to
respond to the threat posed by terrorist groups and other
illegal armed groups. The physical protection of nuclear
materials and installations and adequate guarantees for
the peaceful use of nuclear material and technology are
fundamental to establishing a favourable environment
for developing nuclear energy that benefits humankind.

Namibia understands the relevance of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) as, first, to
ensure the right of all Member States to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy for the development and
advancement of technology, and, secondly, to ensure
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
whether nuclear, chemical or biological, as well as their
means of delivery and related technologies. In that
regard, we reiterate the sovereign right of Member States
to the development of advanced technologies, such as
nuclear, chemical, biological and pharmaceutical ones,
so as to achieve industrial development.

Namibia continues to participate in the activities of
the international community in the area of disarmament
with a view to achieve a world free of weapons of
mass destruction and the complete prohibition of their
acquisition, development, stockpiling, transferring
and modernization. It is our belief that cooperation
between Member States and the relevant regional and
international organizations will strengthen national
capacities to help prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, including their acquisition by
non-State actors and terrorist groups.

As a State party to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
(CWC), Namibia welcomes the implementation of
that Convention, which is the only comprehensive
multilateral treaty banning the whole group of
weapons of mass destruction, while also providing
for a verification system and promoting the use of
chemicals for peaceful purposes. Namibia believes that
the main focus of the CWC should remain the complete
elimination of all categories of chemical weapons.

Similarly, Namibia considers the Biological
Weapons Convention as representing an important
component of the international legal architecture
related to weapons of mass destruction, while noting
with concern that the lack of a verification system
continues to pose a challenge to the effectiveness of
that Convention.

All pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) should be treated in a
balanced approach. The failure of the 2015 NPT
Review Conference has raised serious questions about
the future of the international non-proliferation and
disarmament regime. The reaffirmation of deterrence
doctrines, modernization plans and long-term
investments in nuclear-weapon programmes only serve
to undermine the legitimacy of the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime. Those trends pose serious
challenges to disarmament initiatives.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
successful conclusion of the Open-Ended Working
Group for the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD IV). We
underscore the importance of convening SSOD IV, as it
would offer an opportunity to review the most critical
aspects of the disarmament machinery and mobilize the
international community and public opinion in favour
of the elimination of weapons of mass destruction. It
would also enhance the total control and reduction of
conventional weapons, which can be easily acquired by
non-State actors.

We also welcome the ongoing conference to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit
nuclear weapons, leading to their total elimination.
We note with appreciation the successful outcome of
the first session of the conference and look forward to
another successful outcome of its second session.

Let me assure you, Sir, that Namibia continues to
stand fully behind this important global effort to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.

