Mr. Sharma (India): Post-conflict peace-building is
a concept on which it appears that the only
intergovemmental agreement is that we should speak on
it for seven minutes. To respect this agreement I will cut
my statement short, but I shall make available to
delegations a fuller written version.

As the President of the General Assembly at its
fifty-second session observed in his note of 7 August
1998, the main problem has been disagreement over
assigning the key role for post-conflict peace-building to
the General Assembly.

The Non-Aligned summit in Durban reiterated that
the General Assembly must have the key role in the
formulation of peace-building activities. In our view, the
Security Council should not mandate peace-building
activities until the General Assembly has laid down policy
through universal intergovemmental deliberations.

 
India understands the argument that security has a
broader context. But the Security Council is comparable to
a Home Ministry in a national Government: it has an
enlightened policing function. All Governments know that
the tensions that sometimes explode in riots or civil unrest
have social and economic roots; once order is restored,
democratic Governments urgently address the causes of
discontent. However, it is not the Home Ministry that
authorizes the economic and social programmes needed for
a long-term cure. There are, of course, exceptions where
those in charge of security take decisions also on economic
and social issues; these are called police States.

The Council is a purely political body. Its decisions
reflect a balance of interests and power which is not
constant. If the Council tries to build peace, its blueprint
will either reflect the ideology of dominant members - in
cases where others have no interest - or a hodgepodge,
where conflicting views have to be reconciled. In neither
case is this calculated to help the country concerned.

Perhaps the clearest analysis of peace-building so far
was made last year by the Carnegie Commission on
Preventing Deadly Conflict, which identified three core
needs essential to peace-building, these being security, well-
being and justice. Of these, the Security Council can
legitimately address the first. The Commission's View was
that there were three main sources of insecurity:

"the threat posed by nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction; the possibility of conventional
confrontation between militaries; and internal violence,
such as terrorism, organized crime, insurgency and
repressive regimes".

Of these, as the Commission also noted, the possibility
of the use of nuclear weapons is the most destabilizing
threat, both to international peace and security and to
peace-building. Unfortunately, the permanent members of
the Security Council are the ones that possess, and continue
to refine, the largest nuclear arsenals. Unless they agree to
dismantle those arsenals, there will be no true peace-
building.

On violent conflicts fought with conventional weapons,
the Commission noted,

"The global arms trade in advanced weapons is
dominated by the five permanent members of the
United Nations Security Council ...".
Again, the Security Council has much reason for
introspection.

If the Council gets into the business of promoting
well-being, and tries to guide post-conflict development
activities, problems may be expected to follow. Among
many other questions, the Council should consider the
following.

What development paradigm will it follow? A choice
among alternative strategies is a function of sovereignty.
The imposition by the United Nations, on the instructions
of the Council, of a particular paradigm may not only be
resented; it could in fact exacerbate the economic and
social tensions that created the political problems in the
first place. Misguided peace-building could build frictions,
leading to a fresh cycle of violence.

More than once, United Nations peacekeepers used
to provide humanitarian assistance have been perceived as
partisan, and their attempts to help have inflamed
passions rather than dampening them. The same problems
are inherent in peace-building. Once aid is perceived as
biased, it becomes part of the problem; it fuels conflict;
it does not build peace.

The distinction between the mandates of the United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies and
those of the Security Council must not be blurred. They
should execute only those activities authorized by their
governing boards and stick to the expertise they have
developed over the years.

When the Council began its discussions last week on
the concept of post-conflict peace-building, we had
prepared for a debate in general terms. However, the
attack on Iraq over the last week has thrown up
fundamental problems and questions which must be
addressed. We are faced with a conflict resulting from
unilateral action by some members of the Council. The
international community might have its own views on
how peace can be built in Iraq and its neighbourhood, and
the Security Council as a whole may be sensitive to these
views, but the views of the vast majority of countries do
not find the receptivity they deserve among the members
of the Council.

This in turn has two possible consequences. Either
the Council will be unable to act, and will therefore lose
its moral authority, or it will be propelled in a direction
that does not conform either to the realities of the
situation or to the wishes of the international community.

 

There is, of course, also the continuing danger that the
Security Council will be bypassed on the grounds that its
authorization is not needed. In none of these cases would
the Council be discharging its obligations under Article 24
of the Charter. The creeping misuse of the Security Council
for purposes not part of its mandate is certain to lower the
Council's standing. We hope that all members of the
Council will realize this.

The attack on Iraq also raises once again the question
of the validity or the usefulness of sanctions. In Iraq,
sanctions were used as a tool for peace-building, to ensure
that Iraq did not have either stockpiles of, or the means to
produce, weapons of mass destruction. However, if peace-
building also means, as it must, addressing the needs of the
populations affected by conflict, sanctions, as in the case of
Iraq, clearly thwart this objective. The international
community's goal is to ensure that Iraq and its neighbours
live in peace with each other, that the events of the 1980s
and 19905 are not repeated and that Iraq is enabled to join
the comity of nations. Only this would truly build peace.

Again, the Council is faced with a choice: either it
asserts its authority and takes such practical decisions on
sanctions as would truly build peace, or it might find that
its ability to lead the international community is impaired.
After all, agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system have detailed the horror of what sanctions have
wrought in Iraq.

According to the United Nations Children's Fund,
90,000 deaths each year are directly attributable to the
effects of sanctions, which means three quarters of a
million killed so far; 1 million children under the age of
five are chronically malnourished; and education has been
shattered, with 84 per cent of schools needing rehabilitation
and enrolment down sharply.

According to the World Health Organization, the
health system is close to collapse. According to the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World
Food Programme, there has been a significant deterioration
in agriculture, which needs attention and investments that
cannot be given to it under the oil-for-food programme.

In the interests of peace, if not in the name of
humanity, the Security Council has to realize that this is not
a crisis that can be allowed to drag on indefinitely or
to deepen. There has to be a policy towards closure which
respects both Security Council resolutions and the human
dignity of the people of Iraq.

The events which led to the attack on Iraq also make
it clear that the personalities and actions of those most
closely involved in post-conflict peace building are crucial
to success. By and large, the Secretary-General and the
international community have been very well served by
those international civil servants who have been made
primarily responsible for post-conflict peace-building.
Exceptions make it clear how crucial their role is and
how sensitive and delicate a charge it is to carry out
responsibilities which have a critical bearing on building
peace in regions of conflict, and to avoid coming under
suspicion of serving agendas other than international
peace and security.

We thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
enabling us to consider this important item.

