Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to thank
Kazakhstan for having organized this important debate.
We appreciate the close attention paid to the situation
in Afghanistan during Kazakhstan's presidency of the
Security Council.

The Council's recent mission to Kabul was a
solid manifestation of its resolve in supporting the
Government and the people of Afghanistan in their
efforts to rebuild their country. We thank Kazakhstan
for its leadership in taking this mission forward.

We believe that Afghanistan, located in the
Heart of Asia, is inseparable from Central Asia. The
security, stability and prosperity of Afghanistan is
of key importance for that of Central Asia and other
neighbouring regions. This is also essential for the
maintenance of global peace and security.

Addressing the challenges that Afghanistan
continues to face in the fight against terrorism,
radicalism, violent extremism, illegal narcotics
production and trafficking is also crucial for the
countries of Central Asia and beyond. That is why
regional actors as well as the wider international
community have important responsibilities and roles
in assisting Afghanistan to overcome these challenges.

It is not realistic to think of long-lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan without the support
of neighbouring and regional countries. Therefore,
the continued constructive engagement of the
international community with regional actors could
contribute to enabling an atmosphere conducive to
genuine cooperation.

Security and development in Afghanistan are
closely interlinked. There can be no development
without security, and security cannot be sustained
without development. There is a need to enhance
regional ownership and cooperation in order to achieve
progress on both fronts. We therefore welcome the recent
efforts and initiatives to strengthen the interaction and
cooperation between Afghanistan and the Central Asian
countries. We see such initiatives as complimentary
to the wider efforts to enhance Afghanistan's focused
regional cooperation.

Our vision for Afghanistan is a peaceful, secure
and stable country that enjoys good and cooperative
relations with its neighbours, while being at the centre
of major regional cooperation projects in infrastructure,
trade and transportation. With that understanding, we
believe that the recent signing, in Ashgabat, of the Lapis
Lazuli Transit, Trade and Transport Route agreement
will also solidify the basis of regional cooperation by
bolstering trade.

Turkey will continue to contribute to the regional
cooperation efforts, including through the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process, which we are pleased to co-chair
for the second time this year. Increasing cooperation in
the Heart of Asia will not only benefit Afghanistan, it
will also constitute a useful instrument for the region
as a whole to realize its full potential in economic
development, investments and trade.

We would also like to emphasize that an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process is
central to achieving long-lasting peace in the country.
Enhanced dialogue and cooperation among regional
actors is necessary for the peace and reconciliation
efforts to yield concrete results. Therefore, we look
forward to the successful holding of the forthcoming
second meeting of the Kabul Process. Turkey remains
ready to contribute to the Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace and reconciliation efforts to the best of
its ability.
In conclusion, we would like to underline that the
Afghan people deserve a better future. The continued
commitment and support of countries of the region,
including those in Central Asia, as well as the wider
international community, will be critical in assisting
the Afghan Government and people along that path.
In that regard, we are pleased to see minister-level
participation, including from Central Asian countries,
in our meeting today. Turkey remains ready to assist all
efforts in that regard as long as our help is needed.

