Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time this month that I speak in a public
meeting, I would like to commend the delegation of
Spain on its outstanding presidency of the Security
Council last month. We also express to you, Sir, our
determination to support you resolutely during this
month.

We once again express our gratitude for the presence
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and value the presentation of her
tenth report on Libya, in fulfilment of resolution 1970
(2011). My delegation, aware of the many difficulties
being experienced by Libya and worried about the
escalation of violence, shares the view that justice and
accountability are essential to achieving sustainable
and lasting peace.

Several delegations, as well as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights himself, have
expressed concern about the high number of civilian
deaths due to acts committed by various armed groups,
especially those attributed to terrorist groups associated
with the self-styled Islamic State. It is imperative to
stop indiscriminate attacks and acts of kidnapping,
torture, sexual violence and other cruel and degrading
treatment, which should be the subject of serious and
transparent investigations. That is why we encourage
the efforts of the parties, with the help of United
Nations, to set up a Government of national accord that
will contribute to the necessary stability and to put an
end to impunity.

Chile believes it is a duty to continue to insist on full
cooperation with the International Criminal Court and
its Prosecutor, pursuant to the provisions of resolution
1970 (2011). We also believe that the Libyan authorities
must comply with their obligations under international
law and cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor as

called for in resolutions 2174 (2014) and 2213 (2015).
Moreover, we urge, on the one hand, that Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi be made immediately available to the Court
and, on the other, that Abdullah Al-Senussi and other
individuals receive guarantees of due process in Libya.
Without that happening, international justice will lack
the trust required to achieve its ends.

My country would also like to support the
Prosecutor's call on the Council to make available
resources to facilitate investigations referred to the
Court in line with the provisions of article 115 (b) of the
Rome Statute. Given the direct impact of the financial
aspect on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor, we
also believe that, together with the specific proposal of
the Prosecutor, complementary formulas for financing
should be applied, making it possible for that Office
to carry its investigations forward in an effective and
efficient fashion. That is a central concern.

In that vein, Chile will continue to work for a closer
relation between the Council and the International
Criminal Court, especially with regard to the two
cases referred so far As we have expressed on earlier
occasions, we are convinced that referrals are not an
end in themselves. We repeat that it is the responsibility
of the Council to conduct an effective follow-up, in
compliance with the mandate given to the Court.

Finally, we wish to reiterate our recognition of the
work ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor in the investigation
of the abuses and crimes committed against victims
in different parts of Libya and its contribution to the
process of strengthening a more just, inclusive and
resilient Libyan society.

