Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium associates itself fully with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.

Belgium deplores the fact that armed conflicts
continue to have a disproportionate effect on children.
The year 2014 has been called a very bad one for
children, and there are no prospects for improvement in
2015. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General indicated in her annual report to the Human
Rights Council, the indoctrination of children by
extremist groups is creating new challenges in terms
of their protection, psychosocial rehabilitation and
reintegration. The recruitment and use of children by
non-State armed groups is growing. Children are often
recruited by force or abducted, but some join non-State
armed groups because of economic, social or security
pressures, and must be offered genuine alternatives to
such groups. In our view, prevention is the only lasting
solution to the problem of children's participation
in armed conflict. In that regard, it is essential that
States come up with prevention plans that cover every
aspect of the issue - a plan that effectively prevents
the recruitment and exploitation of children and that,
among other things, provides schooling in safety. A
recent study has shown that investing in prevention
can in some ways generate a good return on that
investment. The total cost of children's association
with armed groups is estimated to be between $120 and
$144 million a year.

Belgium remains very concerned about the fact
that many perpetrators of violence against children do
so with impunity. The greatest challenge in that area
is unquestionably the increasing number of persistent
violators, who continue to deliberately ignore the
relevant Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate that the Council has no choice but
to increase the pressure on those who perpetrate serious
abuses against children, particularly those identified as
persistent violators, and to continue to consider ways to
apply targeted measures against such criminals. That is
quite simply a matter of accountability and of holding
those who commit grave violations against children
to account. We all know that combating impunity and

determining responsibility are important and effective
deterrents.
Finally, Belgium would like to recall the importance
of the Paris Principles on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups for child victims of
non-State armed groups. They include tools designed to
assist action to prevent children's recruitment by such
groups, and we would invite those countries that have
not yet signed the Paris Principles to do so as soon as
possible.

