Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa for his briefing.

For almost three decades, the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) has wreaked havoc and perpetrated
mass atrocities on the people of Central Africa and the
Great Lakes region. The LRA has killed, maimed and
displaced thousands. It has abducted children and forced
them to commit unspeakable horrors. It has destroyed
families and communities. Its acts are unconscionable
and must be stopped once and for all.

The Council has repeatedly condemned LRA
atrocities and supported decisive measures to end
them. Our goal of permanently ending the LRA threat
is within reach, but it will require sustained regional
leadership and international support. The United States
commends the African Union (AU) and Governments
of the region, in particular Uganda, for their concerted
and continuing efforts to neutralize the LRA threat.
The United States has provided significant assistance
to support those regional efforts, including by sending
United States military advisors to enhance the capacity
of regional forces to pursue top LRA commanders and
protect local populations.

Our common commitment has resulted in
notable progress. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs reports that, overall, there was a
significant drop in the number of LRA attacks in 2012
compared to 2011. Some of those displaced by the LRA
in South Sudan have begun to return home, and two of
the LRA's most senior commanders, Caesar Achellam
and Vincent Binani Okumu, have been removed from
the battlefield, while scores of LRA members have
defected or been released. To help bring the LRA's top
commanders to justice, the United States, through the
war crimes rewards programme, is offering rewards of
up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest,
transfer or conviction of LRA leaders Joseph Kony,
Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen.

Nevertheless, the LRA remains aregional threat with
an outsized impact because of its brutality and reach.
Joseph Kony is still at large, and the LRA continues
to conduct attacks and commit abductions. Hundreds
of thousands of people remain displaced throughout
Central Africa because of the LRA. Instability across
the region, particularly in the Central African Republic,
threatens to halt and potentially reverse progress in
the fight against the LRA. The United States believes
that counter-LRA operations under the AU Regional
Task Force should resume as soon as possible. We
welcome the Central African Republic's transitional
Government's assurances that counter-LRA operations
will continue through the AU Regional Task Force
(AU-RTF). Further suspension of military operations
in the Central African Republic could allow the LRA to
reorganize and further endanger civilians.
Meanwhile, the LRA continues to wreak havoc in
other countries ofthe region, especially the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo suffered 54 LRA attacks between
January and March 2013, the most among LRA-affected
countries in the region. Forces of the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo operating in north-
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo should renew
their efforts to combat the LRA through expanded, more
targeted patrols and increased information-sharing.
Furthermore, United Nations missions in the region
and the AU-RTF need to develop a common picture
of the LRA's operating disposition and investigate the
LRA's logistical networks and possible sources ofillicit
financing.

The United Nations comprehensive regional
strategy (S/2012/481, annex) is critical to coordinating
United Nations and AU action to protect civilians
from the LRA and strengthen the resilience of local
communities. The United States fully supports the
strategy and welcomes the new implementation plan
produced by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Moussa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). We hope that this
will translate swiftly into action in the region, and in
particular we urge rapid implementation of the standard
operating procedures for disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration and greater
focus on roads and infrastructure projects to increase
humanitarian access in the region. We request the
Secretary-General to ensure that UNOCA has the
staffing, particularly the technical experts, it needs to
do so.

As we work to end the LRA's campaign of terror,
we must also address the crisis in the Central African
Republic, where the breakdown of law and order,
ongoing human rights abuses and the dire humanitarian
situation pose a serious threat to regional stability. The
United States applauds and appreciates the efforts
of United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations to ameliorate the humanitarian suffering
amid a challenging operating environment. Central
African Republic authorities, however, bear the
primary responsibility for protecting civilians and must
do much more in this regard, particularly for women
and children. They need to bring the Seleka fighters
under control immediately, facilitate humanitarian
access throughout the country, and enable a political
transition. Perpetrators of human rights violations
committeed by both sides during the recent fighting
must be held to account.

In addition to the LRA and instability in the Central
African Republic, piracy and maritime armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea remain serious security concerns
for the region. The United States values UNOCA's
support for regional coordination and capacity-building
to combat those threats, and looks forward to the
regional summit of Heads of State and Government to
be held in June 2013, where countries can demonstrate
their leadership in addressing them. We also welcome
UNOCA's important preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding efforts to promote regional stability, and
urge UNOCA's continued attention to the challenges
faced by women and girls in the subregion, including
female genital mutilation, early forced marriage, denial
of access to education and low political participation.

