Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu and the Head of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), Mr. Edmond
Mulet, for their respective briefings on the reports
presented by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2017/916, annex)
and the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (S/2017/904, annex), which we have an
obligation to examine and scrutinize very seriously and
scrupulously. We appreciate all the efforts that have
been made in investigating the use of chemical weapons
in Syria, as well as in identifying those responsible for
this serious crime.

Our position on this issue has been reiterated
many times. The use of chemical weapons by any
actor - State or non-State - is not only abhorrent,
but also constitutes a serious violation of international
law and a major threat to global peace and security.
The continued use of chemical weapons in Syria is
indeed a source of grave concern, as the latest report
of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic (S/2017/905, annex) on the Ltamenah incident
confirms, and we join other members in reiterating our
condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of these
horrible and dreadful acts. That is why we support
any and all efforts to hold those responsible for these
heinous crimes accountable on the basis of robust and
concrete evidence. In this regard, we thank the Joint
Investigative Mechanism for its substantive report.

Let me state from the outset that we have the highest
respect for the Mechanism and its Leadership Panel.
We understand that the Mechanism has been working
under extremely challenging circumstances due to a
highly sensitive political environment and complex
security considerations, as its report rightly stated
and as also reiterated by Assistant Secretary-General
Mulet today. We respect and appreciate all the efforts
and dedication of the Leadership Panel in carrying out
its heavy responsibilities in spite of these difficulties,
among which is the tremendous time pressure under
which they were working. It is therefore totally unfair
to expect absolutely flawless work and results, which
would obviate the need for members of the Council
to ask for further explanation. It is in that spirit that
we have tried to examine the report, which no doubt
in many instances is very technical and thus requires
some technical knowledge in the area.

In fact, the Mechanism has been very careful in
its analysis of this very complex situation. The report
indicates that it examined two scenarios in detail.
Its conclusions flow from those investigations, but
it is careful to avoid being definitive. For instance,
concerning the crater in Khan Shaykhun, although the
report indicates that the crater "had most likely been
caused by a heavy object travelling at a high velocity,
such as an aerial bomb" (S/2017/904, enclosure, para. 40), it nonetheless adds that the Mechanism "could not
rule out the idea that the crater was caused by other
means" (ibid., para. 49). This is important despite the
qualification, reiterated by Assistant Secretary-General
Mulet a while ago, that it is unlikely.

Similarly, based on video footage confirmed to be
authentic, the JIM. concluded that the Syrian aircraft
was in the "immediate vicinity of Khan Shaykhun
between 0630 and 0700 hours on 4 April 4 2017" (ibid., para. 46 (b)). However, the same report states that
"[t]o date, the Mechanism has found no specific
information confirming whether or not a Syrian
Arab Air Force Su-22 operating from Sha'irat
airbase launched an aerial attack against Khan
Shaykhun" (ibid., para. 31).

Again, the JIM. report indicates that the sarin released
at Khan Shaykhun was most likely from the original
stock of the Syrian Arab Republic. But the report adds
that this analysis "would warrant further study" (ibid., para. 45).

Moreover, the report - both in its analysis and
findings - admits that there are irregularities and
discrepancies. Some of them, the JIM. accepts, are
potentially important. As a result of these and other
irregularities in the report itself, we find it difficult,
in all fairness and genuine curiosity, to understand
how the JIM. could be confident that it has completed
its work.

Ofcourse, we know that the JIM. was not able to visit
the site of the attacks, particularly Khan Shaykhun. Its
report acknowledges that a visit to the site could have
been of value, but then says - as stated by Assistant
Secretary-General Mulet in this meeting - that the
security risks "outweighed the possible benefits for the
investigation" (ibid., para. 15). It further states that

"[s]hould conditions improve, and should it be
determined that an on-site investigation would
produce valuable new information, a visit could
take place in the future" (ibid).

The problem is the JIM. has already made its conclusion
without having to visit the site, which, by its own
admission, could have been of value to the investigation.

Now, we should mention that Assistant Secretary-
General Mulet said that the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic has provided good cooperation. That was
particularly true of the visit of Al-Shayrat air base and
its examination of the logbooks and flight information
for 4 April 2017. The information secured did not
seem to confirm the conclusion that the Mechanism
subsequently made, again suggesting the need for more
work to be done.

However, it is important to be fair to the Mechanism
and the Leadership Panel. They cannot be asked to
deliver more than what they have promised to deliver,
pursuant to the method of work that is laid out in annex I
of its third report (S/2016/738/Rev.1). What is expected
of them is to identify the culprits to the greatest extent

possible, and it might not be proper to require that their
conclusion meet the standard of overwhelming evidence
or even substantial evidence, but for sure it would be
fair to expect the conclusion to be in conformity with
the standard of sufficient evidence.

No doubt, they have covered a lot of ground, and
the findings so far cannot in any way be thrown out the
window, but they are not definitive. This is a work in
progress, for which the Leadership Panel deserves a lot
of credit. We doubt that any delegation could impugn
their integrity, but it is very difficult now to conclude
that the work has been completed. More work is needed.

Because of this and other new cases which need
to be investigated, we are convinced that it is vital to
renew the mandate of the JIM, and we hope we will
be able to do so by overcoming the differences within
the Council on the matter. It is only through unity of
purpose that the Council can address the threat and use
of chemical weapon in Syria, as well as end its further
use by any actor.

