Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I join my Libyan
colleague in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February.

Uganda would like to thank Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL); the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, Ambassador Frank Majoor, in his capacity
as Chairman of the country-specific configuration on
Sierra Leone of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone, Ambassador Shekou Touray, for their
statements to the Council.

We are pleased to note that the reports provide a
positive assessment of the political and economic
situation in Sierra Leone and the role of UNIPSIL
through the Joint Vision of the United Nations Family
for Sierra Leone. In particular, we commend the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone on the
ongoing consolidation of stability and security in
Sierra Leone following the peaceful transfer of power
to President Ernest Bai Koroma through the general
elections of 2007, as well as on their successfully
holding local elections in July 2008.

It is encouraging to further note that Sierra Leone
was able to achieve a gross domestic product (GDP)
growth rate of 6 per cent in 2008, underpinned by the
expansion of the agricultural, construction and service
sectors, although the rate of growth is slightly lower
than the 7 per cent that was attained earlier. That is
significant for a country that experienced a GDP
decline of 17.5 per cent in 1997. As pointed out in the
report, the country still faces a number of
socio-economic challenges that require a holistic
approach. President Koroma's Agenda for Change
significantly lays out the basic policies and key
priorities of the Government for the next three years in
such critical areas as economic growth, delivery of
social services and infrastructure development.

Uganda appreciates the commitment of the
Government and the development partners to raise
$1.2 billion out of the total $2.1 billion required in the
medium term to achieve the objectives of the
President's Agenda for Change. We note that there is a
funding gap of $1 billion to ensure the full
implementation of the Agenda.

Given the critical importance of having sufficient
funding for this programme, my delegation would like
to know what progress has been made so far with
regard to the establishment of the multi-donor trust
fund and the mobilization of resources to be
administered by the United Nations Development
Programme. We call upon UNIPSIL to work with all
stakeholders to mobilize the requisite funds.

In spite of the current global financial and
economic crisis, we request the development partners
to ensure timely disbursement of the pledged funds,
which are critical to the sustainability of the
peacebuilding efforts. It is also a responsibility shared
between the Government and the development partners
to ensure that the funds are utilized on core activities
and projects that spur economic growth, create
employment opportunities and improve the standard of
living of the people of Sierra Leone.

The implementation of the decentralization and
devolution of authority process needs to be expedited
because it will enhance service delivery. We urge the
Government of Sierra Leone and UNIPSIL to continue
strengthening the capacity of national institutions to
address such challenges as the fight against corruption
and the fight against the increasing cases of drug and
human trafficking, as well as piracy.

In conclusion, peacebuilding is a fundamental
component of the three pillars which form the mandate
of the United Nations: peace and security, development
and human rights. It requires reinforcing contributions
from a wide range of sectors and a wide range of
actors. The progress made so far in Sierra Leone is a
good example of what can be achieved through an
integrated and collaborative approach among the
Government, United Nations agencies and the
development partners.

