Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting on the very serious subject of small arms and
light weapons. The mere fact that the Council is seized
with the subject for the fifth time proves its relevance.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on small arms. We would very much like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Abe for the clarity of his
presentation. We also welcome Ms. Kawaguchi. I
would also like to thank my Japanese colleagues for
their careful preparation of the draft presidential
statement that the Council will adopt at this meeting.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
made shortly by Ambassador Jean-Marc Hoscheit,
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg, on behalf of
the European Union. I would nevertheless like to make
the following points.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
has contributed to their unlimited proliferation. Several
million small arms and light weapons are illegally
possessed by either transnational crime organizations
or non-State actors.

It is estimated that the victims of small arms and
light weapons total 500,000 annually, a large
proportion of them being children and civilians. Most
affected by this modern scourge are developing
countries. In order to contain this modern plague on
humankind, in 2001 the United Nations adopted the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. Its implementation is of
paramount importance.

The first Biennial Meeting of Member States on
the Implementation of the 2001 Programme of Action
on Small Arms and Light Weapons was held in July
2003 to exchange experiences. The second such
meeting will be convened in July 2005, and a review
conference is planned for the following year. We hope
that this ongoing effort will lead to a positive outcome.

Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/241,
an open-ended working group was established in order
to negotiate an instrument on marking and tracing. The
group made considerable progress in its first two sessions,
although some substantial issues are still open. Greece
hopes that all pending issues will be resolved during the
next meeting. A new legally binding instrument on
marking and tracing will greatly facilitate the
eradication of small arms and light weapons.

Another means to combat the illicit trade is the
adoption of end-user certificates. Both the European

Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe have relevant provisions in place that
emphasize the implementation of that plan. End-user
certificates will help to discover whether arms destined
for legal uses have been diverted to illegal recipients,
thereby limiting the flow of small arms and light
weapons to unauthorized or undesired users. If such a
measure is universalized, it will contribute greatly to our
legal arsenal in the fight to eradicate the illicit flow of
small arms and light weapons.

In accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations, all countries have an inherent right
to self-defence. The armed forces and police of States
therefore need small arms and light weapons. One can
nevertheless not overlook the fact that, in some
instances, small arms and light weapons that start out
legally ultimately arrive at illegal destinations. That
loophole has to be effectively addressed through severe
measures in the national legislation of all countries.

Given that small arms are inoperable without
ammunition, the flow of ammunition for small arms
and light weapons must also be brought under control.
My country has actively participated in the programme
to destroy excessive ammunition in Albania.

We support the view that the Security Council, in
its consideration of peacekeeping operations, always
has the duty to introduce a component dealing with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants into their local societies. That is a measure
of paramount importance. If it is well implemented, it
will enhance stability in conflict-torn countries.

Measures also have to be taken to ensure strict
compliance with United Nations embargoes and
sanctions in conflict areas. The Council should spare
no effort to stop the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons or to identify potential links between the
illicit trade in those weapons and the illicit exploitation
of natural and other resources. Zero tolerance for
smugglers has to be the rule. Countries also have to
exert some restraint when they are exporting to conflict
areas, even when an arms embargo has not yet been
imposed.

Last but not least, the Council should urge all
Member States fully and effectively to implement all
recommendations of the Secretary-General, who should
also be requested to produce a further update on the
matter when the Council is next seized with the
question of small arms and light weapons.

