The Deputy Secretary-General: "The genocide in
Rwanda is one of the darkest chapters in human history".
Those are the words of the Secretary-General - deeply
moved * spoken in Kigali last week.

Today we remember the victims and the survivors
as we continue to work to achieve justice for them and
to prevent genocide and other mass atrocities anywhere
in the world. We remember with heavy hearts the
collective failure of the international community to
recognize and act on the warning signs of genocide.

Twenty years ago, we saw yet again, after the
Holocaust, how genocide was not a single event but a
process that evolves over time, a process that requires
planning and resources. That means that genocide can
be prevented, with information and mobilization as
well as with courage and political will.

We must continue to build on the lessons learned
to improve our ability to protect populations from the
most serious international crimes. Positive steps have
been taken. The International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, alongside national trials, has held perpetrators
to account. Tribunals and special courts for the former
Yugoslavia, Cambodia and Sierra Leone have made
similar inroads against impunity. The International
Criminal Court has been central in the advance of
international criminal law. The Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide now
gathers information and sounds the alarm where there
is a risk of genocide or other atrocities. Along with the
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, he
and other United Nations officials work on prevention
and on helping countries build inclusive institutions
and tolerant societies, with a focus on the resolution of
grievances and disputes through peaceful means.

More broadly, the United Nations has progressively
placed the promotion and protection of human rights at
the core of our prevention work. The recently launched
Rights Up Front initiative aims to improve our ability
to respond to serious violations of human rights, which
often are early warning signs of mass atrocities and of
conflicts to come. The initiative is meant to generate
early action and more active engagement by Member
States and by the different entities of the United Nations
system. We must be committed to doing our utmost to
protect human lives in a very violent world.
The Rwanda genocide had a serious impact on the
Great Lakes region. Twenty years later, the region is
still seeing and dealing with the consequences. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) established a Protocol for the Prevention
and the Punishment of Genocide, War Crimes, Crimes
against Humanity and all Forms of Discrimination.
Rwanda now chairs the Regional Committee to
implement the Protocol. We count on Rwanda's
leadership in the prevention of atrocities. Almost half
of the States members of the ICGLR have established
national committees on genocide prevention. I
commend Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania and
Uganda for doing so.

As we mark the passage of 20 years since the
genocide, we also pay special tribute to the impressive
work of the Rwandan people for their own recovery and
reconciliation. Rwanda has come a long way since 1994,
and is one of the few countries that have established
a national institution dedicated to the prevention of
genocide. We encourage others to follow its lead and
institutionalize prevention mechanisms.

Conflicts today, from Syria to South Sudan to the
Central African Republic and beyond, sadly, show that
the protection of populations from atrocities remains
lagging and elusive. Those and other crises have different
roots, yet there is a commonality. Across the landscape
of conflict we see similar fault lines, divisions based on
religion, ethnicity and even language. We see the rise of
separatism, extreme nationalism and demonization of
"the others": us versus them, our way or no way.

No part of the world is immune to that threat,
and all of humankind is diminished by it. That means
that all societies should assess their vulnerability and
work at every level to build resilience, tolerance and
vigilance in detecting early warning signals of crises
to come. Let us reaffirm that the primary responsibility
lies with States themselves.

Preventing atrocities also means establishing
legitimate and accountable national institutions that are
inclusive and credible in the eyes of the population. It
means ensuring that the rule oflaw is respected and that
all human rights are protected, without discrimination.
It means managing diversity, supporting a strong civil
society and allowing all peoples' voices to be heard.

In conclusion, we must do more as a community of
nations and as global citizens if we are to live up to the
promise of "never again" and act upon our collective
responsibility to protect. Let us, in these days of so
many acts of blind and brutalizing violence - and
I look at the President as I say this and think of the
recent atrocities committed in Nigeria - be guided and
inspired by the preamble of the Charter of the United
Nations, which reaffirms "the dignity and worth of the
human person" and by the Charter, which urges us to
"live together as good neighbours" in this world.

