Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We sincerely thank His Excellency Mr. Ion
Jinga, Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations and current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and His Excellency Mr. Cho Tae-yul,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to
the United Nations and former Chair ofthe Commission,
for today's informative briefings on the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2017.

I shall deliver my statement on behalf
of the three African Member States on the
Security Council - Ethiopia, cote d'Ivoire and
Equatorial Guinea.

Our group congratulates the Peacebuilding
Commission on its consistent efforts to maintain
peace and security, while always respecting the
sovereignty of countries. As experience in our brother
countries of Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and other African
countries has shown, supporting the sovereignty of
countries is the cornerstone of peacebuilding. Such
support is crucial in order to ensure an effective and
permanent transition from peacekeeping operations to
peacebuilding initiatives, which helps build resilience
and foster sustainable development in countries and
their institutions. Given the huge peace and security
challenges we now face, prioritizing conflict prevention
is not just an option, it is an obligation. The concepts
ofpeacekeeping and peacebuilding are perfectly in line
with that important priority, and they have certainly
caused a paradigm shift in the way we ought to address
peace and security issues. It has been underscored
time and again that peace and security, development
and human rights are inextricably linked. Closer
collaboration among the various organs of the United
Nations and other stakeholders is therefore needed to
build peaceful and inclusive societies.

Addressing institution-building and ensuring
political and operational consistency throughout the
United Nations system is therefore absolutely essential
to ensure that conflict, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
are priorities for the Organization as it conducts its
work and activities. That is basically what the reforms
of the Secretary-General seek to address, and the
African members of the Security Council fully support
the reform process under way. We also believe that the
outcome of the reform will enable the United Nations
to develop additional capacity to comprehensively
respond to today's security challenges, including, inter
alia, maximally reducing the duplication of structures
and overlapping mandates and ensuring greater
transparency and responsibility and better planning
and budgeting. We think that it is important for the
Security Council to understand the catalysing value of
the Peacebuilding Fund.

Peacebuilding and peacekeeping are essential
to the implementation of development programmes
and sustainable peace and security on the African
continent. In that regard, we commend and encourage
the efforts that have been made on focusing on conflict
prevention and post-conflict stablization, such as those
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
on Sustainable Development and Peace and Security
and the subsequent memorandum of understanding
between the African Union Commission and the
Peacebuilding Support Office. The implementation of
the Peace Fund by the African Union demonstrates the

commitment ofAfrican countries to peace and security,
both on the African continent and internationally. Due
to the complex nature of conflicts, however, ensuring
the maintenance of peace and conflict prevention in a
sustainable manner requires international cooperation.
Similarly, the United Nations cannot address the large
number of international security challenges alone. In
order to achieve the ultimate goal of establishing solid
and lasting world peace, it is necessary to strengthen
relations among diverse stakeholders, including
regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions, national Governments, various
civil society groups and private organizations, in all
aspects of conflict cycles. It also entails prevention,
peacekeeking, special political missions, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding.

We take this opportunity to comend the work of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in
supporting regional strategies in the Sahel and the Lake
Chad basin, as well as its work in the Great Lakes region.
Accordingly, we propose considering similar initiatives
in other areas of the continent that require them. Central
Africa, for example, hosts two peacekeeping missions,
and we have seen an increase in terrorist activity and
transnational organized crime by armed groups, both
on the ground and at sea, as well as incidents of violent
extremism. We believe that the Central African region
requires the same level of attention as other regions
in Africa, so as to ensure cooperation to support
peacebuilding. In that regard, we believe that one of
the added values of the Peacebuilding Commission is
to complement the reports of the Secretary-General by
identifying blind spots and gaps in the implementation
of regional strategies aimed at peacebuilding, as well
as potential risks related to dedicating resources to a
single region, country or initiative.

The meeting rose at10.35 am.
