Mr. Kyrle (Austria): Let me, at the outset,
convey to you, Mr. President, our deep condolences
upon the passing of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke.
We will remember him in particular for his
contributions to stability in Southeastern Europe and,
more recently, to peace, security and reconciliation in
Afghanistan.

We would also like to thank the United States for
convening this debate at a crucial moment in Iraq's
democratic process. I would also like to convey to the
Secretary-General Austria's deep appreciation for the
outstanding commitment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

Today also marks a milestone in Iraq's return to
its rightful status in the international community. As a
member of the Security Council in 1991, Austria voted
for a number of the measures that we have brought to a
close today. Austria supports this step in recognition of
the progress achieved by Iraq and in support of
reconstruction and economic development for the
benefit of its people. Last but not least, we do so as
strong encouragement to the incoming Government to
fulfil outstanding Chapter VII obligations.

In 1991, Austria supported resolutions 687 (1991)
and 707 (1991) on the premise that actions requested
from Iraq represented first steps towards the goal of
establishing a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction and missiles for their delivery in the
Middle East. Today this goal remains as important as
ever. In the light of Iraq's commitment to non-
proliferation and disarmament, we hope that the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty will be
ratified soon and that the welcome provisional
application of the additional protocol to the
International Atomic Energy Agency Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement will be followed by its
ratification at the earliest possible moment. We also
expect the destruction of chemical weapons to continue
at a determined pace.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
liberation of Kuwait, we look to Iraq for fresh resolve
to forge a new partnership with Kuwait built on mutual
trust. As border security is paramount to confidence
between neighbours, any shadow of a doubt with
regard to acceptance of the finality and inviolability of
common borders should be avoided. We therefore
encourage Iraq to reaffirm its commitment to
resolution 833 (1993) with respect to its land and
maritime boundaries. Efforts should also be reinforced
to clarify the fate of missing persons, as well as to
settle the issue of the restitution of Kuwait's national
archives.

Much has been said today on the fundamental
changes we have witnessed in Iraq, a country whose
pluralistic traditions and proud history as a cradle of
civilizations we admire as much as we ardently support
its secure and prosperous future. At the same time,
pressing challenges remain, which require determined
stewardship.

As European Union Foreign Ministers underlined
on 22 November, there is an urgent need for the
formation of a stable and representative Government
that is able to rededicate itself to the pursuit of national
reconciliation. Such a Government will be vital to
responding to the aspirations of all Iraqis - regardless
of creed or ethnicity - and to respecting, protecting
and promoting their human rights.

We hope to see renewed resolve by the new
federal Government and the leadership of the Iraqi
Kurdistan region to come to a compromise on their
respective boundaries and competences, as well as on
the distribution of revenues, including from
hydrocarbon resources. Austria encourages the
continuation of UNAMI's efforts to build trust between
Arab and Kurdish communities in the north, in
particular by facilitating dialogue on the safeguarding
of language rights, the rights of detainees and the
resolution of property disputes.

Austria condemns all indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and reiterates its deep concern about recent
attacks on religious minorities, including Christian and
Muslim places of worship. We urge the Iraqi
Government to bring the perpetrators to justice and
ensure that all Iraqis are adequately protected and able
to practice their faith in peace and dignity.

Austria is also concerned about the reported
incidents of harassment and intimidation against
internally displaced persons in Kirkuk, including
threats of forced eviction.

During our term on the Security Council, we have
witnessed a marked decrease in the level of violence.
We have also seen Iraqi security forces progressively
assuming their responsibilities and the steady
anchoring of democratic processes. Those gains have
been hard-won and often challenged by unspeakable
violence against innocent civilians. Austria will
continue to support the Iraqi people in building a
secure, stable, democratic, unified and prosperous
country beyond our term on the Council. We look
forward to working with the new Iraqi Government
towards this goal, both bilaterally and in the framework
of the European Union.

Finally, I wish to assure the Secretary-General of
Austria's continued support for the important work of
Special Representative Ad Melkert and his entire team.
Let me also assure him that their safety and security -
as that of all United Nations personnel - remains of
the utmost concern to us.

