Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia): Before addressing the
item on the agenda, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the newly elected members of the Council
and to wish them every success in discharging their
duties in the next two years.

My delegation would also like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report and
to thank Mr. Guehenno for his, as always,
comprehensive report.

When the Security Council last met to review the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija, all of the
participants in the debate expressed satisfaction at the
fact that the province-wide elections took place in a
peaceful and democratic atmosphere. There was a
sense of cautious optimism around this table about the
prospects for the future. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia shared the view that an important step
forward had been taken. We maintained the position
that it was of crucial importance for Kosovo and
Metohija to make sure that its democratically elected
representatives established provisional institutions of
self-government and commenced work.

However, today, two months later, these
institutions, charged with the task of addressing
everyday problems besetting Kosovo and Metohija
with the joint and equal participation of representatives
of all ethnic communities, have not yet begun their
work. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia regrets that
fact, in particular because the self-government
institutions are envisaged as a significant element in
the process of the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and an important part of a
mechanism to establish confidence within Kosovo and
Metohija society. Elected representatives must justify
the trust bestowed on them and prove that they are
ready and able to address the difficulties that continue
to plague Kosovo and Metohija.

Indeed, the difficulties are many. My Government
is deeply concerned over the lack of security in Kosovo
and Metohija, particularly for non-Albanians. This
concern has been expressed repeatedly in the
Secretary-General's reports, including the report now
before us. Numerous incidents, including murders of
both Serbs and Albanians, the planting of explosive
devices, and intimidation are unfortunately still
standard items in the news coming from Kosovo and
Metohija. A few weeks ago, a prominent Serb was
killed in front of his house in Kosovska Kamenica.
Last week, another tragic event occurred when a newly
elected Albanian member of Parliament was killed in
Pec. We condemn these acts. Such an environment is
not compatible with the efforts to improve the overall
situation and hinders the work of the provisional
institutions. Security for all is a prerequisite for the
successful functioning of these institutions and the
inclusion of Serbs and other non-Albanians in their
work.

Unfortunately, the international presence in the
province is still unable to ensure security and
occasionally faces setbacks, as in the recent release of
the two suspects in the case of the terrorist attack on a
passenger bus near Podujevo last February. A year after
dozens of Serbian internally displaced persons,
including women and children, were killed and
wounded - and at a time when the international
community is mobilizing unprecedented resources to
combat terrorism around the world - the perpetrators
of this blatant terrorist act remain at large in the area
administered and controlled by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR. We strongly condemn this fact.

In addition to continuous security problems, there
are other very important outstanding issues, such as the
stalemate in the process of the returns of internally
displaced persons and the tracing of missing and
abducted persons. They need to be addressed urgently,
in cooperation with UNMIK, KF OR and the competent
Yugoslav authorities on the basis of the Common
Document of last November, as well as with
provisional self-government institutions.

My Government has been a determined partner of
the international community in tackling these and other
issues in order to achieve the common goal of a multi-
ethnic, multireligious and multicultural Kosovo and
Metohija. Along these lines, we have made an
important contribution to the process of voter
registration and the preparation and holding of
elections. We are very appreciative of the contribution
made to the process by KFOR and UNMIK. We also
highly value the message of the international
community, including the Security Council, sent before
the elections, that violence, as a means of achieving
political goals, will not be tolerated in Kosovo and
Metohija and that the elections will not affect its final
status. After all, this is provided for by resolution 1244
(1999) and the Common Document.

That Document is important not only as a good
basis for the development of fruitful cooperation
between my country and the United Nations Mission,
but also for the resolution of a series of concrete issues
listed there. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
expects, as a priority in the coming period, that it will
be fully and consistently implemented. The continued
attention and support of the Security Council in this
process is essential.

Progress in this and other aspects of cooperation
between my country and UNMIK would be greatly
facilitated by the conclusion of a status-of-mission
agreement. In addition to being an important new step
in the partnership between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the international community, a status-
of-mission agreement would resolve a number of
technical and other issues in the functioning of UNMIK
in a much more effective way and would make the
lengthy practice of taking separate decisions on every
individual issue obsolete. There is no doubt that the
agreement would facilitate UNMIK activities and
would contribute to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

In conclusion, let me acknowledge the role that
Mr. Hans Haekkerup played as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo and
Metohija and as Head of UNMIK. Over the past year,
important developments took place in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). His
contribution to that process was significant, including
in strengthening and improving the relations between
Yugoslavia as the host country and UNMIK. I thank
Mr. Haekkerup for all his efforts.

My Government looks forward to close
cooperation with the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, who we just heard is to
be appointed, in addressing many challenges that we
are facing in the ongoing process of implementing
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

