Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): We thank the
Russian Federation for organizing this important
debate on the situation in Haiti. I would also like to
thank Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for her briefing and to reiterate
my Government's gratitude and respect for her work
and continuing support to the consolidation of peace
and democracy in Haiti. And I thank Ambassador
Denis Regis for his statement.

Brazil is standing by Haiti at another difficult
moment. Hurricane Matthew's passing through the
Caribbean last week created the worst humanitarian
crisis there since the devastating earthquake six years
ago. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of
those who lost their lives and we reiterate our willingness
to help the Haitian Government to provide immediate
assistance for the hundreds of thousands of people in
urgent need. We commend the troops of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
for their commitment and we recognize the work
they have been doing in these difficult days for Haiti.
Even before the arrival of the hurricane, the military
personnel of MINUSTAH'S Brazilian contingent were
deployed to the most vulnerable parts of the country. In
an impressive effort, they cleared roads and prepared
airports to receive humanitarian aid in Les Cayes. They
were the first to arrive by land in Je're'mie, the capital
of the worst affected department. As I speak, they are
already supporting the Haitian authorities in the most
challenging period for the reconstruction activities.

Despite the necessary andjustifiable postponement
of the first round of elections, the Haitian authorities
should not slacken the momentum for organizing
their new date as soon as possible. Brazil strongly
urges Haiti's political actors to work cooperatively in
the interests of their people, while joining forces in
prioritizing the country's return to full constitutional
normality by completing the electoral process that
is already under way in order to ensure the holding
of free, fair, inclusive and transparent presidential
and legislative elections. It is also crucial to ensure
that Haiti's political stakeholders spare no effort in
encouraging citizens to develop a greater level of
involvement in the upcoming electoral rounds.

Brazil agrees with the Secretary-General's
assessment regarding stability and security in Haiti,
while recognizing that the security situation remains
relatively calm but fragile, owing to the prevailing
political uncertainty. There are still reasons for concern
about security, including gang activity, the smuggling
of weapons, and politically motivated violence. We
support the recommended extension of MINUSTAH's
mandate for an additional six months until 15 April
2017, while maintaining the current troop and police
levels. According to Interim President Jocelerme
Privert's recent statement in the General Assembly
(see A/71/PV.17), the military and police components
continue to have a very relevant role in the country's
logistics, humanitarian and security operations.

Regarding the strategic assessment mission to be
undertaken for MINUSTAH, with a View to making
recommendations for a future United Nations presence
in the country, we expect that it will happen after the
installation of the new President and the formation
of a new Government. It is crucial to the success of
any future decision to ensure that the United Nations
conducts that pivotal process in consultation with the
appropriate Haitian interlocutors. It is also essential to
ensure that the reconfiguration process be guided by
conditions on the ground and by the need to preserve
and consolidate the progress that has been made in
the past 12 years. Any prejudgement of the situation
may jeopardize investments made by the international
community in stabilizing the country so far.

We concur with the Secretary- General's observation
that the Haitian National Police is not yet operationally
independent and continues to rely on MINUSTAH's
support to fulfil its constitutional mandate. Despite
its enhanced performance in preventing crimes and
controlling civil unrest, we note with regret that the
police force will not be able to reach the target of 15,000
officers by the end of 2016, as initially envisaged.
Furthermore, we are concerned that only half of the
Haitian National Police development plan for the period
2012-2016, one of the benchmarks of the Mission, has
been attained so far.

During the transition period, we encourage the
Security Council to keep tools that are part of the
MINUSTAH mandate aimed at developing quick-impact
and community violence-reduction projects, as well as
an adequate engineering capability. Experience in Haiti
has clearly shown that such initiatives directly benefit
the local population and assist in building confidence
in the peace process and the Mission throughout its life
cycle. Any future presence of the Organization in Haiti
should take this success story into account and ensure
the continuity of such activities in order to contribute to
the sustainability of reconstruction efforts.

The humanitarian situation continues to raise
serious concern. Hurricane Matthew negatively
impacted the living conditions of a significant number
of internally displaced people, currently at 61,000, in
a context of an increase in the number of new cholera
cases and a decrease in the levels of food and nutrition
security in rural areas. We commend the tireless
response activities of the Government of Haiti and the
United Nations, and underline the particular importance
and urgency of the Haiti humanitarian response plan
2016 appeal, launched jointly to meet the critical
humanitarian needs of 1.3 million people, including of
the Haitians and persons of Haitian descent returning
from the Dominican Republic.

Brazil also underscores the importance of
strengthening Haiti's national health institutions and
United Nations efforts to combat cholera, including
through the Secretary-General's initiative to support
the national plan for the elimination of cholera for the
period 2013-2022. We welcome his intention to develop
a package that would provide additional material
assistance and support for those Haitians directly
affected by the disease. The Brazilian Government built,
and currently supports, three community hospitals and
one rehabilitation centre in Haiti, the largest project
implemented so far by Brazil in terms cooperation,
with a budget of $90 million.

The Brazilian Government is also committed to
maintaining its humanitarian cooperation efforts,
as well as the current special immigration policy for
Haitians. In that regard, I wish to recall that, according
to the Brazil declaration entitled "A Framework for
Cooperation and Regional Solidarity to Strengthen
the International Protection of Refugees", adopted
in Brasilia on 3 December 2014, Latin American
Governments consider people fleeing from natural
disasters as victims who should be received
and protected.

We recall that the Peacebuilding Commission could
assume a central role in the stabilization and development
efforts in Haiti. Access to justice and poverty reduction
are important elements in the promotion of Haiti's
development and stability, which deserve more careful
consideration. They can help to empower the weakest
and the poorest, especially through the effectiveness
of social rights, and produce tangible dividends for the
most vulnerable. In that regard, attention should be
given to the further strengthening of Haitian judicial
and correctional systems in order to support a more
integrated and cohesive Haitian security sector. The
programmatic resources recently allocated to those
efforts can certainly contribute to reverse the slow
progress towards consolidating the rule of law in Haiti.
(Spoke in French)

Brazil continues to be committed to its Haitian
brother and sisters in their efforts to establish a
stable democracy and sustainable development. We
are convinced that, as in several other periods of
difficulty, Haitians will be able to overcome the current
difficulties. The people of Haiti deserve all our support
in order to break with the cycle of instability and
political uncertainty, including through our support to
the elections and the swearing in of a new President in
Feburary 2017.

