Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the briefings by Assistant Secretaries-General
Simonovic' and Zerihoun and express our appreciation
for the efforts that the Secretary-General continues to
make to bring the situation in Ukraine to an end.

The recent report of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine continues to
generate concern for our country with respect to the
human rights situation in eastern and southern Ukraine,
in particular in Donetsk and Luhansk. My delegation
is particularly concerned by the alarming increase
in human rights violations and abuses, which have
primarily affected journalists, politicians and activists.
We deeply deplore the deaths of two Russian journalists
and an Italian journalist in Luhansk last week.

The increase in violations of the right to life,
liberty and security that now affect civilians in those
regions, as manifested in the attacks, kidnappings,
torture and harassment taking place, highlight the need
to restore the rule of law and respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international
law. We also reiterate our concern about the situation
of internally displaced persons in Ukraine, which,
according to the report, now total over 12,700 people,
primarily women and children. That is a clear sign of
the severity of the crisis.

Chile would like to acknowledge the efforts of the
Ukrainian Government to put an end to the situation
in the country and highlights the peace plan and the
unilateral ceasefire recently announced by President
Poroshenko. The announcement by separatist groups
that they would comply with the ceasefire is an
encouraging sign and should be reflected in their actions
on the ground. Of equal importance are the proposed
constitutional amendments in the Memorandum of
concord and peace, which was drafted during the round
table on national unity and adopted on 20 May by the
Ukrainian Parliament, which are aimed at determining
Ukraine's future in a democratic, transparent and
inclusive manner.

We urge the parties to seek a peaceful solution to
the crisis through direct political dialogue, exercise
restraint, refrain from unilateral actions that could
exacerbate tensions and participate in international
mediation efforts such as the trilateral contact group,
which includes Ukraine, Russia and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the
Geneva agreement of 17 April. Similarly, we call for
full respect for the rule of law, democracy and human
rights in Ukraine, including the rights of all minorities.

The Government of Ukraine has the responsibility
to maintain public order throughout the territory, in
conformity with its constitutional norms and domestic
legislation and with full respect for the rights and
safeguards of all people in Ukraine. The monopoly of
the use of force that the Government of Ukraine enjoys
in its own territory, as is the case for any Government
in the international community, should be exercised
with full respect for human rights and in proportion to
the situation at hand.

Chile reiterates its support for the appeal made by
Mr. Simonovie for ensuring accountability with regard
to violations and abuses of human rights in Ukraine,
including the 222 cases of illegal detention, of the
disappearance of 81 persons, and the deaths of more
than 400 people in the east, including children, members
of the armed forces and armed groups. It is equally
essential that the authorities continue to investigate and
finally bring to justice those who were responsible for
the death of 48 persons in Odesa on 2 May, and that
they look into why the security forces did not take more
timely and decisive steps to prevent that tragedy.

We reiterate our support for the work of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
and with the monitoring mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We are confident
that those independent international mechanisms will
continue to contribute to achieving a solution to the
cr1s1s.

