Ms. Lind (Estonia): I thank you for organizing this
debate, Mr. President.

Since the last time the Estonian Minister for Foreign
Affairs spoke at the United Nations, in September 2015
(see S/PV.7527), terrorist aggression has, tragically,
continued around the world, including in our region,
in Europe and in its neighbourhood, where hundreds of
people have been killed and injured in heinous terrorist
attacks. Estonia remains vigilant and committed to our
common fight against terrorism.

Terrorism is a global phenomenon, and the
international community must act together to
prevent and counter terrorism in a comprehensive
and sustainable way. The United Nations is the most
appropriate framework for shaping international
counter-terrorism measures. In that regard, let me point
out the adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014)
and, most recently, 2253 (2015), as well as the Plan of
Action on Preventing Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
presented by the Secretary-General.

As a European Union member State, Estonia fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered in the Council
today by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU).

To enhance the fight against terrorism, we support
closer cooperation and the exchange of information,
both inside the EU and with other countries and
organizations. We participate in the EU work in
progress, including the fight against terrorist financing
and stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
Estonia has signed and will ratify the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on the
Prevention of Terrorism, and our first cases on terrorist
financing have been brought to justice.

In the long term, we must focus on prevention.
Radicalization is a social phenomenon first, and then
a law-enforcement issue. Education, integration,
employment and eventually deradicalization and
rehabilitation must be provided to prevent violent
extremism. Online and offline, we must stop terrorist
propaganda and develop counter narratives, in public-
private partnerships. In broad terms, democracy, the rule
of law and respect for human rights remain essential in
preventing and countering terrorism. Estonia takes that
into account in its activities on a national level as well
as in its international cooperation and development aid.

Ultimately, the solution lies in addressing the
conflicts and assisting the fragile States where
violent extremism breeds. To counter one of the most
menacing terrorist organizations of our time, Da'esh,
Estonia supports the Global Coalition to Counter the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, to which we are
contributing, in accordance with our capacity, through
military and humanitarian aid.

At the same time, we must not forget that terrorism
and violent extremism are not limited to radical Islam
and specific regions. No manifestation of terrorism
can be tolerated wherever it emerges, regardless of its
religious, political, historical or ethnical background
and motivation.

