Mr. Quintana (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Iwish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the information that he has provided to the
Council today, which supplements that contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/603) concerning
the recent progress made in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacic', Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, and
His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of
the Republic of Kosovo.

Colombia recognizes and supports UNMIK's
important role and believes that, in defining its priorities,
the Mission must continue to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region
through its cooperation with the parties involved and
with regional and international agencies. UNMIK's
work is essential in persuading the parties of the need
to show moderation in their statements and to promote
the dialogue that will make it possible to achieve
sustainable solutions to the disputes.
With regard to the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), Colombia supports the
joint efforts that have been made by that Mission and by
the Kosovo authorities in order to implement the rule of
law in Kosovo and reduce the level of impunity.

Colombia calls upon the parties to adopt measures
to reduce tension and to avoid the eruption of a new
crisis, as well as to work with the necessary political
resolve based on previous agreements, bearing in mind
that that is the only true way towards peace.

We condemn violent activities that are aimed at
intimidating communities, as happened to Kosovo Serbs
in the municipality of Kline/Klina and in the village of
Drenovc/Drenovac. We call upon the authorities and
the communities to work towards reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence among all inhabitants of Kosovo.

Colombia welcomes the initiative taken by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Kosovo and UN-Women in lending their support to
the entity for gender equality under the Office of the
Prime Minister, with the aim of designing an action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In turn, we also recognize the work of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its partners in implementing outreach activities
addressing displaced persons, both within and outside
Kosovo.

We also wish to express our support for a regional
perspective aimed at resolving the problems, and in
particular, for the actions of the European Union in
bringing about a rapprochement between Pristina and
Belgrade, and for the involvement of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in that process.

Finally, we reject and condemn all types of attacks
perpetrated against the facilities and personnel of
international organizations that are present in Kosovo
and call for due respect for those persons and for their
work, in particular that of EULEX.

