Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish first of all to welcome you, Madam
Minister, and to thank you for presiding over the
Security Council at this meeting. I wish also to
welcome Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Council
members and States of the Great Lakes region who
have come to New York to consider the question of
strengthening peace, security and sustainable
development in the Great Lakes region.

African issues are constantly at the centre of the
Council's attention. This reflects the international
community's grave concern at the complex ongoing
situation on the African continent. Recent
developments in the Great Lakes region show clearly
that the most important way to settle conflict in the
region and throughout Africa is to strengthen the rule
of law by developing democracy and good governance.

The Council's consideration of current conflict
situations in the Great Lakes region continues to
indicate that the greatest difficulties arise in the
settlement of problems relating to the transitional and
post-conflict periods. The implementation of
legislation and the revival or establishment of legal
systems take place slowly. Programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
carried out with difficulty or are completely blocked -
notably by illegal Congolese or foreign armed groups
operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in neighbouring States, where their
destabilizing impact on the region's peace process has
recently taken on an increased cross-border character.

At the same time, we note the generally positive
momentum in the peace processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. That is
encouraging, and it reflects a solid trend towards
overall stabilization.

To consolidate the success of the Burundi peace
process and to make it irreversible, the democratically
elected Government still has many severe problems to
address. Naturally, that will require considerable
assistance from the international community, including
through the participation of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Friends of Burundi and the leading
donors.
The priority for the leaders and the parliament of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is to accelerate
the establishment of a legal and logistical basis for the
holding of free, honest, transparent and democratic
elections in June 2006. Still pending is the thorny
problem of the disarmament, reintegration and
voluntary repatriation of members of foreign armed
groups operating in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In our View, it is of great importance that regional
cooperation among the States of the Great Lakes
region - in particular Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - be
established, along with putting in place confidence-
building measures and resolving outstanding bilateral
issues. This should be done in the framework of
multilateral security mechanisms such as the Tripartite
Plus One Joint Commission.

In resolving disarmament problems, the regional
dimension must be emphasized by broadening and
deepening cooperation among neighbouring States.

Stabilizing the situation in Central Africa and
putting in place solid conditions conducive to
development are closely linked to a successful outcome
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. A major task in the upcoming phase will be to
carry out an objective analysis of compliance with the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration of Principles on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region and, at the second summit of States of
the region, to adopt viable, balanced, achievable
decisions binding on all, particularly in the areas of
peace and security.

I wish to note that my delegation fully supports
the draft resolution (S/2006/51) that has been prepared
for adoption at the end of today's meeting.

Finally, Madam President, I should like once
again to thank you and the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania for the great effort you have put
into preparing and conducting today's meeting.

