Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to His Excellency Jalil
Abbas J ilani, Foreign Secretary of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan, for his leadership in convening today's
open debate. I would also like to express appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
informative briefing, which impressed on us the
importance of today's discussion.

Allow me, before I delve into today's topic, to echo
the strong condemnation expressed by the Security
Council in its press statement on the terrorist attack in
In Amenas, Algeria, which has affected people of many
nationalities, including some from my own country,
and has resulted in numerous deaths and injuries. We
express our deep sympathy and sincere condolences
for the victims of the attack and to their families. The
perpetrators of such heinous acts must be brought to
justice. Japan believes that terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, and that
any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable. I
should like to reiterate Japan's strong determination to
combat all forms of terrorism.

Mr. President, Japan welcomes your initiative
of introducing a new resolution highlighting
the multidimensional nature of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We agree that it plays a
critical role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, preventing and containing conflicts,
building peace in post-conflict situations and providing
sustainable peace and development. With the purpose
of further improvements and reflection on the issue,
I would like to share the following three observations
with the Council.
First, I would like to draw the Council's attention to
the history of the Japanese contribution to peacekeeping
operations. In its 20-year history in that respect,
Japan has proactively taken an early peacebuilding
role. In Timor-Leste, Japan delivered engineering,
police capacity- building and electoral support, which
contributed to building a foundation for the country's
economic development. Last month, that South-
East Asian nation graduated from the peacekeeping
operation, well on its way to future prosperity. In Haiti,
the Japanese Self-Defense Forces' engineers proactively
contributed to the country's national recovery efforts
and planted the seeds for its future development. In
South Sudan, Japanese engineering units are now
supporting nation-building efforts for the youngest
nation in the world. By sharing lessons learned from
its premium experiences as an early peacebuilder,
Japan would like to invigorate the discussion and the
consideration of further improvements related to this
issue.

Secondly, peacekeeping missions have evolved and
at the same time struggled to address the emerging
challenges of the twenty-first century. In the midst of
their evolutionary process, missions are now required
to be capable of meeting specific needs and handling
complex situations for the successful delivery of their
multidimensional functions. To that end, each mission
should be launched and operated based on broader
support from Member States, now more than ever.
The Security Council, the supreme decision-making
authority on the establishment of missions, has remained
without any substantial changes to its composition or
decision-making process for more than six decades.
Japan believes that the time when changes are made
to such decision-making mechanisms is the time when
peacekeeping operations will start to exercise their full
potential to respond to the expectations ofa new era.

Thirdly, Japan has also actively engaged in the
discussion of the peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development nexus in the context of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). For example, as the Chair of the
Commission's working group on lessons learned, Japan
organized a meeting in December to clarify the role
played by the PBC vis-a-vis the Security Council while
the country on the agenda of the PBC is undergoing
a United Nations mission transition. In order for
peacekeeping efforts to generate a long-term impact,
enhanced cooperation between the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and other development
actors is essential. Japan remains committed to
promoting such interactions.
In closing, Japan would like to express its heartfelt
appreciation to all peacekeepers for their solid
contribution, made through daily hard work, even in
the midst of severe situations on the ground. At the
same time, Japan would like to express its deepest
condolences in connection with those peacekeepers
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of
duty, and strongly condemns attacks targeting United
Nations peacekeepers. Japan will do its best to work
towards the achievement of international peace and
security, with full respect for the safety and security
of personnel.

