Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First, on behalf of the Spanish delegation, I would like
to thank the Algerian presidency, in particular
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria,
Mr. Belkhadem, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Your presence, Mr. Minister, at the
head of the Council at this meeting further stresses the
importance of our discussion of this important
question. We would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan
Egeland, for his highly valuable briefing on this
question.

It is clear that in recent years major progress has
been made in the area under consideration, and that is
to be commended. However, it must also be recognized
that, in most of the crises the Council is facing, the
civilian population continues to suffer
disproportionately the effects of combat and
occupation situations. As Mr. Egeland's briefing
provided many examples of that, I need not go into
detail.

In the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/431), dated 28 May 2004, which the Council
first discussed in a meeting held under the Philippine
presidency, ten priorities were listed as the basis of
the plan of action presented in December 2003 by
Mr. Egeland; we believe those priorities should
continue to be our fundamental frame of reference.

Given the brief time we have available, the
Spanish delegation shall focus on only some of those
priorities.

In 20 conflicts in the world, humanitarian access
is continued to denied or impeded to 10 million people
who need food, water, refuge and medical assistance,
leading to the unnecessary suffering of the civilian
population. International pressure, often through the
action of the Council, has in various cases managed to
remove many of those obstacles, although there
continues to exist, in certain places and at certain
moments, practical difficulties that need to be dealt
with. The protection of the civilian population is the
responsibility of all reputable States and all parties to
an armed conflict. If a Government does not have the
ability to protect or help its own population or is not
willing to do so, the international community, in
particular the United Nations, must fulfil that
protective function. To that end, international attention
must not weaken, pressure must be maintained and all
bodies and agencies of the United Nations system must
act with the same goal.

Secondly, we are greatly concerned at the
situation of the more than 50 million people in the
world that have become internally displaced persons or
refugees. Any process for the normalization of life
following a conflict must include the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons and refugees to their
place of origin. If that return does not take place, we
must ensure that the camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons meet basic sanitary and security
standards. Armed groups cannot be allowed to
infiltrate refugee camps to recruit or kidnap men,
women and children, as such acts violate the civilian
and humanitarian nature of the camps and leave the
population and refugees vulnerable to attacks from
various factions.

Thirdly, we would like to stress the importance of
attending to the most vulnerable sectors of society. I
am referring in particular to the protection of women
and children. In spite of the efforts made, more than
300,000 minors under the age of 18 are directly
involved in armed conflicts, while acts of sexual
violence continue to be a brutal weapon of war, used
with excessive frequency by several belligerent groups.
The physical, psychological and social consequences
of those practices are appalling and can even destroy
the links that bind a community. For that reason, the
efforts in this area must be intensified, incorporating in
international peacekeeping missions qualified
personnel to assist victims, raising awareness on these
issues within the institutions of transition that carry out
national reconciliation processes and improving
medical, emergency, support and comprehensive
rehabilitation services for the victims of sexual
violence. Those actions should be carried out by the
bodies of the United Nations system in cooperation
with non-governmental organizations and other entities
active in that area.

Finally, we believe that it is important to put an
end to impunity for particularly serious acts of
significance for the international community as a
whole. Unfortunately, in many cases, those crimes
continue to be committed in complete impunity. We
firmly believe that the perpetrators must be brought to
justice, because that is the only way to deter other
possible perpetrators. To that end, it is necessary to
continue efforts to improve national penal systems
through adequate international assistance. If the action
of the national authorities is insufficient, due to their
lack of will or capacity, international judicial bodies
must be able to take action. In that context, my
delegation firmly supports the appeal of the Secretary-
General contained in his report (S/2004/431) of 28
May 2004 for universal ratification and accession to
the statute of the International Criminal Court, as well
as to the treaties concerning international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.

In conclusion, we express our agreement with the
draft presidential statement that has been prepared by
the members of the Council as a whole, as a result of
the impetus of the Algerian presidency. I would also
like to express our interest in and support for the
guidelines of action announced by Mr. Egeland at the
conclusion of the very thorough briefing he gave at the
start of this meeting.

