Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
work of the Security Council this month. I also
congratulate you on having organized this important
public debate on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Guinea welcomes this wholesome
initiative, which attests to the renewed and growing
interest in strengthening the ways and means for such
organizations fully to honour their commitment, which
has become crucial, to promoting the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and the maintenance and
building of peace around the world.

While endorsing the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Angola on behalf of the
African Union, I shall focus in my own on the critical
challenges to and opportunities for the international
community in promoting peace, security, stability and
development in the subregion of the Mano River basin.
The situation in that highly sensitive region, which is
considered to be the source of instability in West
Africa, has undoubtedly witnessed important progress,
reflected in particular in the building of peace and
democratization in Liberia and Sierra Leone, the
relaunching of the peace and reconciliation process in
Cote d'Ivoire, and the strengthening of national
dialogue and the restoration of conditions of good
governance and economic growth in Guinea. While
welcoming that progress, which augurs well for the
future of the subregion, we should not let our guard
down. Further progress is still necessary to eradicate
forever the fundamental factors behind instability, to
prevent a recurrence of conflict and crisis, to ensure
the viability of States and to build a lasting peace.

Indeed, after 15 years of armed violence, the
States and peoples of the Mano River region are today
at a turning point in their history. They need to
individually and collectively meet the immense
challenges of political, economic and social
reconstruction, the establishment of a lawful State that
respects human rights and the settlement of
transboundary issues, including human and drug
trafficking, terrorism and the traffic in firearms.

In that context, we must welcome the recent
encouraging prospects for reactivating the Mano River
Union and for resuming an ongoing dialogue at all
levels among its member States. The Mano River
Union, which on 3 October 2007 commemorated 34
years of existence, is working to be at the very heart of
the subregion's transformation. The member States are
committed, in that respect, to reactivating the
secretariat of the Union and revitalizing its operational
mechanisms, particularly the 15th Protocol to the Mano
River Union Declaration, which addresses community
issues of defence, security, justice, territorial
administration and foreign affairs.

The countries of the Mano River basin are also
seeking to strengthen their transboundary cooperation
in order to better address the interlinked issues of
peace, security and integrated economic development
in the subregion. Therefore, on the initiative of Guinea,
a draft pact on good-neighbourly relations, stability
and solidarity was submitted in November 2006 to the
member countries of the Mano River Union, to which
it had been proposed to add Cote d'Ivoire. The draft
pact is an important confidence-building measure,
which should become effective and operational as soon
as it is adopted.

We must encourage and support the initiatives of
the Mano River Union aimed at carrying out
institutional reforms promoting closer subregional
integration among its countries and ensuring greater
effectiveness in the settlement of transboundary
problems.

Building the capacity of civil society groups that
are working to promote, beyond their borders, a culture
of non-violence and peace is a vital task. Volunteer
organizations such as the Mano River Women's Peace
Network, the Mano River Union Youth Parliament and
the Action Group of Religious Faiths, which have
played a major role in the restoration of peace, need to
be involved in all phases of programmes of action.

The adoption of a truly regional viewpoint to
advance the peace agenda is necessary to prevent a
recurrence of conflict. Priorities that are clearly fixed
by member States need to be supported by United
Nations entities, donors and all relevant stakeholders.

Guinea welcomes the success of the
Peacebuilding Commission in dealing with countries
emerging from conflict. We encourage the Commission
to continue to fulfil its mandate with the same rigour
and effectiveness, while expanding its action to include
all other involved countries. We also believe that it is
equally important for the international community to
provide the necessary support to neighbouring
countries weakened by the serious effects of conflict
on their borders. We should also further affirm the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission as the body for
coordination between the United Nations system and
regional and subregional organizations, as suggested

by the President of the Security Council in his
statement of 28 March 2007 (S/PRST/2007/7).

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my
delegation's conviction that this meeting of the
Security Council will undoubtedly contribute to
identifying specific and promising paths for action,
enabling us to strengthen the role of regional and
subregional organizations in promoting peace, stability
and development in Africa and around the world.

