Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom, in its capacity as penholder for issues
relating to Yemen, for its efforts to reach a compromise
acceptable to all members of the Council on the renewal
of the relevant sanctions regime. Our support for the
two draft resolutions (S/2018/156 and S/2018/157) that
we considered is based primarily on our conviction
of the importance of preserving the aforementioned
sanctions regime in order to contribute to ending the
conflict and the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
We believe that it is necessary to deter and to limit
the capacity for action of the individuals or entities that
threaten peace, security and stability in that country
in order to promote the achievement of a political
solution. We are committed to that, in particular since
the Council has entrusted us with the responsibility
of chairing the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014). That is a task that we hope
to fulfil with equanimity and impartiality, working
constructively with all the members of the Council. In
that regard, we emphasize the importance of always
considering developments in Yemen in a balanced way,
with respect for due process and on the basis of the
available evidence.

Peru condemns the launching of missiles against
the territory of Saudi Arabia, among various other
equally condemnable events and actions that are also
mentioned in the most recent report of the Panel of
Experts on Yemen (see S/2018/68), some of which have
serious humanitarian consequences on the territory of
Yemen. We believe that, in that context, it is essential
to ensure that the Panel of Experts can continue to
conduct impartial and detailed assessments on the
implementation of the sanctions regime and on the
current situation on the ground for the due consideration
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and of the Council.

We also believe that it is necessary to provide
all necessary means to the new Special Envoy and
to support him in his difficult task of re-establishing
dialogue and trust among all the parties involved in
the conflict.

