Mr. Bidrn Lian (Norway): Allow me first, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council for the month of February
and to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Cerdenas, for
the excellent work he accomplished. I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to the ministerial delegation of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), under the leadership
of the Foreign Minister of Malawi, and to the Foreign
Minister of Angola; we listened to their interventions with
the closest attention.

In 1994 the grave humanitarian situation caused
Angola, together with Rwanda, to be the largest recipient of
Norwegian humanitarian aid. Angola's road to peace has
been long and arduous. After numerous set-backs in the
negotiations, Norway welcomed with satisfaction the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 and
the entry into force of the cease-fire. A significant step had
been taken towards the restoration of lasting peace in
Angola. We congratulate the people of Angola and join
them in their wish to see an end to the human suffering and
the tragic toll that the protracted war has inflicted. The
Lusaka Protocol means that a decisive step has been taken
towards the final resolution of the internal conflict in that
war-torn country.

In this connection, my delegation commends most
sincerely the excellent work accomplished by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre
Blondin Beye. Norway believes that a critical factor for
the eventual success of the peace process in Angola is the
creation of conditions that will make the implementation
of the provisions of the Protocol possible. The
establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), as suggested in the
report of the Secretary-General, will have a key function
in assisting the Government of Angola and UNIT A in
coping with the remaining obstacles and thus in achieving
the all-important goal of national reconciliation and the
restoration of a durable peace in Angola.

Since the operation started, Norway has participated
in UNAVEM. with military observers, and I can announce
today that my Government has determined that we should
maintain our contribution within the framework of
UNAVEM. III at about the same level. We are pleased
that the Security Council in its draft resolution has
decided on a mandate period of one year, as suggested in
the report. Implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is
already behind the time set in the report, and a shorter
period than one year would seem unrealistic to us.

However, much remains to be done within the
framework of the Peace Accords and the relevant Security
Council resolutions in order to give full effect to the
peace settlement. We note with appreciation the
Secretary-Generals observations regarding the respect for
the cease-fire shown by the Government and UNITA,
their commitment to ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and their commitment to the
Lusaka process and to national reconciliation. We feel
that further concrete confidence-building measures will be
imperative for a successful peace process, and therefore
urge the parties to the Protocol to continue to commit
themselves fully and faithfully to implementing its
provisions and to respect and maintain the cease-fire
throughout the country.

As my Foreign Minister stated in his address to the
General Assembly at its forty-ninth session, Norway
stands ready to support regional processes to encourage
closer cooperation between African nations. In general,
regional organizations should take on more responsibility
for peace-keeping in the future. The presence today of the
ministerial delegation of the OAU sends a positive signal
that we note with great appreciation. It follows from what
I have said that we would welcome a substantial regional
effort in UNAVEM. III.

 

In a country like Angola, humanitarian action can
serve as a dynamic force for peace. It can help create
momentum towards restoring security and promoting
reconciliation. The number of non-military tasks planned
for UNAVEM. III is indeed significant. We support the
priorities set for the United Nations humanitarian
programme: relief assistance, mine clearance,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
repatriation of refugees and resettlement of internally
displaced persons.

The operation will be costly. I would like to
emphasize the fundamental importance of a sound financial
basis for UNAVEM. III. It is incumbent on all Member
countries to fully meet their responsibilities in this respect.

In a comprehensive peace-keeping operation like
UNAVEM. III, the issue of the coordination of the various
elements and activities, be they of a military or a
non-military character, is crucial. We welcome the plan to
establish integrated teams to coordinate day-to-day
functions and to ensure the most efficient use of available
resources. As far as possible, longer term development
assistance to Angola should also be designed and managed
with a particular view to reinforcing the peace process.

As a country passing through a crucial stage in the
process of building democracy, Angola needs the support
and encouragement of the international community. Norway
has played its part in trying to repair the severe damage to
Angola's economic and social fabric. In 1994, Norway
contributed $6.8 million in humanitarian assistance to
Angola. Of these funds, more than $1.3 million was spent
on mine clearance. Mine-clearance programmes in Angola
will be high on our priority list in 1995 also. To date,
$700,000 has been earmarked for a central mine-clearance
school in Luanda. In 1994, most of the Norwegian
humanitarian assistance was channelled through
international and national organizations such as the World
Food Programme, the Red Cross, Norwegian People's Aid,
the United Nations Children's Fund and Church Action for
Angola, as well as through the United Nations Department
of Humanitarian Affairs.

In addition, $2.2 million was given to Angola as long-
term development assistance in 1994. We will continue our
long-term support for the people of Angola; the same level
of assistance is foreseen for 1995.

There is now a real chance that the Angolan peace
process will be crowned with success. The international
community is showing full solidarity with Angola through
the decisions that are being taken today. But this
solidarity can only support the efforts of the Government
of Angola and UNITA, whose will to implement the
peace accords and to engage in genuine reconciliation will
remain decisive.

Let me therefore conclude by expressing the hope
that Angola will continue the successful trend of Namibia,
South Africa and Mozambique in establishing a peaceful
and democratic society.

