Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
extending a warm welcome to you, Sir, and by
thanking you and the delegation of Uganda for
convening today's open debate. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive analytical report on this issue
(S/2010/514). I also wish to thank Ambassador
Lamamra for his briefings and contributions. I also
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria, and thank him for his contributions to this
important debate.

The Security Council, at its summit meeting of
23 September (see S/PV.6389), reiterated its
commitment to strengthening its strategic partnerships
with and support to regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Today's debate
presents a unique opportunity to follow through on our
commitments and to translate them into concrete action
in the African context, and thus contribute to the
strategic vision of partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU).
We are also pleased with the growing recognition
of the fact that the African Union has various
comparative advantages that need to be utilized in such
a way as to contribute to international peace and
security. The United Nations has recently assumed the
important responsibility of supporting the AU's efforts
to enhance its own capacity in this area. In this regard,
we welcome the recent progress made in strengthening
the strategic and operational partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, including
enhanced collaboration between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union.

United Nations support to the African peace and
security architecture, including the African standby
force and the 10-year capacity-building programme for
the African Union, are essential elements of our
common strategy with respect to the African continent.
The establishment of the United Nations Office to the
African Union in July was also a serious step, and we
look forward to the full operationalization of the
Office. We are also pleased with the inauguration of
the Joint Task Force on Peace and Security between the
United Nations and the AU, which we believe represent
a strong platform for further efforts.

We also welcome the steps taken by the African
Union to enhance its capabilities in the field of
preventive diplomacy. We are particularly pleased with
the joint efforts of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission in the areas of conflict
prevention and peace mediation in a number of African
countries. The inclusion of assistance in developing the
African Union's mediation strategy in the 10-year
capacity-building programme is also commendable
insofar as peace mediation is a cost-effective and
efficient method of crisis management and conflict
resolution.

However, as highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General, important challenges remain and
more needs to be done. In his report, the Secretary-
General points to a number of such challenges, the
notable of which pertains to financing. We note that the
Secretary-General's conclusions on this issue are
strikingly similar to those contained in the 2008 report
of the Prodi panel (S/2008/813). Indeed, both reports
point to the need for sustainable, flexible and
predictable financing mechanisms for the AU peace
support operations mandated by the United Nations.
Voluntary contributions frequently constitute an
unstable and unpredictable funding mechanism. That is
why resolution 1809 (2008) and the presidential
statement of 26 October 2009 (S/PRST/2009/26)
acknowledged the need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
a United Nations mandate.

As the Secretary-General also underscores in his
report, the current financial framework for partnerships
in peacekeeping operations is not conducive to
building a long-term strategy. We fully endorse the
conclusions and recommendations contained in the
report on these issues. In particular, we concur with the
Secretary-General that a more predictable, reliable and
sustainable funding mechanism must be found,
especially to ensure that the African Union will be able
to fulfil the goals set out in the African peace and
security architecture.

In the light of the experiences gained in the
context of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
where the logistical support package was financed
through United Nations assessed contributions, we
believe that the Security Council must be ready to
consider the use of assessed contributions to support
similar United Nations authorized operations on a
case-by-case basis in the future. This could help the
Council to overcome the biggest challenge standing in
the way of African peacekeeping operations, as well as
United Nations-African Union strategic cooperation.

Investing in the African Union's peacekeeping
capacity means at the same time investing in the
security, stability, prosperity and thus the future of that
great continent. It is a long-term investment that will
surely pay off as the African continent fully develops
its own capabilities. Turkey is ready and willing to do
its fair share in this regard. With these considerations,
we support the draft presidential statement prepared by
Uganda and look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General to define the United Nations
strategic vision for United Nations-African Union
cooperation on peace and security.

