Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you for convening this meeting, Mr. President,
and we are grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his valuable
briefing.

Peru notes with deep concern that the destructive
cycle between Israelis and Palestinians does not stop.
Escalations of violence, such as the one occurring a
week ago, are followed by periods of tense calm, which
is simply an unsustainable and destabilizing scenario
for the Middle East and for the international community.
We continue to mourn new deaths, many of them
children and young people, as well as the deteriorating
security conditions for millions of Palestinians and
Israelis.

We note with concern the serious impact of this
vicious cycle on the prospects of resuming a political
process leading to the two-State solution. The parties
persist in blaming each other and in justifying their
violent actions, thereby increasing mistrust and giving
free reign to hate and extremist speech. We reiterate
our condemnation of any attack against civilians while
acknowledging the right to self-defence, which must
always be guided by the principles of proportionality,
precaution and distinction.

We emphasize the need for an urgent compromise
between Israel and Hamas, which would allow a long-
term ceasefire. We highlight the important efforts being
made to that end by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and Egypt, among other countries with
influence in the region. We believe that an agreement
of that type should serve to improve the tragic
humanitarian conditions in Gaza, bearing in mind that
the intensification of violence is often accompanied by
retaliatory measures that create chaos on the civilian
population.

We also consider it necessary for the Palestinian
Authority to resume effective control over Gaza, with
a View to improving the humanitarian situation and
laying the foundations for a resumption of Palestinian-
Israeli dialogue. We reiterate the need to guarantee
the performance of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in providing essential services. To that end,
we welcome the significant contributions recently made
by countries in the region and by the European Union,
which have made it possible to alleviate the shortfall in
UNRWA's resources for the current year.

The prospects for a political solution are becoming
increasingly unclear. It should be a cause for alarm that
recent opinion polls allude to a significant reduction
in the support of Israeli and Palestinian citizens
for the two-State solution. Persistent and harmful
practices such as settlements, property demolitions
and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967 undermine precisely the two-State solution
and contravene resolution 2334 (2016). Those illegal
practices must cease.

We also consider it imperative to reject hate speech,
anti-Semitism and discrimination in all their forms. In
any society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must
be appreciated as a value, and never as a threat. We face
an extremely turbulent and uncertain situation, which
requires more than ever that leaders on both sides show
concrete restraint, commitment to peace and respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

Those efforts must necessarily be supported by
the international community. The Security Council,
in line with its sensitive responsibility to ensure
international peace and security, cannot and must not
remain silent in the face of the gravity of developments
on the ground. Peru supports all efforts to reverse the
cycle of destruction, address the underlying causes
of this prolonged and bloody conflict and achieve the
resumption of direct negotiations between the parties.

