Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
too very warmly welcome the Special Representative
on his first visit to the Council and are very grateful to
him for a pointed and very interesting briefing, which
sets out the right priorities for the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). The Permanent Representative
of Sweden will shortly be making a statement on behalf
of the European Union, which the United Kingdom
fully endorses, so I will just briefly highlight a few
points.

Both the Special Representative's briefing and the
Secretary-General's report make clear that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) continues to make some very good progress.
On that, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and his staff are to be warmly congratulated.
But we have also heard from him today how difficult
are the circumstances which UNMIK faces. The
Mission cannot bring peace to Kosovo just through
hard work. The people of Kosovo and its leaders must
take up their responsibility for peace, along with all the
difficult decisions that that entails.

In this context, the United Kingdom has
welcomed the start of consultations with Kosovo
political representatives on the development of a legal
framework for provisional institutions for self-
government. This is an important step forward, fully
within the mandate established by resolution 1244
(1999). The establishment of these institutions is a key
stage in the democratization of Kosovo which does not
prejudge its final status. But we were equally
concerned at the withdrawal of the Kosovo Serb
representative from the Working Group on the legal
framework. It is not in the interests of Kosovo's Serbs
for Belgrade to block their participation - and thus,
their representation - in this group. Such tactics set
back hopes of establishing a cooperative relationship
between UNMIK and Belgrade, so we hope that the
decision will be reconsidered.

I was pleased to hear about the high priority that
the Special Representative has given to tackling law
and order, which is a fundamental issue for Kosovo's
future. We will support him fully in his efforts,
including in securing higher numbers and quality of
police and judiciary. The United Kingdom remains
ready to provide additional international judges and
prosecutors, if requested.

The situation in Mitrovica is a particular concern,
and we support UNMIK's efforts to tackle it. The
United Kingdom also looks to Belgrade to use its
influence positively to help resolve that situation.

Another vital issue is the return of refugees.
UNMIK is working with representatives of the Kosovo
Serbs on the practicalities of returns, and to promote
tolerance - which is an essential condition for a safe
and successful returns programme. This needs careful
coordination and a step-by-step approach.

The situation in the wider region, in particular in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
southern Serbia, is a particular concern at the moment.
We condemn the latest acts of violence by extremist
groups in Macedonia, which have no possible
justification in a democratic society. The United
Kingdom also calls on leaders of Albanian
communities in Kosovo publicly to do the same and to
work to restore calm. We support the efforts of the
main Albanian political party to encourage restraint,
and we welcome the positive and helpful statements
that have been made by the Albanian Government. We
also fully support the Macedonian Government, which
is representative of both ethnic communities.

The question of a Security Council mission to
Kosovo has been raised. We would need to be sure that
the potential positive results of such a mission were
clear before a decision was made, and that the timing
and the security considerations were both carefully
considered against the objectives that the Special
Representative has set out for us today.

