I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing and his report (S/2020/345, annex) on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Ms. Irena Hasi¢, Executive Director of Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for her presentation. I would also like to welcome the representatives of the European Union, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. At the outset, I wish to express our support for and solidarity with authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and commend their coordinated efforts to combat the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and mitigate its effects. As underscored in the report, the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrates that acting within the constitutional and legal framework to ensure the full functionality of all institutions and their close coordination is in the common interest of all levels of Government and of all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that such coordination contributes to reconciliation among all the communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation welcomes the appointment by the end of December 2019 of the new State-level Council of Ministers, following the 2018 elections. We note, however, that some cantonal Governments have yet to be appointed. My delegation supports the efforts of the Office of the High Representative, in line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions, and calls on all parties to make concerted efforts to implement the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. With regard to the agenda of five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office High Representative, we encourage all parties to fulfil their commitments with a view to ensuring Bosnia and Herzegovina's full autonomy. While the end of this year will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement, the report of the High Representative underlines that many issues remain unresolved. In this regard, we would like to express our concern over the continued rhetoric of incitement and divisive statements. We call on all political leaders to prioritize the national interest of all the citizens in Bosnia and Herzegovina and pave the way for younger generations to build a better future based on ethnic and cultural unity. In this context, Tunisia expresses its full support for the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge all parties to take the necessary steps to strengthen the rule of law and to ensure the participation of young people and women in various level of the political processes. The month of July 2020 will mark the anniversary if the Srebrenica genocide, and we remain deeply concerned by the continued perpetration of genocide denial and appeal against the glorification and memorialization of war criminals. In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its full support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts to stabilize the country and promote reconciliation among its various ethnic groups, and stands ready to work with partners to support lasting peace and security and sustainable development.
