Mr. Silajdiie (spoke in Arabic): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you on
acceding to the presidency of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)

It was 18 years ago almost to the day that Bosnia
and Herzegovina became a Member of the United
Nations. In these 18 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
travelled the difficult road from being a country that
suffered the worst atrocities and civilian plight in
Europe since the Second World War to being a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and an
active participant in the peacebuilding efforts of the
international community. As a grim reminder of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's recent pest, this July we will
solemnly mark the fifteenth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide.

We have made progress in strengthening and
advancing relations with our neighbouring countries
Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia, contributing in that
way to regional cooperation as one of the major
prerequisites for lasting peace and stability in the
region. Bosnia and Herzegovina has also made
continued progress in meeting conditions for Euro-
Atlantic integration. At their meeting held on 22 and
23 April in Tallinn, NATO foreign ministers granted
the Membership Action Plan to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Accession to the Membership Action
Plan is recognition of the progress achieved and a
strong stimulus for an even greater commitment to
Euro-Atlantic integration. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
also met all the conditions required for visa
liberalization with the European Union.

Even though Bosnia and Herzegovina has
undoubtedly achieved significant progress, I have
come here today to tell the Council that the Dayton
Peace Agreement has not been implemented in its
central parts. I will go into some detail on this subject,
and I ask Council members to bear with me in those
details.

The Dayton Peace Agreement has been
continuously adjusted to the "realities on the ground",
which have resulted from the systematic violations of
the Agreement, and not the other way around. This is
demonstrated by the fact that the report the High
Representative has submitted here today (S/2010/235)
is the thirty-seventh of its kind.

Most of the problems and challenges that Bosnia
and Herzegovina faces today stem from the failure to
implement the central elements of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, particularly its annex 7, which guarantees
the right of all refugees and displaced persons freely to
return to their homes of origin in safety - a right
confirmed by this Council's resolutions. As a result of
the systematic and continuous violations of annex 7,
out of some 46 per cent of non-Serbs who lived in

Republika Srpska - an entity of Bosnia and
6
Herzegovina - before they were either killed or

cleansed, only 8 per cent live there now.

The failure to implement annex 7 has resulted in
the most serious constitutional problem facing Bosnia
and Herzegovina today. The so-called entity voting
mechanism, which was intended as a safeguard for the
legitimate territorial interests of the two entities as
perceived by all three constituent peoples, has morphed
into a mechanism by which one ethnic group from one
entity blocks the State without any input from the other
constituent peoples. And this mechanism continues to
be used as if annex 7 had been fully implemented.

The entity voting mechanism allows only 10 Serb
deputies elected from the Republika Srpska entity -
who constitute only 22 per cent of Parliament's 42
deputies - to block any proposed decision of the
Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Over the past
13 years, these 10 deputies have used entity voting to
block over 260 proposed laws. In contrast, Parliament
enacted less than 150 laws in the same period. This
ethnic monopoly on territorial interests solidifies
ethnic division, renders the State dysfunctional and in
turn perpetuates instability.

Certainly, the views expressed here are not shared
by all political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
the United States Congress, the European Commission,
the European Parliament, the Council of Europe and
the Venice Commission have all rightly identified
entity voting as the main obstacle to the efforts to
transform Bosnia and Herzegovina into a viable and
self-sustainable country, capable of functioning in the
absence of the Office of the High Representative. All
of these institutions have recommended that entity
voting be either eliminated or reformed, and all of their
recommendations have so far been ignored.

The second fundamental problem - the question
of State property - stems from the fact that the rights
given to the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina through
Annex 4, which is the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, have been set aside in favour of political
compromises necessitated by the so-called realities on
the ground.

Under article I of the Dayton Constitution,
Bosnia and Herzegovina was established as the sole
legal successor to the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Socialist Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and, as such, it remains the owner of all
property registered to those predecessors. Similarly,
under the Succession Agreement - the agreement
among all countries of the former Yugoslavia -
Bosnia and Herzegovina is the owner of all former-
Yugoslavia property on its territory. The entities have
no ownership rights and no basis for claims over any
such property.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's ownership of State
property is the right guaranteed by article I of the
Dayton Constitution and was unequivocally confirmed
as such by a final and binding verdict of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina - a court created by
the Office of the High Representative, generously
funded and supported by many Governments and
staffed by international judges and prosecutors from an
even greater number of countries.

It is therefore unacceptable to seek consensus to
implement this existing law or to seek political
compromises with those who block its implementation.
The same mistake was made when the High
Representative imposed entity-based privatization in
1998, with obvious negative consequences for the
return of refugees, the consolidation of the single
economic space and the reintegration of society in
general.

One of the demands made by Slobodan Milosevic
at Dayton was to divide State property between the
entities. He did not achieve that goal, and it is puzzling
that some still insist on that demand. It is true that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has two entities under the
Dayton Peace Agreement, but that Agreement also
preserved the legal continuity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including, of course, ownership of the
State property. That was one of the key balances that
made Dayton possible, and it also served as a primary
cohesive factor between the two entities. State property
is as central to the Dayton Peace Agreement as the
two-entity structure.

The High Representative rightly points out the
continuing challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement
by the Republika Srpska entity authorities. But these
challenges will not be answered by strengthening the
position of the challengers, especially bearing in mind
their open calls for a referendum on secession.
Partitioning State property between the entities will
obviously strengthen those claims and eliminate a
primary cohesive factor. There is obviously a reason
why that was not done in Dayton, and it cannot be
quietly introduced now without far-reaching

consequences. The High Representative's recent letter
to the State Attorney of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
which he called on the State Attorney to stop the
registration of State property, despite the fact that the
State Attorney was merely acting on the basis of
existing law and legal precedents, encountered strong
opposition in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High
Representative did not use the Bonn powers, however.
Thus this letter can only be construed as pressure on
the courts and the judicial system that is outside the
purview of those powers.

The Security Council had a very good reason for
insisting on the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement "in its entirety" (resolution 1031 (1995),
para. 30) when it adopted resolution 1031 (1995). That
is precisely what we advocate. The solutions and the
myriad difficult compromises built into Dayton
ensured that the Agreement would function if and only
if all of its elements were fully implemented. The
non-implementation of one element made the
functioning of many others difficult, if not impossible.

Today, the implementation of Dayton in its
entirety has been practically replaced by the
implementation of the five goals and two conditions.
Some of those goals and conditions have nothing to do
with the Dayton Agreement - the signing of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union, for example. Some of them were
resolved in Dayton including the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina owns most of the State property as the
legal successor of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as former High Representative Lajeak
officially communicated. Some other central elements
of Dayton are conspicuously missing from this list of
five plus two: the right of refugees to return, for
example.

It is not the sheer arbitrariness of this list that is
disconcerting, but the fact that the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, rather than the
implementation of Dayton, has become a goal in and of
itself. And one of the central elements of Dayton has
been marked for change in order to serve that goal,
namely, Bosnia and Herzegovina's ownership of State

property.
This will not lead to Dayton's implementation in
its entirety, but, more likely, to its demise. Dayton was
a difficult compromise, creating the necessity for a
number of its elements to function in unison. The

Office of the High Representative was put in place to
ensure precisely such functioning, not to give
legitimacy to a-la-carte implementation, just so it can
leave. If the mission of the Office of the High
Representative has morphed from full implementation
mode to departure mode, we can only conclude that
this transformation is not in accordance with the clear
language of Council resolution 1031 (1995).

At the same time, we cannot be expected to
provide assistance for that transformation. Not only do
we take our international obligations - including
under Security Council resolutions - seriously. We,
moreover, remain conscious of the dangers facing
Bosnia and Herzegovina if Dayton's central elements
are slowly reduced, modified or completely taken
away. For, if one central element of Dayton is on the
table, so must be all the others.

In conclusion, I Wish to state that article I of the
Dayton Constitution, by which Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not disappear but continues its legal
existence as a State, was the outcome of the patriotic
struggle and sacrifices of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of the assistance of friendly
countries. That is precisely why no one has the
mandate to question the meaning of that article or the
other pillars of the Dayton Peace Agreement. It is our
hope that the Security Council will continue to uphold
the commitments of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
remain the guardian of peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the region.

