Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We would like to
join our colleagues in welcoming the ministers from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
Uganda and the high-level envoy from Rwanda. I think
that this high-level participation reaffirms the
importance of the debate we are having today.

We share the shock and horror that has been
expressed by many of our colleagues over the killing of
personnel of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC); we hope that effective measures will be
taken to resolve this state of affairs.

The advantage of speaking late in the day is that
many of the points that we would have liked to make
have already been made by our colleagues, including
most recently by Ambassador Chowdhury, who said
that we all have to reaffirm the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and that the looting and pillaging of resources are
unacceptable. Thus, at this stage we have only two
additional points to add to the discussion.

The first point we want to make is that the Panel
of Experts, in delivering its report (S/2001/357) to us,
has basically delivered what may be called a hot
potato. It is a hot potato because it has created a
dilemma for the Council, and the dilemma is this: if the
contents of the report and the findings of the Panel are
correct - and I stress the word "it" because we, as a
national delegation, do not have the capacity to verify,
confirm or deny the findings of the report - then the
Council has an obligation to take action in response to
the points made in the report. If they are not correct,
then we have an obligation, as an institution, to clear
the record and ensure that no false or misleading
impressions are left behind.

Frankly, we are not sure what institutional
strength we might have, as the Council, to verify the
claims made in the report; but such verification we
have to do. Clearly, before we make any decisions in
the Council, we have to be sure that they are based on
sound facts and due diligence. I am glad that this is a
point that has been echoed in several of the speeches
that have been made in response to the Panel's
findings.

In some ways, we have bought ourselves some
time. In giving the Panel a three-month extension, we
hope that the Panel will make every effort to respond to
all the points raised today - and I am glad that
members of the Panel have been here listening to the
statements made both by members of the Council and
by the high-level envoys who are here - so that when
the Panel comes back to us in three months" time we
will, we hope, be in a better position to respond
adequately and effectively to the many strong claims
found in the Panel's report.

The second point we want to make here is that, in
looking at the whole issue, we should be aware that in
some ways the issue of natural resources exploitation is
only one of the dimensions of the conflict we are
addressing. It may be useful to refer to a quote from a
recent book by a writer named Michael T. Klare, who
has just published a book entitled Resource Wars: The
New Landscape ofGlobal Conflict.

"Particularly vulnerable are once-colonized
areas where the occupying power destroyed local
institutions, plundered the countryside of its
human and material resources, and departed
without laying the groundwork for effective, self-
financing national governments once a
rebellion has erupted, the fighting often evolves
into resource conflict."

In the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, that legacy of exploitation began more than 100
years ago, when King Leopold II of Belgium colonized
the region as his personal fiefdom and began the
systematic exploitation of its natural wealth. More
recently, the aftermath of the Rwanda genocide in 1994
and the rebellions in 1996 and 1998 have further
complicated the situation and transformed economic
activities and trade networks in the region.

Clearly, we have to address deep-rooted problems
when trying to analyse the situation here. It is doubtful
that we can do so very clearly in such an open setting.
But we are pleased to note that the retreat we will have
this weekend with the Secretary-General will touch on
the issues of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
hope that in that debate we will address openly some of
the more difficult issues, which cannot be addressed in
such an open session as this.

Finally, let me just state for the record that we
support the presidential statement to be issued at the
end of the day.

