Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me first
congratulate the delegation of Sweden on acceding to the
presidency for this month and convey my appreciation
for the briefing given earlier by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov.
I would also like to align our statement with those
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

It is significant that this is the first meeting of this
Security Council since its failure once again last month
(see S/PV.8274) to fulfil its duty towards the Palestinian
people, which is enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Following that sad event, and in response to the
overwhelming outrage of the membership of the United
Nations, the General Assembly adopted the analogous
resolution ES-10/20. Indonesia is very pleased to
acknowledge the enormous support for the Palestinian
issue throughout the international community.

However, as usual, the will of the majority prevails
on paper, but reality shows the opposite. We are very
saddened by the fact that hundreds of Palestinians were
killed and thousands injured, including women and
children, in the latest wave of violence unleashed on
a defenceless civilian population, and once again this
organ has failed those victims. With those events in
view, we will again remind this organ - and we will
do it again and again 4 that the heart of the conflict in
Palestine is the occupation and illegal settlement. It is
therefore a dangerous irony that not only have we failed
to stop the illegal activities of the occupying forces,
but we have also almost completely failed to protect
unarmed civilians from the atrocities. It is distressing,
and indeed shameful, to observe our insensitivity on
that matter, as human lives seem to have no value
because they are the lives of others, rather than our own.
We must understand that the highest form ofjustice is
safety and security.

To that end, we reaffirm that the Palestinian
people, as in the case of all peoples everywhere in the
world, are entitled to the basic right of protection in
accordance with international law. It is the obligation
of the Security Council to protect civilians. In our
view, common humanity demands that we reject the
use of excessive, disproportionate and indiscriminate
violence by the Israeli forces against Palestinian
civilians, including the use of live ammunition against
civilian protesters.

Indonesia calls for an end to the closures and
restrictions imposed by Israel on movement and access
into and out of Gaza. We again draw attention to the
deteriorating conditions in Gaza, including the lack
of basic economic and social needs and poor medical
conditions, that are behind the cycle of conflicts. They
also prepare the ground for idle youth to be recruited
by terrorists or terrorist organizations. We therefore
appeal to Member States to strengthen the efforts to
assist Palestinians, including through multilateral,
regional or bilateral channels. Such assistance can take
any form, including capacity-building.

In that regard, I am pleased to say that Indonesia has
already announced a $2-million commitment to assist
Palestinians in capacity-building programmes, under
the auspices of the Conference on Cooperation among
East Asian Countries for Palestinian Development, in
accordance with the needs of the Palestinian people.

Indonesia reiterates that the situation in Palestine
is unsustainable and unjustifiable. We must bring to an
end the excessive assault on the lives of Palestinians.
Of equal importance, we must avoid conveying the
dangerous impression on the ground that all hope
is lost. We are fully optimistic that the rights of the
Palestinians will be fulfilled. A crucial factor for the
fulfilment of those rights is unity among Palestinians
We have high hope for the continuation and progress
of the domestic reconciliation process. We believe that
the world will not rest until Palestinians enjoy their
inalienable rights.

