Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like to join
others in welcoming the Secretary-General's presence
at this important meeting of the Security Council,
which marks a significant achievement of the United
Nations. I wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Guehenno, for his comprehensive briefing. We are
glad to hear the good news today.

We welcome the successful holding on 30 August
of the elections for the Constituent Assembly in a
democratic and transparent manner. We highly
appreciate the relevant activities of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the Transitional Cabinet, as well as the restraint
and patience exercised by all political parties. We also
note with satisfaction the cooperation shown by the
Government of Indonesia.

We believe it is extremely important to avoid
confrontation within East Timorese society after the
elections. We are of the opinion that this should remain
one of the priorities for UNTAET. It is also essential to
ensure the smooth formation of the Constituent
Assembly and the new Cabinet, and to maintain a
peaceful environment for the debate over the first
constitution of East Timor.

Taking into account the shortage of adequate
qualifications among the East Timorese, UNTAET, in
our View, should pay special attention to providing
relevant assistance to the citizens who were elected to
the Assembly, preparing them for good governance and
for the creation of a new civilized democratic society
in this territory, which has suffered so much and which
has never experienced democracy. The drafting of the
constitution will also require the assistance of the
international community.

We consider that the election of 30 August
became an extraordinary event on the way to the
independence of East Timor. At the same time, we are
aware that a great deal remains to be done to achieve
independence, and it will continue to require
international support and United Nations leadership
and participation. Ukraine is ready to continue to
support the efforts of UNTAET towards the practical
implementation of the aspirations of the people of East
Timor.

Finally, we would like to voice our full support
for the presidential statement on the issue.
