Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Koenigs for his
efforts and his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan
and for introducing the report of the Secretary-General.

It is absolutely clear that during the time that has
elapsed since the overthrow of the Taliban regime, the
country, with the assistance of the international
community, has been able to achieve certain successes
in State-building. The relevant assessments were made
by the participants in the high-level conference on the
Afghan problem, which took place in New York in
September.
At the same time, however, the situation in
Afghanistan remains unstable and, in a number of
areas, tense. This is linked primarily to the continuing
increase in terrorist activity by the Taliban, Al-Qaida
followers and other extremists, as well as to the lack of
a solution to key socio-economic problems.

Of particular concern is the fact that, practically
speaking, extremists are in control of a considerable
number of regions, and parallel structures of power are
being formed in those areas. Moreover, Taliban leaders
continue to spread a radical world view incompatible
with the country's objectives of democratic
development and advocating the continuation of
violence in Afghanistan.

In such circumstances, it is necessary to pursue
the policy of isolating extremist ringleaders, first and
foremost those who are on the sanctions lists of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), while preserving for rank and
file Taliban not tarred with the brush of war crimes the
possibility of returning to peaceful life. It is precisely
that kind of policy which must be followed by the
United Nations Mission in the framework of carrying
out its mandate.

The diversionary activities of extremists and
terrorists are being fuelled by significant financial
sources; the principal source continues to be drug
trafficking. The major surge in the illegal production of
drugs is a source of concern. Anti-drug efforts must be
substantially stepped up, both in and around the
territory of Afghanistan, through the creation of a
comprehensive system comprising an anti-drug and
financial security belt, with a coordinating role played
by the United Nations and with the participation of
neighbouring countries.

More use must be made of the potential of
regional organizations, which have proven their
effectiveness in working in this area, in particular the
Treaty on Collective Security Organization (CSTO)
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). We
believe that, in combating the Afghan drug trade, it
would be useful to establish constructive cooperation
between the CSTO and NATO. Evidence of this is the
success of the NATO-Russia Council's pilot project on
training counter-narcotics police officers for
Afghanistan and countries of Central Asia: this was
based at the Russian training centre at Domodedovo.

The recent Shanghai Cooperation Organization
summit, held in Bishkek, reaffirmed that organization's
broad potential in the implementation of stabilization

programmes in Afghanistan, including in the counter-
terrorism and counter-narcotics areas. The SCO has
significant potential in moving forward peacekeeping
initiatives, as reflected in the adoption of Russia's
proposal to hold a regional conference on Afghanistan
under SCO auspices.

There is still an imperative need for the full
implementation of the objectives set out in the London
agreement. Maintaining the existing ethnic balance in
the organs of State power and administration is also
important for consolidating the foundations of internal
peace in Afghanistan. The search for possible
compromise solutions in this sphere must be carried
out by the Afghans themselves, without external
pressure.

Military measures alone are insufficient to deal
with Afghanistan's problems. At present, there is a
need to focus on the revival, under United Nations
auspices, of the Afghan economy, which has been
virtually destroyed. The Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board is playing a useful role here. Russia
is actively working in this area, participating in the
implementation of a number of projects to rebuild
Afghan energy and transport infrastructure. Another of
our contributions to the stabilization of the country's
economic situation is the agreement on the settlement
of the Afghan debt to Russia, recently signed in
Moscow.

