The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
murder of Iranian diplomats in Afghanistan by Taliban
combatants. This was a crime committed in flagrant
violation of international law and despite repeated
assurances by the Taliban leaders guaranteeing the
safety and security of the personnel of foreign
missions in Mazar-i-Sharif. The killing of Iranian
diplomats by Taliban combatants has seriously
increased tension in the region.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
condolences to the families of the Iranian diplomats
and to the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran. It believes that this criminal act should be fully
investigated with the participation of the United
Nations with a view to prosecuting those responsible.
The Council demands that the Taliban release other
Iranians detained in Afghanistan and ensure their safe
and dignified passage out of Afghanistan without
further delay.

"The Security Council recalls its condemnation
of the murders of members of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan and the personnel of
humanitarian agencies in areas controlled by the
Taliban and demands that these crimes be
investigated and the Taliban ensure the safety and
security of all international personnel.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the escalating military operations in the
Bamyan province and at reports of mass killings of
civilians in northern Afghanistan. It demands that
the Taliban fully respect international humanitarian
law and human rights.

"The Security Council calls upon all concerned
to exercise maximum restraint. It also calls upon the
parties, in particular the Taliban, to take action in
response to the strong concerns expressed by the
international community, to stop fighting and resume
negotiations aimed at achieving a peaceful settlement
of the conflict on the basis of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council.

"The Security Council will keep the situation
under close review and is prepared to consider

urgently further action."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
