Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to welcome
Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Mr. Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo, to the Council. We are pleased to see both of
them. I would also like to welcome Mr. Zannier and to
thank him for his briefing. We appreciate the work that
he and the whole team in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) are doing
towards promoting stability and reconciliation.

We are pleased to see that the overall political
and security situation in Kosovo is generally calm and
that in this reporting period the number of security
incidents has decreased, which reflects a positive trend
over the past two reporting periods. We call on the
Kosovo authorities, in particular local-level institutions
and the Kosovo Police, to make sure that this becomes
the norm and to continue to take all necessary
measures to prevent violent incidents, with a special
emphasis on those affecting minority communities.

Kosovo continues to take further steps in
consolidating its democracy, strengthening its
institutional capacity and opening up its democratic
space through advances made in the decentralization
process. We are pleased to see that administrative
structures in the four new municipalities have been set
up and that elections have taken place in the
municipality of Partesh. This clearly indicates a
commitment by the Kosovo Government to improve
the lives of all communities, while the turnout rate for
the elections in Partesh demonstrates that the local
communities are gradually responding to these efforts.

We continue to believe that full implementation
of the decentralization process will improve
governance, enable all communities to have their
voices heard, make the political process and
administrative structures fully representative and,
ultimately, contribute to overall integration and
reconciliation. We recognize that there are still
problems on the path towards full reconciliation. The
problem posed by the issue of missing persons and the
challenges encountered in the returns process in that
regard cannot be overlooked. Still, as the latest
cooperative effort on missing persons demonstrates,
the essential thing is to have the will to work towards
closure for the people, who have suffered enough,
without politicizing these issues. Then, the results
attained will help start the healing process.

At the same time, we regret that on some other
issues which require direct practical cooperation
between Pristina and Belgrade there has not been much
progress. It is our sincere hope that the coming months
will see an improvement in that respect.

Improving governance and the rule of law in
Kosovo is also essential, as is taking steps to fight
corruption and impunity. We commend the efforts by
the Government of Kosovo towards those ends. In
order to make further progress and consolidate the
gains made so far, it is important for the international
community to remain engaged in Kosovo and to assist
by sharing expertise and resources.

We also remain concerned by the volatile and
sensitive political and security situation in northern
Kosovo. The gradual integration of the north into the
rest of Kosovo is to the clear benefit of all the
communities in that region. The only viable way to
achieve this is through dialogue.

Turkey was one of the first countries to recognize
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State. In that
regard, we welcome the recent issuance of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice that
Kosovo's declaration of independence is in accordance
with international law. It is our sincere hope that that
opinion will open a new phase in relations between
Pristina and Belgrade; both of them are our close
friends and partners. Consequently, we call on both
sides to see that opinion as providing a new window of
opportunity to engage constructively on practical
issues for the benefit of all their peoples and of
regional cooperation.

Lasting peace and stability in the Balkans
remains our ultimate and overriding goal. We are
convinced that the preservation of Kosovo's territorial
integrity and its political and social structure built on
democratic values is essential in attaining that goal. As
an important player in the region, Serbia can do much
for the consolidation of peace, democracy and
prosperity in the Balkans and in the greater European
space. We welcome and support the developing
relations between Serbia and the European Union. The
future of Kosovo also lies in its integration into the
European structures. Accordingly, we believe that this
common European perspective provides a sound basis
for cooperation and dialogue. We welcome the efforts
of the European Union to assist the two countries on
that path.

We agree with the Secretary-General that a
coherent and cooperative approach by the international
actors engaged in Kosovo is essential in exploring the
existing window of opportunity. Therefore, we also
look forward to the continuation of cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
and welcome the agreement reached to that effect. And
while such efforts are under way - as the Secretary-
General also emphasizes in his report (S/2010/401) -
it is imperative that the parties avoid any steps that
could be seen as provocative and derail the dialogue.

