Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this informative meeting on the terrorist
threat to civil aviation.

As was clearly expressed in the concept note
(S/2016/791, annex), the Security Council has focused
its attention on other emerging aspects of international
terrorism, such as its financing and the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. Today, the expansion and
evolution in aviation terrorism requires us to concentrate
our efforts on its prevention and suppression.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for her briefing
and to commend the work of the United Kingdom in
leading the negotiations that allowed us today to adopt
the important resolution 2309 (2016), which Uruguay
also co-sponsored.

In recent years, terrorist acts against civil aviation
have adopted forms that transcend the classic definition
of aviation piracy. In addition to the diversion and
hijacking of aircraft and hostages, we have also seem
other forms of crimes, such as attacks perpetrated
on airport facilities. The Beijing Convention on the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to International
Civil Aviation and its Protocol of2010 criminalize, inter
alia, the use of civil aircraft as weapons to cause deaths,
injuries or harm, the use of dangerous materials to
attack aircraft or other objects, as well as cyberattacks
against air-traffick-control systems or stations.

There is no doubt that terrorists have found civil
aviation a useful target, not solely for destructive
purposes but also for the media exposure they so
eagerly seek. Their acts have huge international impact
due to their lethal and multiple side effects, with
large-scale psychological and social impacts. The high
number of victims of various nationalities in attacks
against aviation can produce, without doubt, the most
devastating and critical aspect, but it is not the only
kind. The economic, trade, political, cultural and
other types of consequences are also myriad. I recall
that millions of persons use aircraft for the purposes
of work, tourism or Visiting their families, and that
States base and promote their relations on the basis of
the numerous exchanges facilitated by that means of
transport.

Attacks on civil aviation are also attacks on closer
relations and dialogue among civilizations, regional
integration and the wide range of exchanges unique to
the era of globalization. As early as 1944, the Chicago
Convention on International Civil Aviation noted in its
preamble that

"the future development of international civil
aviation can greatly help to create and preserve
friendship and understanding among the nations
and peoples of the world, yet its abuse can become
a threat to the general security".

Resolution 2309 (2016), beyond its unobjectionable
purposes, is underpinned by the spirit of cooperation
and solidarity that must prevail to address and defeat
international terrorism.

My country abides by the international legal
instruments that make up the counter-terrorism
framework for global civil aviation. We attach particular
importance to international standards and best practices
in addressing civil aviation security. We are party to the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation,
signed in Chicago on 7 December 1944, and deposited
our ratification instrument on 14 January 1954. By
way of various national laws, Uruguay approved the
Tokyo Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts
Committed on Board Aircraft, of14 September 1963 and
The Hague Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Seizure of Aircraft of 16 December 1970 and adhered
to its Protocol for the suppression of unlawful acts of
violence at airports serving international civil aviation
in February 1988. We also approved the International
Convention against the Taking of Hostages, adopted by
the General Assembly on 17 December 1979, and the
Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for
the Purpose of Detection, signed on 1 March 1991.

At the institutional level, our national civil aviation
and aviation infrastructure directorate is the competent
agency tasked with implementing civil aviation
policy in Uruguay. Through it, we seek to guarantee
the security, regularity and efficiency of aviation
operations and the delivery of services in our national
airspace throughout Uruguay, in accordance with the
relevant international standards and requirements. We
have in place regulations to protect civil aviation against
unlawful acts of interference, based on Uruguay's
aviation regulation 17 on aviation security and relevant
guidelines and directives.

In terms of policy, decree 267/003, of 1 July 2003,
authorized the national aviation security programme,
which is aimed at ensuring the security, regularity and
efficiency of international civil aviation in our country.
It further provides the necessary safeguards against
unlawful acts of interference through regulations,
methods and procedures. The programme aims to
maintain the security of national and foreign carriers
providing services from Uruguay and the security of
civilian airports servicing international flights. It is
geared towards meeting the international standards
and recommendations in annex 17 to the Chicago
Convention on International Civil Aviation, as well as
the relevant provisions on aviation security set out in
annexes 2, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14.

Through decree 267/003, my country also
established the national committee for civil aviation
security, which, inter alia, advises the competent
security authority regarding necessary safety measures
in tackling threats to civil aviation, airports and
services. Furthermore, decree 225/010, of 26 July
2010, establishes the policy framework for proper
coordination of the State's intelligence services.

Uruguay believes that, in order to address the
growing, ever-changing terrorist threat to civil
aviation, it is necessary to implement the safety
standards approved by the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), so as to achieve better
standards, systems and methods linked to the various
operational aspects of civil aviation. However it is
clear that many countries have neither the technical
capacity and knowledge nor financial resources
necessary to implement those standards. It is therefore
important that the countries with such capacity provide
technical assistance, including technology transfer
and programmes, as well as financial resources, to
the countries in need. Accordingly, cooperation is
proven to be the key element for concrete and effective
implementation of best practices and the highest
standards of civil aviation security. Uruguay considers
cooperation as an imperative that must be achieved
at both regional and international levels and further
complemented by efficient coordination under the aegis
of the ICAO.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating our firm
conviction that the changing and growing challenges
generated by terrorist threats to civil aviation can be
successfully addressed only from that perspective. That
is to say, we must reaffirm our indelible commitment to
invest national capacities and resources commensurate
with the requisite of achieving that objective.

