Mr. Matussek (Germany): I would like to join
my colleagues in thanking the Secretary-General for
his timely and valuable report (S/2009/304). I would
also like to thank the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Mufioz, for his very
comprehensive briefing.

Germany fully supports the statement of the
European Union presidency to be made by the
representative of Sweden later and shares its analysis
of peacebuilding challenges.

Today more than ever, the international
community is facing the challenge of supporting post-
conflict countries on their way back to sustainable
peace and stability. It is often said that winning peace
is almost as difficult as winning a war. The fact that
30 per cent of countries fall back into conflict within
five years of a peace agreement underlines the
magnitude of this challenge.

The report provides an excellent road map for the
way ahead with its numerous recommendations. I
would like to focus my statement on three particularly
important challenges.

The first issue at stake is national ownership.
National ownership is key to all peace building efforts.
However, in the immediate aftermath of a conflict,
national ownership cannot be taken for granted. There
are often insufficient national capacities to fully enable
the country to exercise its ownership. Therefore, it is
vital to strengthen the national capacity to re-establish
the institutions of Government, restore the rule of law,
provide basic services and handle other key
peacebuilding needs. We also must support the national
authorities by establishing a prioritized early strategy
to address the causes of each particular conflict.

Secondly, there is need for effective and
accountable senior United Nations leadership on the
ground. This is a prerequisite to corral the international
assistance behind the early national strategy. Thereby
we can provide timely and predictable support. To
achieve a comprehensive and coherent approach we
will need a clear division of labour and responsibilities
among the various actors. In particular, we must strive
for close coordination between the United Nations and
the World Bank.

Finally, there is the timing of international
support. We need to rapidly and efficiently lay the
groundwork for durable peace and sustainable
development. To that end, it is essential for
peacebuilding efforts to start as early as possible after a
conflict, if possible alongside peacekeeping efforts.
The new terms of reference for the Peacebuilding Fund
provide enhanced opportunities for faster and more
flexible funding for peacebuilding activities in the
crucial moments directly after a conflict.

Germany will, in particular, strengthen its
national capacities to contribute to international
peacebuilding missions. We will also support efforts
within the framework of the United Nations and
regional organizations to increase the rapidity and
efficiency of our response to conflicts.

We look forward to a strengthened role for the
Peacebuilding Commission in tackling the challenges
ahead. The comprehensive review in 2010 will provide
a good opportunity to discuss the Peacebuilding
Commission's future role and activities.
