Mr. Stock: It is a privilege to address the Security
Council once again. Let me thank the Lithuanian
presidency for having INTERPOL present as various
senior security officials gather before this body for
the first time in history. At the core of this meeting
is a single goal: breaking the cycle from radicalization
to return - a cycle we saw tragically completed in
the streets of Brussels. A single individual, carrying
lethal skills refined through a year spent in Syria, was
able to leave the conflict and travel freely throughout
South-East Asia and to finally re-enter Europe to strike
against innocents. At the time, no identifiers existed
in INTERPOL databases about the suspect. Indeed,
the incident illustrated how opportunities to disrupt
terrorist mobility must be systematically forged and
promptly seized.

Such was the case last year, when a suspect was
apprehended on his way to Syria, thanks to Belgium's
decision to issue an international alert through
INTERPOL and thanks to the actions taken by Lebanese
officials on the ground, based on that intelligence. In
another instance, a routine fingerprint check against
INTERPOL databases made it possible to identify an
undocumented migrant off the coast of Greece as a
subject wanted for terrorist activity in Chechnya.

Those are just two examples of the many
interdictions achieved by our member countries. No
matter where they occurred, they all embodied the
same two elements of success: first, the secure sharing
of information on foreign fighters across national and
regional borders, through INTERPOL; second, prompt
access to that information at the front lines, by the right
officer, at the right moment. Those two dimensions also
define INTERPOL's support to its member States in the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014).
Terrorism-related operational information has
unique features. Understandably, restriction of its
circulation is the default position of any sovereign
national authority. Therefore, we have actively engaged
member States to forge the trust needed for data to flow
internationally. I have had the honour to personally
open a dialogue on that issue with ministers across
our membership, such as in summits held in Riga,
Washington, DC, and St. Polten, Austria. In parallel,
our counter-terrorism experts regularly hold restricted
operational meetings. There, national agencies can
determine how to best combine the potential of
INTERPOL's tools with their country's legal, tactical
and human rights requirements.

Today, I am glad to confirm that remarkable
progress has been achieved. At the time of the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), fewer than 900
foreign terrorist fighters had been identified through
INTERPOL channels. Today, identifiers of more than
4,000 are available in our databases. No doubt, the call
issued by the Security Council represented a watershed.
Countries are increasingly realizing that not sharing
ultimately represents a risk, while doing so through
INTERPOL offers them an invaluable opportunity.
Whenever information enters INTERPOL's systems,
the source country retains full control over it. Every
single member country shall remain in our databases
and can take a free and sovereign decision as to how
long the data shall remain in the INTERPOL databases
and how its visibility should be managed. Member
States can therefore use INTERPOL channels even to
communicate bilaterally.

The same freedom applies to the type of information
countries choose to exchange. That can include basic
identifiers such as names, aliases, dates of birth and
photos; fingerprints and DNA profiles retrieved from
crime scenes; and information on valid or revoked
travel documents potentially at the disposal of suspects.

INTERPOL diffusions, which let States hand-
pick foreign counterparts accessing their information,
remain the primary channel for sharing information
on foreign terrorist fighters. Their great flexibility has
been proven in the field. In one case, two countries
had issued diffusions to flag the same foreign terrorist
fighter, each of them choosing different geographical
restrictions for access to their records. The information
was thus linked to the same individual within the
database, yet INTERPOL applied a tailored approach
to the visibility of every single piece of data, depending
on the source and its instructions. That model explains
why countries increasingly trust INTERPOL with their
data.

In addition, we are working to turn that information
into added value for member States. Our analysts are
working side by side with seconded national experts,
thanks to the generous support of Belgium, France,
Kuwait, Spain, Switzerland and the United States. All
data received is cross-checked to establish links, which
are communicated to relevant agencies as allowed by
data owners. Routes and transit hubs, as well as tactics,
techniques and procedures used by terrorists, are the
object of dedicated analytical products. As a result, we
are monitoring the threat as it evolves.

We assess that the pressure to restrict foreign
terrorist fighters' mobility is already producing
changes in tactics. In the medium term, we project
so-called broken travel to become a more frequent
feature and facilitation networks to become more
prominent relative to self-organization. That underlines
the importance of implementation of targeted United
Nations sanctions on individuals and entities involved
in such activities, including through the issuance of
INTERPOL Special Notices. Other patterns include
a growing share of recruits with criminal records,
especially from Europe, and the active role played
domestically by some suspects who had been prevented
from travelling abroad. Furthermore, a growing number
of groups - from northern and sub-Saharan Africa
to South-East Asia - are shifting their allegiance to
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Greater risks
exist for cross-pollination among conflict zones beyond
Syria and Iraq and for access to resources for more
sophisticated attacks abroad.

That landscape leads to a single conclusion, and
my first recommendation today. We must share even
more information and share it even better. Intelligence
is crossing borders, but at a much slower pace than
foreign terrorist fighters. Groups active in Syria and
Iraq can rely on recruits from 190 countries. That is
well above the number of States currently populating
INTERPOL's foreign terrorist fighters database, which
explains why a gap still exists between the number of
foreign terrorist fighters we have identified and those
estimated to have reached that conflict zone.

Let me also highlight two other imperatives: first,
ensuring that information flows domestically between
national intelligence agencies and law enforcement; and
secondly, sharing data across regional borders. Several

encouraging initiatives are fostering information
collection regionally. I believe the next, natural step is
for INTERPOL to bring them together as a single, global
platform. That will avoid duplication of efforts and new
missed opportunities. Withholding information within
any region simply puts the rest of the world at risk.
The same applies to any intelligence made available by
member States, but unable to reach the front lines.

As highlighted by the Hague-Marrakech Memorandum
on Good Practices for a More Effective Response to
the Foreign Terrorist Fighter Phenomenon of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, making INTERPOL tools
directly accessible at international borders is a valuable
step in screening travelers and turning knowledge
into action in the field. We are therefore pursuing the
extension of INTERPOL's I-24/7 network to border
posts as an utmost priority in our support to member
States.

Compared with the same period in 2014, in 2015
80 million additional searches were performed globally
against our screening tools, such as INTERPOL's
nominal database; the travel documents associated with
the INTERPOL notices system; and the stolen and lost
travel documents database. Over the past year, more
than 20 countries have shown encouraging increases in
the use of these systems. However, to date systematic
checks at borders are a reality only in select member
States. Underlying this is first and foremost national
capacity. In many cases, domestic authorities show a
willingness to establish protocols and inter-agency
cooperation to extend access. Yet infrastructural gaps
still provide challenges, particularly in high-priority
locations.

This leads to INTERPOL's second recommendation
to this forum. The call for capacity-building made
in resolution 2178 (2014) finds a natural target in
strengthening international borders. Today we have
the opportunity to set a clear-cut, ambitious objective
aimed at filling this urgent gap. Leaving the most
exposed member States alone in their response would
mean undermining both their immediate security and
our chances of success in the long term.

INTERPOL asserts that, with the Council's
leadership and support and by mobilizing member
States' resources, within a reasonable time frame all
major border posts surrounding this conflict zone
will be able to achieve systematic screening capacity.
INTERPOL stands ready to act to turn that vision into
reality, together with our partners.

Among them, of course, are the United Nations
counter-terrorism entities. We remain committed
to working closely with the United Nations and its
Member States to fully implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We will continue our close cooperation with
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
particularly as the Chair of the working group on the
protection of critical infrastructure and co-Chair of
the working group on border management and law
enforcement relating to counter-terrorism.

The same applies to our support to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, including
the provision of INTERPOL experts to assessment
missions and to our ongoing efforts with the 1267
Monitoring Team to strengthen the implementation of
sanctions against individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida.

Finally, we are working to expand our support
by becoming a global, neutral platform to exchange
experience, challenges and solutions across countries
and sectors, acting as a bridge to private industry in
countering terrorist use of the Internet; as a hub for law-
enforcement discussion on issues such as radicalization
and de-radicalization; and as a forum linking police and
the military, including peacekeepers, in understanding
shared threats such as the spreading of improvised
explosive devices.

In closing, let me express how privileged I feel at
the trust that the Security Council has bestowed on
INTERPOL. I would like to place once again the full
array of our expertise, tools and services at the complete
disposal of the international community.

As Member States find themselves once again
united in protecting peace, they will find INTERPOL at
their side, helping them turn their borders into vehicles
for justice and barriers to terror.

