Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and his
tireless efforts on this issue. As he has set out so clearly
this morning, the situation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories continues to be of the utmost
concern for the Security Council. After generations of
hostility, blood and tears and in the wake of years of
pain and wars, we are determined to bring an end to the
bloodshed and sorrow.

But such determination is not new. In fact, those
words I just uttered come from the Washington
Declaration, signed on this very day 23 years ago.

That historic document started a process that created
a historic peace between Israel and Jordan, a peace
that would have been unthinkable decades before. The
symbolism of this particular anniversary should not be
lost on anyone in the Council today. It should remind us
all that the peace we seek is not impossible, no matter
how far off it may appear, no matter the challenges
ahead. It is a reminder of hope that the region desperately
needs. One need look only to the recent abhorrent surge
in violence to see that peace remains far from the minds
of far too many.

I condemn the horrific terrorist attack that claimed
the lives of three Israelis during a Shabbat dinner
last Friday. I deplore the tragic murder of two Israeli
policemen at the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif
the Friday before. A spiral of tension and violence
has swept across the West Bank and Jerusalem in
recent days. I am deeply concerned about the loss of
life, including the deaths of at least four Palestinians,
and deplore the violence that left hundreds injured in
clashes over the weekend. The relevant authorities must
swiftly investigate all of those incidents.

We call on all parties to show restraint and restore
calm. We call on all parties to avoid provocation and,
through engagement, to reach a solution that ensures
the safety and security of the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, one that upholds the status quo. We welcome
the engagement between all parties to find a solution,
and we welcome positive steps taken overnight. This
is the path to de-escalation. This is the path all parties
must take.

In parallel, we must not lose sight ofother challenges
to peace, such as the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Gaza, where the recent cut in electricity
supplies is exacerbating already perilous conditions:
over 30,000 persons displaced and insufficient clean
water to meet the population's needs, with most only
getting water for a few hours every three to five days.
Over 70 per cent of Gazans are now reliant upon the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Middle East. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the United Nations for its efforts
to alleviate the suffering of those in Gaza.

Ultimately, it is the decision of Hamas to choose
violence and to reject the Quartet principles that lies
at the heart of the tragedy in Gaza. There is a way
out: Hamas must renounce violence, recognize Israel
and accept previously signed agreements. That means
an end to the rockets, an end to the violence. Those
countries in the region with influence over Hamas
must encourage them to take these steps. We also need
to see steps towards the restoration of the Palestinian
Authority control of Gaza, and with it the restoration
of effective and accountable governance. If we are to
achieve a solution, Israel must lift restrictions on Gaza
to ease the suffering of ordinary Palestinians. The
United Kingdom stands ready to do all it can to support
those efforts.

Beyond Gaza, we are also concerned at seeing
settlement activity in East Jerusalem increasing,
especially at a time of heightened tension. All
settlements are illegal under international law, and I
strongly condemn plans to build new settlement housing
units. Many of those units are within Palestinian
neighbourhoods, and some involve the demolition of
Palestinian homes. That is unacceptable. I am also
gravely concerned by proposals for the construction of
a further 1,100 units between the West Bank settlements
of Adam and Neve Yaakov. Settlements undermine the
territorial contiguity of the West Bank and make a two-
State solution harder to achieve.
There is a great deal for us to do if we are to
make peace a reality. However, before concluding, let
me return to the Washington Declaration. While the
process that began on 25 July 1994 led to peace between
Israel and Jordan, we should never forget the leadership
shown by the United States, which was so instrumental
in making that peace possible. It is that same leadership
that President Trump and his Administration are now
demonstrating in reinvigorating the Middle East peace
process. That is to be applauded and supported. We call
on the region as a whole, Israelis and Palestinians to
seize the opportunity that such leadership offers, just
as it was seized 23 years ago.

