Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr.
Nambiar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General, and
Under-Secretary-General Egeland for their briefings
this morning.

In recent weeks the Security Council has been
seized of the worsening situation in the Middle East.
The Council convened an emergency public meeting at
the end of last month to consider the situation between
Israel and Palestine. A week ago, in this very Chamber,
we discussed the conflict between Israel and Lebanon.
We are gathered here once again today. However, the
crisis in the Middle East continues to show no sign of
casing. The Gaza Strip in Palestine and the south of
Lebanon and Lebanon's capital, Beirut, are engulfed in
the flames and smoke of war, while some cities in
Israel are still under rocket attack. Once-quiet cities are
now in ruins. The scenes of devastation and of the
misery and suffering of victims are deeply harrowing
and disturbing.

China has made its position clear since the
beginning of the crisis in the Middle East.

First, China is opposed to any action that may
destabilize the Middle East. We condemn the attacks
targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure. We call
upon all parties to the conflict immediately to cease all
hostilities.

Secondly, China urges all the parties concerned to
exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid harming
civilians and to prevent the situation from deteriorating
further.

Thirdly, all the parties concerned should provide
access and extend assistance in the delivery of
international humanitarian relief, as well as ensure the
safety and security of all United Nations personnel and
of relief workers.

Fourthly, the international community should step
up its efforts and diplomatic good offices to create
conditions for a ceasefire. In that regard, we appreciate
the efforts by Secretary-General Annan and his special
team led by Mr. Nambiar. We support the United
Nations continuing to play a significant role in that
regard.

Fifthly, the Security Council should react as soon
as possible to defuse the crisis in the Middle East, in
order to discharge is special responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
20

The Secretary-General's briefing yesterday and
the two briefings we heard this morning were indeed
appalling. Mr. Siniora, Lebanon's Prime Minister,
painfully warned us that Lebanon has been torn to
shreds. Heads of State and Government gathered here
at the United Nations last year and produced the
Outcome document, which calls for the protection of
civilians. Yet today we are witnessing the deaths of
many civilians in bombardments and artillery shelling,
as well as the fleeing of countless refugees from their
homes and livelihoods. We once again strongly appeal
to all the parties concerned to abide strictly by
international humanitarian law, to avoid hurting
innocent civilians and to provide access and assistance
in the delivery of humanitarian aid. We also urge all
the parties concerned to honour their commitments to
ensure the safety, security and freedom of movement of
United Nations personnel.

The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
international community and the people of the Middle
East have closely watched each and every move of the
Security Council since the outbreak of the crisis there,
in the expectation that the Council would promptly
take effective measures to help to defuse the crisis. At
this critical juncture, we hope that the Security Council
will be able to live up to their expectations and react as
soon as possible in order to send a strong message in a
single voice.

The damage to the countries of the Middle East
brought about by this crisis is enormous. Its impact on
the Middle East peace process will also be long-lasting.
The bloody lessons once again demonstrate that hatred
and violence cannot bring about peace. They also again
highlight the importance of reaching a comprehensive
settlement to the crisis in the Middle East. Yesterday,
Secretary-General Annan proposed a package of
elements to resolve the conflict between Israel and
Lebanon, which we believe can serve as a good basis.
China is ready to join others to continue to improve
and develop the proposals in order to create political
conditions for an early end to the current crisis.

