Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Denisov for his presentation today on the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
for the commendable work that has been done by the
CTC under his leadership. Japan has been participating
in the work of the CTC as an interested State. Now, as
a member of the CTC as from this month, we will be
able to engage more actively in the work of the CTC
and enhance our cooperation in order to help the
Committee to meet the expectations of the international
community by upgrading the counter-terrorism efforts
of Member States.

My Government supports the programme of work
for the first quarter of this year, as outlined by
Ambassador Denisov. I would like to make three brief
points regarding the work programme, on which we
believe the CTC should be focusing particular attention
as we move forward.

First, Japan expects the fourth special meeting of
the CTC with international, regional and subregional
organizations, to be held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, at the
end of the month, to be important in developing closer
links between the CTC and those organizations. In this
regard, Japan, and my mission here, would like to
thank the Government of Kazakhstan for offering to
host that important meeting. Japan will participate in
the meeting, including by sending staff from the New
York mission. I wish to stress that, in order for the
CTC to be able to facilitate full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions, enhanced
dialogue and cooperation with the many counter-
terrorism-related organizations at the international,
regional and subregional levels is critically important.

It will also be necessary to avoid duplication of
effort, as well as to close gaps in the work done by
such organizations covering a variety of counter-
terrorism activities. In this connection, we hope that
establishing best practices by the CTC in relation to
dealing with the financing of terrorism, as requested in
Security Council resolution 1566 (2004) and
mentioned in the most recent programme of work, will
be facilitated through the process of consultation with
relevant organizations, some of which will be
participating in the forthcoming special meeting.

My Government considers it appropriate that the
CTC should begin developing best practices, in the
first instance on measures related to the financing of
terrorism in the first instance. But it should then be
able to gradually extend its work on best practices to
other areas of counter-terrorism policy.

My second point has to do with the importance of
the CTC's visits to States, as called for in Security
Council resolution 1566 (2204). While we welcome the
visits programme, we realize that there will be a limit
to the number of States that the CTC and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
will be able to manage to visit. That being the case, the
visits by the CTC and the CTED should not only
concentrate on the States visited, but should also
inform and bring benefits to other States not visited
through the sharing of information and experience
gained, which may be useful in assisting those other
States in their efforts to enhance their counter-terrorism
capacity.

In the same vein, we would expect that, upon
completion of a foreign visit, the CTC would share to
the extent possible, its findings, views and information
on States' needs assessments with interested Member
States.

Thirdly, my Government has high expectations of
the analytical work that will be done by the CTED
when it becomes fully operational during the first
quarter of this year. We hope that the new team of
CTED experts will eventually be able to submit to the
CTC a report in which it will present its comprehensive
analyses and views and, where appropriate, make
recommendations regarding technical assistance
requirements of Member States. It should present its
views regarding the regions and countries with respect
to which the CTC should be intensifying its efforts,
benefiting from consultations with experts from other
relevant organizations.

The international community has suffered untold
tragedy and misery as a result of an ever-increasing
number of acts of terror. The CTC must ensure that the
sacrifices made by the victims of terrorism, however
tragic, are not in vain. It carries a heavy responsibility
in that regard, and the international community expects
it to continue its work with unflinching determination
in pursuit of the best practically attainable measures
aimed at preventing and working towards the
elimination of the scourge of terrorism.

To that end, we expect that the CTC will continue
to cooperate fully with other committees related to
terrorism, such as the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, let me express my appreciation to
Ambassador Denisov for his unfailing strong
leadership and to the experts and secretariat members
of the CTC, as well as to Ambassador Ruperez and the
Directorate staff, for their commendable efforts. My
Government pledges its continued full support for the
work done in this important Committee.

