The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Chad.

1 too thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs and Mr. Ivan
Simonovic', Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, for their briefings.

The report of the commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
(S/2014/276, annex), as many among us have said, reveals
a situation of massive human rights violations in the
country. The report describes systematic, widespread
and flagrant human rights violations that have been and
continue to be perpetrated by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. It concludes that, in many cases, the
violations constitute crimes against humanity.

According to the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, the violations are, by nature, an
inherent part of the country's political system. As a
result, the commission of inquiry recommends urgent
action on the part of the international community to
address the human rights situation in the country,
including referrals to the International Criminal Court.

We too express our deep concern over the gravity
of the situation, if the information reported is proven
factual. Nevertheless, it must be emphasized that the
authorities of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
have rejected the said report and have refused entry to
the commission to carry out its investigation. In view
of the restrictions, it is obvious that the commission's
members did not have the latitude to examine in detail
the data contained in the report, despite having carried
out numerous interviews with North Korean citizens
outside of North Korea. Precisely 480 persons were
interviewed for the report.

For our part, we call for prudence in avoiding the
politicization of human rights matters, particularly
when we know that in the context of some situations
where massive and flagrant violations of human
rights have been and continue to be committed, the
international community has lacked the courage even
to report as much. How does one explain that double
standard? There are many examples showing the errors
committed by the Council in the past in taking hasty
decisions based on certain reports. Moreover, the
report indicates that the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has existed
throughout the country's entire history. If that is the
case, then we would ask why the situation has not
garnered the attention of the international community
during that time.

To conclude, we call on those countries with
influence over the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to assist in clarifying the allegations of massive
human rights Violations in the country and encourage
it to allow the independent investigators free access
to both enter and leave the country. Along those lines,
we also call upon the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to make a commitment to direct and frank
dialogue with the international community and the
countries of the region.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.
