Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
managing the work ofthe Council wisely during August.
I would like also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for her briefing.

On behalf of the Government of Iraq, I thank the
two delegations of the United States of America and
the sisterly Kuwait for organizing the regional visit
of the Security Council mission to cities in Kuwait
and Baghdad. The first visit of its kind, it signalled
the continued strong commitment of the international
community to support the stability, prosperity,
sovereignty, independence and security of Iraq. It
marked a new phase on the country's journey and offered
reassurance of the good intentions of Iraq and Kuwait
to build good neighbourly relations and resolve crises
in the region through political and diplomatic means.

We also thank Special Representative Hennis-
Plasschaert for the efforts she made along with her team
to guarantee that the visit went smoothly. We thank
her as well for her close cooperation with the Iraqi
authorities while implementing her mandate as per
resolution 2470 (2019) and providing Iraq and Kuwait
with the support to implement resolution 2107 (2013).

What the Iraqi cities are witnessing today
demonstrates that Iraqis share a common objective,
namely, a determination to live a life of freedom
and dignity and to have a Government that serves its
citizens and provides them with services. Given the
circumstances and the potential available, there is great
hope that my country's Government will manage to
achieve the objectives of the governmental programme
for the period 2018 to 2022, the implementation of
which requires structural economic reforms with a
view to harnessing Iraq's resources and putting them in
the service of the Iraqi people.

The most important challenges facing Iraq today
include bringing about economic reform, supporting the
status and rights of women, protecting and bolstering
human rights and eradicating unemployment. The
biggest challenges lie in the areas of security and social
development. However, all of those reforms require a
stable economic environment. Iraq is a country that
deserves to live in safety and to have an opportunity to
fulfil the aspirations of its people, especially after the
war it has waged against terrorism. The Government of
Iraq was recently able to take the following measures.

The Cabinet has now been formed with the
appointment of the Ministers of Defence, the Interior
and Justice by the Council of Representatives, which
chooses ministers with a high degree ofprofessionalism
and experience. They took their constitutional oath on
24 June. That was the result of considerable integration
and coordination among the three presidencies.

Iraq in general, and the governorates that have been
liberated from Da'esh in particular, has experienced
improved security and stability. All the roads in
Baghdad that had been closed since 2003 have been
reopened. In addition, on 1 July, the Prime Minister
issued Executive Order 237, which restructures the
popular mobilization forces, regulates their military
operations and introduces terms of reference with the
aim of increasing stability and the State's authority and
guaranteeing that weapons are strictly in State hands.
In that context, the volunteer factions have stated
their intention to abide by the Executive Order and
to implement all the orders issued by the commander
of the armed forces. All factions that operate outside
the law and use the banner of the popular mobilization
forces for illegal purposes will be held accountable.

The Supreme Council for Combating corruption
has introduced a national anti-corruption strategy in
Iraq, including establishing a national integrity index,
with the participation of the various Iraqi components
and civil society organizations, as well as putting in
place effective implementable mechanisms.

Furthermore, there has been a breakthrough in the
relationship between the federal Government and the
Kurdish Regional Government, which are now working
to resolve pending issues via constitutional means.
More than one round of talks has taken place between
representatives of both Governments, in Baghdad and in
Erbil, at which both sides agreed on a raft of economic,
agricultural and financial measures, foremost of which
is the standardization of administrative procedures at
all Iraqi border crossings, including those located in
the province of Kurdistan, and the resumption of oil
exports from Kirkuk to the Turkish port of Ceyhan.

Iraq submitted its first report under the voluntary
national review procedure at the High-level Political
Forum held in New York last month. It summarizes
Iraq's experience in implementing the 2030 Agenda
and the Sustainable Development Goals. Moreover,
the Government of Iraq, with support from partners,
has devised new strategies and plans to deal with the
challenges of transitioning from a crisis situation to an
economy conducive to sustainable development. It has
also devised a national development plan and a poverty
reduction strategy that targets the most vulnerable
segments of society, especially in the most remote
and disadvantaged areas, as well as a reconstruction
and development plan for the period 2018 to 2027.
The Government also took part in designing a Vision
2030 plan, in line with the Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its 17 Goals.

The defeat of the terrorist organization Da'esh
was without doubt a huge challenge and an important
victory for the Iraqi armed forces, including the army,
the police, the Peshmerga and the popular mobilization
forces, which fought side by side to rid Iraq of the
filth of this criminal organization. In that regard, we
are thankful for the assistance of our international
coalition allies led by the United States. Our task now
is to intensify our efforts to tackle the legacy of this
terrorist organization and establish a work plan to
care for the children it recruited and children born as
a result of rape, as well as to deal with foreign terrorist
fighters, the wives, widows and children of terrorists
and women and victims survivors of rape committed
by terrorists. Furthermore, we must step up efforts to
achieve stability in the liberated areas once occupied
by Da'esh terrorists. We must also address the tragedy
of internally displaced persons.

To that end, we must tackle the security and human
rights concerns linked to the return ofterrorist elements
and their families to Iraq. However, we must underscore
that this problem is not merely an Iraqi one; rather, it

is a problem that affects everyone in the region and
beyond. If this issue is mismanaged, we risk creating
fertile ground for a new generation of terrorists. We
must therefore eliminate the danger inherent in the
movement of hundreds of Da'esh women able to attract
and recruit new fighters. Da'esh has been among the
most successful terrorist organizations in relying on
women within its ranks to carry out operations and
spread its extremist ideology. The presence of female
elements in Iraqi camps and prisons is a great burden
that far exceeds the ability of the Iraqi Government to
address the problem. The international community,
international organizations and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees therefore
have a responsibility in that regard. It is not simply a
matter of providing medical assistance, food and water,
but also of maintaining security and limiting the spread
of the extremist ideology of Da'esh.

In that connection, we ask the international
community to fully respect Iraq's sovereignty and
jurisdiction and to support its efforts to hold those
terrorists accountable and bring them to justice, in
accordance with relevant local laws, so as to curb
the return and the spread of terrorist activity. Iraqi
judicial institutions will apply due process with full
transparency and professionalism with regard to those
indicted or convicted ofbelonging to Da'esh, whether in
the investigation stage or during trials and sentencing.
Iraqi judicial institutions provide foreign detainees and
convicted persons with the necessary assistance in order
to meet with their embassies in Iraq. In that regard, we
call on the Governments of the countries concerned to
develop a comprehensive response to the repatriation of
their citizens, try them in national courts and work with
the relevant bodies for the return children associated
with the remnants of Da'esh.

Iraqi forces tasked with liberating cities referred
terrorists and their families to specialized investigative
bodies to determine their citizenship status and
identification numbers in order to complete their
investigation files - this after they had destroyed all
of their identification documents prior to entering Iraq.
That would then allow them to stand before Iraqi courts
to be tried transparently and fairly and in accordance
with Iraqi laws in effect that criminalize and punish
persons who have committed terrorist crimes, including
foreign residents law No. 118 of 1978, counter-terrorism
law No. 13 of 2005 and law No. 111 of 1969 of the
amended Iraqi penal code.

The children ofDa'esh terrorist families are divided
into two categories. The first, minors, are subject to the
laws in effect if they are proven to have belonged to
a terrorist group or participated in its activities. After
sentencing, they are sent to rehabilitation homes and
schools. Children below the age of criminal liability
make up the second category. After verification of their
citizenship status, those children are handed over to the
embassies of their countries to be repatriated.

Given its sensitive nature, this work requires
accuracy. It also requires exhaustive examination into
the status and citizenship of the families and children
of Da'esh, followed by determination of their specific
legal status. They are then referred to the specialized
Iraqi bodies that work in coordination with the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, which acts as the liaison between
the specialized Iraqi bodies and foreign embassies,
both within and outside Iraq.

As a result of those efforts, Iraq has returned
a number of children to their countries of origin,
including Russia, Tajikistan, Belarus, Georgia, Finland,
Ukraine and Turkey. That number totalled 473 children
as of 10 July. Moreover, Iraq urges other embassies,
in or outside Iraq, to take in their citizens, including
women and minors, who have served their sentences or
are under the age of criminal liability.

As for offering support to internally displaced
persons, the Ministry for Migration and Displaced
Persons has issued repatriation grants to displaced
persons from liberated areas and continues to implement
social reconciliation measures in the areas where they
reside. Moreover, campaigns to rebuild liberated cities
destroyed by the Da'esh terrorist organization continue
in earnest.

My Government is working to send a clear message
to our neighbouring countries that Iraq's stability
and prosperity is in our common interests. The time
has come for the region to have a unified vision for
achieving economic prosperity. Iraq's chances of
success are real but are in jeopardy. As a result, Iraq
cannot tolerate more tension or escalation in the region.
The Government of my country is keen to fully develop
relations with its Arab neighbours.

We also attach importance to our relationship with
Iran, with which we share a border of 1,400 kilometres.
We enjoy many economic and social ties to Iran, and
it is in our national interest to enhance our ties with it.

The same is true of our neighbour Turkey, to
the north. Undoubtedly, Turkey is important from
a geopolitical and economic perspective, despite
its continuous violations of Iraqi territories. My
Government has issued approximately 54 protest
memorandums demanding the immediate halt of Turkish
shelling of Iraqi territories and calling for respect for
the sovereignty of Iraq. In that regard, I would like
to confirm that my country is keen on defending the
independence and sovereignty of Iraq. In return, Iraq's
territories will not be used to launch any threat to the
safety and security of neighbouring countries.

I would like to thank the States members of the
Tripartite Commission for providing us with satellite
imagery, which has acquired vital importance. In
addition, the efforts of the Iraqi Ministry of Defence,
witness testimony, analysis of the images provided by
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and GPS coordinates all helped to determine the sites
provided by Kuwait and to uncover 46 unidentified
remains in Samawah. After conducting the necessary
DNA tests on those remains, it was proven that 32
of them belonged to missing Kuwaitis. The Iraqi
Government handed over the remains to Kuwait on
8 August. Moreover, I would like to thank the United
Nations, which provided the Committee with modern
technology such as underground radar to help both the
Iraqi and Kuwaiti sides uncover potential burial sites,
which we consider a positive step to resolving this
important humanitarian issue.

In addition, approximately 162,000 books were
found, which belonged to the University of Kuwait
and the National Library of the State of Kuwait. The
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research
of Iraq, in cooperation with its Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, collected those books from various markets,
bookshops and citizens. The Ministry for Foreign
Affairs supervised the packing and transport of 42,000
of the books and dispatched them yesterday on board
an Iraqi Air Force C-130 military aircraft. They were
delivered to the Kuwaiti side today, 28 August, in the
presence of the Undersecretary of the Iraqi Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hazzim Al-Youssifi, Head of
the Archives Committee charged with searching for
Kuwaiti property and archives, and a representative
of the United Nations. The rest of the books will be
returned in instalments in the near future so that we can
finally conclude our consideration of this issue.

As for Iraqi missing persons, we are carefully
following all important related developments and are
trying to determine the burial locations of Iraqi soldiers
in Kuwait. The uncovering of their remains would help
alleviate the suffering of the families of Iraqi soldiers
missing since the 1991 Gulf War. In that connection,
we appreciate the efforts of the three members of the
Committee in analysing satellite imagery in order
to arrive at a highly accurate location of the burial
sites. We also thank the ICRC for providing us with
a complete list of coordinates pertaining to the burial
sites, which will be cross-referenced with the satellite's
coordinates. We look forward to uncovering the fate of
the remains of those soldiers as soon as possible, while
the necessary measures taken and the outcome will be
included in the Secretary-General's report on the status

of the implementation of resolution 2107 (2013).

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country's
commitment to building a prosperous Iraq, in
coordination and cooperation with the international
community, with a view to eliminating the ravages of
terrorism and expediting the reconstruction process so
as to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and
implement the Government programme decisions in
accordance with national laws in effect.

