Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for Syria, Mr. Steffan de Mistura, for his tireless
efforts in the service of pursuing peace in Syria.

I should also like to acknowledge the spirit of
responsibility shown by the Syrian actors during the
fifth round of discussions, held in Geneva from 23 to
31 March.

The fact that such discussions have been held as
planned, without interruption or abandonment, reflects
the commitment and determination of participants
to recognize the complexity of such substantive
agenda items, such as a political transition, territorial
integrity, the fight against terrorism and measures to
restore confidence, as well as governance, security and
constitutional reform.

The Senegalese delegation expresses the hope that
this spirit of sacrifice and persistence, which is really
necessary, must continue to impel all parties so that a
definitive solution can be reached to the crisis Syrian
conflict, which has lasted too long. We reiterate our
hope that the cessation of hostilities throughout the
Syrian territory will be sustained and consolidated,
notably in the framework of the Trilateral Ceasefire
Monitoring Mechanism in Astana. We welcome the
efforts of the Mechanism's princapl actors: the Russian
Federation, Turkey and Iran. It is important that this
truce translate into a continued improvement of the
humanitarian situation on the ground. My delegation
believes that the Astana process should reinforce the
political process.

My delegation welcomes the conference on Syria,
convened in Brussels on 4 and 5 April at the intiative
of the European Union and in collaboration with the
United Nations, which registered pledges of $6 billion
for 2017 to help tackle the daunting challenges facing
Syria, where in six years of conflict the level of
development has declined by four decades.

We have said on many occasions that the crisis
currently faced by Syria is a multidimensional one; it
has political, humanitarian and security aspects, and
touches on the issue of non-proliferation. With respect
to the security aspect, the fight against terrorism - in
particular against Da'esh and the former Al-Nusrah
Front - is an absolute priority for us. That is why
we reiterate the need to implement a comprehensive
strategy that respects international humanitarian law
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

With respect to non-proliferation, I unreservedly
condemn - as I did last week - the recent use of
chemicals as weapons in Syria. In the same vein,
Senegal once again encourages the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, through its Fact-
finding Mission, to gather and study, with all the required
professionalism, data from all available sources so as to
attribute responsibility for the chemical weapons attack
that we saw in Khan Shaykhun. We are hopeful that our
Council will find itself in the midst of this essential
question of accountability, following this vile act,
which affected many civilians - including children.

My delegation, as it was compelled to do here five
days ago (see S/PV.7915), cannot stress enough the
imperative of a peaceful settlement of the dispute in
order to face the challenges that have been repeatedly
referred to, including chemicals weapons, the
proliferation of terrorist groups and, even more serious,
an unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe. Senegal
is convinced that only a negotiated political solution,
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015), will enable us to reach a
lasting solution to this conflict. We therefore place great
hope in the meeting between the Secretary of State of
the United States of America, Mr. Tillerson, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Lavrov.

Senegal reiterates its calls on the Security Council,
the most influential countries, and in particular the
International Syria Support Group and its co-presidents,
the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, to continue to provide the necessary support
to the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. De Mistura.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
fullest support for Mr. De Mistura's tireless efforts,
especially since he has just confirmed his intention to
convene the next round of talks in May.

