Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
join others in welcoming Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda
back to the Security Council. I thank her for her
comprehensive briefing and report, as well as for her
Office's continued work in the fight against impunity.
Let me once again reiterate our strong support for the
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor, whose call for
the full backing ofthe Security Council and all Member
States must be heeded.

The challenges that the Office of the Prosecutor
faces in relation to the Darfur situation and the support
needed to overcome them are known to all of us. It is
time for action to resolve them. Ultimately, it is the
survivors and victims in Darfur who pay the highest
price when justice and accountability are not ensured.
It is vital that the Security Council follow through on
its decisions so that neither the Council's authority nor
the functioning of the Court is undermined. We share
the Prosecutor's view that the success of the referral
of the Darfur situation to the Office of the Prosecutor
continues to depend heavily upon the cooperation of
States, in particular States parties to the Rome Statute
and members of the Council.

Sweden is yet again disappointed that there
have been few developments since the last briefing
(S/PV.7963) that would allow the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to pursue its investigations further. All
suspects remain at large. We reiterate our call on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the
ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), and to
fulfil its obligations to arrest and surrender individuals
subject to arrest warrants. Further steps are also needed
on the part of the Government of the Sudan to ensure
justice for the women, men and children who suffered
horrendous crimes during the conflict in Darfur.

It is a matter of concern that President Al-Bashir
has been able to continue to travel internationally,
including to States parties to the Rome Statute. We
are also deeply concerned about the ability of other
suspects in the Darfur situation, including Mr. Hussein
and Mr. Harun, to travel. We echo the declaration
issued on 14 November by the European Union and
its member States, which expressed regret regarding
President Al-Bashir's recent visit to Uganda, a State
party to the Rome Statute. We also note yesterday's
finding of the Pre-Trial Chamber of the Court regarding
Jordan. We urge States parties and other Member States
to cooperate fully with the Court and to arrest and
surrender suspects. As stipulated in the Rome Statute
and, as the Court has concluded, the official capacity
of a person shall not bar the Court from exercising its
jurisdiction over such a person.

Like others, we continue to raise the issue of
non-cooperation with the relevant Governments. In
order for the ICC to fulfil its important mandate, and
without its own enforcement mechanism, the Court
relies on the cooperation of States, including for the
implementation of arrest warrants. As we said when we
last met on this item, the Council should approach cases
of non-cooperation in a structured manner and - as a
minimum - discuss which tools it has, if any, for an
appropriate response.

Sweden recognizes the ongoing debate on the ICC
among African countries. The ICC was not set up to
be a court for Africa. The Rome Statute for the ICC
is based upon global values and needs more States
parties, not fewer. We stand ready to listen to the
concerns of States parties and discuss the challenges
experienced in their relations with the ICC. In that
regard, as the Prosecutor has said, we urge any State
party that identifies a challenge precluding it from fully
cooperating with the ICC under the Statute to consult
with the Court in a timely manner so as to resolve
the matter. We also believe that the Council should
stand ready to meet with the Open-ended Ministerial
Committee of Ministers for Foreign Affairs on the ICC,
established by the African Union.

We note in the report that the number of reported
cases of rape in Darfur has declined, but the issue of
sexual and gender-based violence remains a serious
problem. A holistic approach for sustaining peace and
addressing the root causes of instability, including
building effective rule-of-law institutions, is essential
as we address remaining challenges. Impunity and the
lack of accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of
international human rights law can never be accepted.
We must give the Court all our support as it carries out
its important work.

