Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me begin by
emphasizing the critical role that the United Nations
plays under the leadership of the Secretary-General,
his Personal Envoy and the Head of the Mission in
maintaining peace and security, as well as in promoting
mutual trust and achieving a political solution in
Western Sahara.

On the ground, the personnel of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) carry out important tasks mandated by
the Council. MINURSO has managed to continue its
operations with a limited capacity after the departure
of 73 of its personnel on 20 March. That continuity has
been possible solely owing to the dedicated efforts of
the remaining personnel of MINURSO, whom I wish
to commend.

On 24 March, members of the Security Council
expressed serious concerns about the developments
related to Western Sahara and therefore stressed
the importance of addressing the situation, so that
MINURSO might resume its full capacity to carry out its
mandate. Peacekeeping operations and other missions
are deployed by the Council to carry out critical tasks
around the world to maintain international peace and
security. Given that the mandate of MINURSO was due
to expire on 30 April, many Member States, including
Japan, made strenuous efforts to address the situation.
It was a matter of priority for the Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission by tomorrow. At the same time,
it was also necessary to ensure that MINURSO returns
to full functionality as a matter of urgency.

Japan voted in favour of resolution 2285 (2016)
because it provides the answer to those priorities.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the
penholder, the United States, for its efforts in preparing
the draft resolution. A return to full functionality
should, in our View, include on-site political reporting
capabilities, so that MINURSO will be able to fully
carry out its mandate contained in the relevant Council
resolution, including the one we have just adopted.

In the resolution, the Council requests to be
briefed within 90 days, but that does not mean that
we should wait 90 days to take action. Rather, in
the light of the urgency, efforts should be made to
recover full functionality in an expeditious manner. It
is the responsibility of the Council to ensure that its
resolutions, including this one, are fully implemented.
We look to the Kingdom of Morocco, an important
member of the international community, to continue its
utmost efforts to improve the situation in cooperation
with the United Nations. Japan stands ready to assist
such efforts in any way it can.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need for
lasting adherence to the ceasefire and the importance
of the continuation of negotiations towards a long
overdue political solution that will provide for the self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara.

