Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): Let me join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the responsibilities of running
the Security Council this month.

We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of Ghana on
behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).

The delegation of the Republic of Sierra Leone
wishes to express its profound appreciation to the
Council for its assessment mission to West Africa,
whose report (S/2004/525) we are here to discuss. The
mission is yet another concrete indication of the
Council's commitment to resolving the conflicts in the
West African subregion. We salute members of the
mission for the visit and the impressively prepared
report. My delegation is convinced that sustainable
peace and political stability can return to that crisis-
ridden region if the recommendations of the mission
are implemented. We therefore urge all stakeholders,
including the United Nations and other members of the
international community, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Governments and other
parties to the conflicts in the countries in the region to
cooperate in the implementation of the
recommendations.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to remind the Council about two depressing facts
concerning the conflicts in the West African subregion,

careful consideration of which may provide added
momentum to the long and tedious search for peace.

First, for about 15 years now, most of the time
and resources of ECOWAS have been concentrated on
conflicts in the region, almost completely diverting the
attention of the organization from its original objective
of regional economic integration and development.
Thus, those conflicts have retarded national as well as
regional development initiatives.

The second fact I wish to recall is that it has not
been easy even for countries in the region that have not
been in conflict to pursue the goals of international
development declarations, such as the Millennium
Development Goals and the goals of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). Do we
sincerely expect those already poor countries that are in
conflict, or transiting from conflict to peace, where
even the basic social services are a luxury, to fulfil
their obligations under such declarations? Special
assistance to those countries to help them to catch up is
the only answer to their predicament.

I have reminded the Council about those two
intimately related issues to underscore the need to take
a fresh and hard look at peacekeeping operations and
peace processes, as suggested in the report. What my
delegation is advocating is a strategy of an integrated
approach to the peace effort that not only conducts
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
then disappears from the conflict scene, but, as part of
the peace process, also addresses the issues of the
conflict and ensures a smooth transition from hostility
to sustainable peace and development.

As we all know, disarmament and demobilization
can be a simple and straightforward exercise if the
parties to a conflict are committed to resolving it.
Reintegration is a much more complicated, expensive
and multifaceted process, around which the issue of
post-conflict transition revolves. In Sierra Leone, for
example, the two elections held in 2002 -
parliamentary and presidential - and the local-
government elections held in May this year, constituted
major progress in the political reintegration process.
But by far the most critical aspect of reintegration,
which can be called survival or economic reintegration,
is yet to be fully accomplished because of the poor
state of the economy. Education, skills and
employment opportunities are the tools for that aspect
of reintegration. Ignoring them can amount to leaving a

vacuum in the peace process that can stimulate
regeneration of the conflict. We therefore strongly
support the mission's view that the link between
security and sustainable development should be
strengthened.

This delegation particularly welcomes the
recommendation on a regional approach to the problem
and on the need for cooperation and positive relations
between neighbouring States. We in Sierra Leone, for
example, drawing from the experience of our conflict,
will never feel safe and secure until our neighbours
have peace and no one undermines the stability of the
others. We believe, however, that the peace effort in the
region should ensure that armed conflict does not
spread further. We realize that this is not easy, but
avoiding it will not in the long term be in the best
interest of peace, stability and development in the
region.

The report contains a good account of the major
concerns of Sierra Leone, including support for
strengthening the capability of the security machinery,
the Special Court, reviving the shattered economy to
resume active development and to provide employment
opportunities, and rebuilding institutions to reinforce
Government authority - all as part of the post-conflict
recovery process. My delegation merely wishes to
re-echo our President's appeal for support for the
national recovery programme, which in fact has
provision for addressing many of the issues raised in
the report. These are the foundation and building
blocks of durable peace, stability and development.
They are the tools that destroy the gear that can reverse
our drive through transition. We need the Council's
support for these tools.

Let me remind members of the Council that the
experience of Sierra Leone has been extraordinary, as
has been their response. But the fascinating story of
their positive response will be incomplete without
sustained support for the transition process. I therefore
repeat my President's appeal to the Security Council
and the international community to remain an active
part of this critical post-conflict transition phase.

