Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to join those who preceded me in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
convinced that you will guide our work capably and
wisely. We also wish to thank you and the Security
Council for your prompt response to our call for a
meeting.

We commend your predecessor, the Ambassador
of Japan, who skilfully and distinctively presided over
the Council's work last month.
The delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
associates itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Qatar on behalf of the League of
Arab States, Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Through the carnage it is wreaking in the Gaza
Strip, Israel has again called attention to its bloody
nature and inhuman approach. Yesterday, it carried out
yet another massacre in Beit Hanoun, killing tens of
civilians, most of whom were women and children.
Israeli occupation forces fired 11 shells on 6 houses
from tanks surrounding the city, from which they had
withdrawn the day before yesterday. Those shells
struck people while they slept, tearing them apart and
mixing their blood with Palestinian soil.

That barbaric Israeli attack cannot be justified as
self-defence: it was unjustified revenge. Nowhere in
the Charter of the United Nations is there a reference to
revenge. This is an act of aggression that cannot be
justified by international law. Even those few who have
justified revenge as an act of deterrence have qualified
that position by saying that revenge must be
proportionate to the initial crime.

The excessive and indiscriminate use of Israeli
military power and the inhuman practices of the
occupation forces fall under the category of repression
and collective punishment against the Palestinian
people, whose land is occupied and whose rights are
usurped. Israel's barbaric attacks against Palestinian
civilians, including the killing of women, children and
the elderly, run counter to all international laws and
norms and are clear and flagrant violations of
international law and the relevant provisions of the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

Israel has created an atmosphere of death inside
the occupied Palestinian territory. That has led many to
equate the value of life and death, given that there are
no prospects for the future to give Palestinians hope or
an alternative to the peace process that has been
aborted by successive Israeli Governments. Those with
influence on the peace process have no interest in
intervening to put an end to the bloodshed in occupied
Palestinian territories. That bloodshed will lead to
more violence, because all hope has disappeared from
the lives of Palestinians. They have lost their
livelihood and human dignity.

All of that will only lead to generations filled
with hate, desperation and the desire to avenge. Israel
will be responsible for that. Inaction by the
international community and the fact that the Security
Council has ignored the repeated massacres perpetrated
by Israel and allowed acts of aggression and

occupation to replace justice and rule of law, only
serves to encourage Israel to deny the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to
establish an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia strongly condemns
the massacre perpetrated yesterday by Israel in Beit
Hanoun, as well as others throughout occupied
Palestine, which have led to the deaths and injury of
dozens of women, children and other innocent
civilians. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its
call on the international community to act quickly to
put an end to acts of aggression against innocent
Palestinians, as well as to revive the peace process in
conformity with the Arab peace initiative and
internationally binding resolutions. The Kingdom
warns of the grave consequences that could result from
assaults on the peace process. We also underscore the
fact that it is necessary to urgently convene an
international conference that includes all parties with a
view to ending such horrible massacres and providing
protection to the Palestinian people.

