Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes
Ambassador Huang Xia to his first briefing to the
Council as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to the Great Lakes Region. I assure him of Indonesia's
full support in his work.

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
report of 1 October 2019 (S/2019/783). The Great
Lakes region has witnessed positive developments and
initiatives recently. We must seize the momentum to
make progress in overcoming challenges to peace and
sustainable development. I should like to make several
pertinent points.

First, the root causes of the conflict should be
addressed. The Great Lakes region has been marred
by conflict, mistrust and humanitarian difficulties for
years. We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
over the persistent challenges to human rights in the
region. Peace and stability remain fragile, especially
in the light of threats posed by armed groups, the
illicit exploitation of and trade in natural resources
and the outbreak of Ebola in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. A lack of development also causes the
instability. Yet, hope remains.

WewelcomestepstakenbyPresidentFe'lixTshilombo
Tshisekedi to strengthen relations with neighbouring
countries, leading to the confidence-building meeting
held in Kinshasa. I also echo the Secretary-General
in recognizing the importance of a comprehensive
approach to addressing the root causes of conflict in the
region. Trust is important and partnership is key. The
international community should unite and stand behind
African efforts in their pursuit of peace and security.

Secondly, relief for the humanitarian situation must
be prioritized. There are 548,153 refugees and asylum-
seekers and 4.8 million internally persons in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Although 75,000
Burundians have returned to their country, the total of
remaining Burundian refugees in the region exceeds
400,000. Furthermore, cases of communicable diseases
raise concerns and require an urgent international
humanitarian response. However, funding for
humanitarian responses in the region in 2018 was less
than 50 per cent. We, as the international community,
must do more. This cannot go on much longer. We
should strengthen our support to the region, including
through improved humanitarian assistance.

Thirdly, the work of regional organizations
and United Nations missions in the region should
be supported by the Council. We recognize the
role of regional and subregional organizations. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community and the United Nations
are the major guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed by 13 countries
in the region. We commend the ICGLR for its efforts
to ensure that all countries of the region adhere to
the cause of peace, including by preventing the illicit
movement of natural resources.

We also recognize that United Nations peacekeepers
are playing their role in winning the hearts and minds
of the local population to support the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process. We are
proudthatIndonesianpeacekeepersinthe UnitedNations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo have been successful in assisting
the DDR process by engaging with local communities.
The support of the international community through
regional and subregional organizations will enable the
Government to reintegrate combatants into society,
thereby preventing relapse.

In conclusion, addressing the complex peace and
security challenges in the region is not easy. For our
part, Indonesia will remain committed as a true partner
of Africa in maintaining peace and security.

