Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish
to thank Minister Lavrov, Minister Rodriguez
Gomez, Minister McCully, Minister Aman, Minister
Linkevicius and Minister Wali for participating in this
debate. Above all, I thank Minister Wang Yi for coming
to the United Nations to preside over this important
discussion.

The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
viewedthe purposes and principles of the United Nations
as "a test for the effectiveness of the Organization".
It is a testament to their enduring relevance that, as
we gather in the Council nearly 70 years later, the
same purposes and principles continue to guide the
Organization and provide that crucial measure of our
collective effectiveness.

As many here know, the very first words of the
Preamble to the Charter are "We the peoples of the
United Nations". It is all too easy in our debates in the
Council and across the United Nations to lose sight of
the people whose rights and welfare are dramatically
affected by the degree to which we fulfil the Charter's
ambitious mandate. To recommit ourselves to the
purposes and principles is to recommit ourselves to the
people, individuals in every one of our States, whose
basic dignity the Charter is meant to defend and uphold.
I should like to highlight three ways the United Nations
and its Member States can and must improve our
effectiveness in working together towards that noble
and necessary aspiration.

First, the Security Council must play the robust
role set out for it by the Charter to maintain or restore
international peace and security, and it must take actions
when circumstances demand it. Yet, too often the
Council has not lived up to that primary responsibility.
Consider Syria. When the Al-Assad regime launches
deadly attacks on peaceful protesters, when it tortures
tens of thousands of detainees in its prisons, when it
employs openly starve-or-surrender tactics that inflict
a devastating toll on civilians, amid all of that, divisions
among Member States continue to prevent the Council
from taking action to stop the regime from attacking
civilians or even speaking in one voice to condemn the
violence and call for meaningful accountability. As a
result, we have let down the people at the heart of the
Charter.

Secondly, Member States shall "fulfil in good faith
the obligations assumed by them in accordance with the
Charter", including the obligation to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Council and must "give the
United Nations every assistance in any action it takes
in accordance with the Charter". We have shown the
ability to leverage those obligations to good effect as
arms embargoes in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are making it harder
for armed actors to get the weapons they have used to
commit atrocities. Other measures, like the ban on the
trade in illicit charcoal from Somalia, are limiting the
funds that violent extremist groups like Al-Shabaab
are using to fuel their campaigns of terror. But it is not
enough for us to adopt mandates and resolutions, we
must be willing to exercise the political will and take
the action needed to actually preserve international
peace and security.

Today, we empower United Nations peacekeeping
missions with more robust mandates than ever before
to protect civilians and monitor human rights. When
those mandates are contested, however, we must take
appropriate action to defend them. Unfortunately, the
Council was silent when the Sudanese Government
denied United Nations peacekeepers unhindered access
to the town of Thabit, North Darfur, thereby preventing
the United Nations from properly investigating possible
human rights violations following allegations that
Sudanese soldiers had raped more than 200 women and
girls in October. Instead, the only time the peacekeepers
were permitted to reach Thabit, Sudanese military and
intelligence officials refused to let them interview
alleged rape victims in private and, in some cases,
recorded the interviews.

Ensuring respect for the work of the United
Nations entails acting in good faith in accordance
with the principles of the Charter. Yet notwithstanding
the foundational obligations of Member States to
respect sovereignty and territorial integrity, Russia
today is training, arming, supporting and fighting
alongside separatists who have brutally seized
Ukrainian territory - a blatant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and an assault on its
neighbour's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity - one that has already cost some 5,700 lives
and forced the displacement of more than 1.7 million
Ukrainians.

Thirdly, in dealing with States that flout the United
Nations principles, and their international obligations
more generally, the United Nations must come up with
more effective ways to pressure them. That includes
States that brutally repress their own people, behaviour
that in and of itself can threaten international peace
and security. Consider the recent actions of the United
Nations with respect to North Korea. In March 2013,
the United Nations Human Rights Council established
the Commission of Inquiry on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, which not only thoroughly
documented the regime's horrors, but also brought
them into public view by holding open hearings with
victims and experts. Based on the Commission's
findings, the General Assembly adopted resolution
67/181, roundly condemning the regime's systematic
abuses and encouraging the Security Council to
consider appropriate action to ensure accountability.
When the Security Council met in December to discuss
North Korea's human rights crisis for the very first time
(see S/PV.7353), many members, including the United
States, echoed the General Assembly's call.
It is true that the regime's prison camps continue
to hold between 80,000 and 120,000 people in ghastly
conditions. Nonetheless, by shining a light on the
unspeakable violations being perpetrated every day
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, United
Nations action is helping to galvanize broader pressure
on the regime to end abuses that were ignored for far
too long.

The situation in North Korea reveals a fundamental
lesson learned many times over since the Charter was
adopted. Widespread human rights violations can
themselves pose a threat to international peace and
security. We must not ignore connections between the
way Governments treat their own citizens and the way
they interact with other States and the norms of our
shared international system. North Korea, for example,
has repeatedly threatened nuclear attacks against States
that criticize the way it treats its own people. In Syria,
violations perpetrated by the Al-Assad regime were
instrumental in the dramatic rise of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist groups, which
are now wreaking havoc far beyond that country's
borders. Moreover, the violence in Syria has led
nearly 4 million people to take refuge in neighbouring
countries, placing a massive and destabilizing strain on
those Governments.

Whether in Syria or elsewhere in the world, when
a country locks up its political opponents instead of
resolving differences through dialogue, or when it
attempts to silence its critics, as some Council members
are doing, it both violates its Charter commitment to
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and it will
not bring about the stability that is so important to the
lasting economic and social progress we all wish to
see. Rather than locking up one's opponents, making
ridiculous allegations and pointing fingers at foreign
Powers, respecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as the Charter provides, is the foundation for
peace, security and prosperity.

As we strive to enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations, we must guard against attempts to
manipulate the purposes and principles of the Charter
in an effort to prevent the United Nations from tackling
the global challenges it was designed to confront and
defending the rights of individuals it was meant to
champion. Yet some seek to distort the purposes and
principles by asserting, for instance, that human rights
violations have no relation to international peace and
security, or that the sovereignty of nations precludes
United Nations engagement on those issues. But as
President Obama said before the General Assembly a
few years ago,

"sovereignty cannot be a shield for tyrants to commit
wanton murder or an excuse for the international
community to turn a blind eye" (A/68/PV5, p. 16).

Sovereignty did not give the Nazis licence to massacre
Jews 75 years ago. It did not give a Hutu extremist
regime licence to slaughter Tutsis two decades ago. And
it does not and cannot be allowed to shield Governments
that commit atrocities today.

If we, the people of the United Nations, are to
recommit ourselves to the purposes and principles of
the Charter, we must see them as the drafters intended
them: as a blueprint to unite us in advancing the safety,
security and human rights of people across the world,
and not as an instrument to divide us and obstruct
that crucial effort - people like the Syrians in East
Ghouta, more than 200 of whom have been killed in
the past two weeks by bombs dropped by the Al-Assad
regime; people like the democracy and human
rights activists whose efforts to promote freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly have
been stifled by the growing global crackdown on civil
society, with over 50 countries proposing restrictive
measures on civil society efforts in just the past two
years; and people like the Ukrainian children and
elderly who were trapped in Debaltseve, left to cower
in basements while separatists, with Russia's weapons,
training and blessing, pummeled the city with rockets
and mortars after having agreed to a ceasefire. If we
keep such people at the heart of our efforts, we will
more effectively live up to our shared responsibilities
and the shared vision that the drafters embodied in the
purposes and principles of the Charter.

