Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes this open meeting of the Security Council on the
very important question of the situation of refugees in
Africa. We believe that this debate will be very useful to
the Council's work in the coming weeks.

First of all, we would like to express our appreciation
and gratitude to the High Commissioner, Mrs. Ogata, for
the very comprehensive statement she has made today on
the situation of refugees and other displaced persons in
Africa. We would also thank her for the excellent advice
she has offered the Security Council in its further work.

We also commend her and her team for the protection
and invaluable assistance they provide refugees, often at the
risk of their lives. Indeed, 36 personnel died in the Great
Lakes region in the 1994-1996 period. We also congratulate
her on the cooperation she and her team offer
Governments, thus enabling them to discharge their
responsibilities to the refugees that they so generously
take in. I assure her of Canada's continuing support.

Emphasis has been placed on the fact that despite
the efforts made, in several countries the number of
refugees has not decreased. Reference was made to
Guinea, Tanzania, the Sudan and Kenya, and further
flows have occurred in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi, Angola, Ethiopia and Eritrea. To these
we must add, as was stressed by the High Commissioner,
the many Africans displaced within their own countries.
Their number has also increased, with particularly
devastating consequences for their countries, for, unlike
most refugees, these displaced persons do not usually
benefit from protection and assistance comparable to that
given refugees.

Under the best possible conditions, flows of
desperate peoples crossing borders in a very short period
of time have a significant impact on the humanitarian and
security situation at the regional and national levels.
Nevertheless, as we are seeing in Africa, the host
countries - whose infrastructures often have already
been weakened - can become overwhelmed and
experience an increase in social tension. The situation can
deteriorate even further when these flows are the result of
a deliberate tactic of war and when conflicts threaten to
spill over national borders and involve other countries.
This phenomenon is not confined to Africa alone. We
have seen it in Europe and neighbouring areas, in the
Balkans and the Northern Caucasus.

I would like to express my Government's gratitude
for the generosity and spirit of solidarity shown by many
African host countries, including Tanzania and Guinea,
which have without fail taken in peoples from
neighbouring countries affected by war and for their
commitment to fulfilling their obligations under
international law on refugees.

Canada wishes to underline the importance of
countries' continuing to provide a safe haven to all those
who manage to cross a border so as to save their lives.
We should demonstrate more solidarity with them in their
efforts. We must also stress the responsibilities of African
countries, and indeed of countries in all parts of the world
whose people are internally displaced, to ensure that those
peoples' rights are protected under international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the laws of their

 
countries of origin, as in the case of the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

In those cases where countries cannot or will not
provide the necessary protection and assistance to their
peoples, they nevertheless have the responsibility to provide
full access, in conditions of complete security and without
restrictions, to others in order that those peoples' basic
needs can be met.

Angola and the Sudan are examples of situations
where this kind of problem exists. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on internally
displaced persons, Mr. Francis Deng, has rightly said that
sovereignty does not exempt countries of responsibility.
This is a point we have often made.

Thus, we have to continue demanding stronger efforts
to protect and help refugees and internally displaced
persons and other populations affected by war. However,
along with Mrs. Ogata, we must recognize that population
movements are only a symptom of political crises.

The Security Council and the whole of the
international community must show more imagination and
look more resolutely at the political causes of the
humanitarian crises in Africa and elsewhere. We can do this
through mandates taking the human security requirement
into account, as well as through a decompartmentalization
of efforts so as to provide greater effectiveness for United
Nations missions. The Security Council has an important
role to play in this task. Besides, as the High Commissioner
has stressed, when a matter has been resolved politically,
the task does not step there. The international community
must continue to encourage reconstruction and
reconciliation in order to ensure lasting peace and ensure
that the displaced populations can return to their countries
and be reintegrated with dignity and in a climate of
security.

The countries of origin have a central role to play in
eliminating the underlying causes of population
displacement and in doing their utmost to ensure that their
nationals have good reason to return home with a sense of
confidence. This point applies particularly to the countries
of the Great Lakes region, where there have been cyclical
population movements because of continuing conflict. We
can see that these populations are very reluctant to return
home.

In conclusion, I would like to come back to one
particular point made by the High Commissioner. A large
proportion of refugees and displaced persons are children
and adolescents. We have many with us today. I wonder
if the High Commissioner could tell us what her Office is
doing to ensure that the specific needs of these children
and adolescents are met, and if she could speak on
specific measures to help girls, particularly with regard to
protection, education and vocational training.

