Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and
the associated countries, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well
as the European Free Trade Association countries members
of the European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union commends the Security Council,
under your guidance, Mr. President, for holding a formal
meeting on this important subject of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in the context of
peacekeeping.

The European Union expresses its gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his statement this morning and for
the excellent report he has prepared on the role of United
Nations peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, in response to the request made by the
Security Council in its presidential statement of 8 July
1999, following the open debate held the same day on the
matter. It is gratifying to note that the treatment of this
important issue is being given appropriate continuity by
the Security Council and the Secretary-General,
particularly in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping.

In this regard, the European Union also recalls the
report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, approved on 10 March 2000 and to be issued,
which notes this report of the Secretary-General and
addresses certain issues related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and United
Nations peacekeeping.

The report of the Secretary-General represents a
comprehensive review of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, the role they play in
establishing conditions for a long-lasting peace and in
post-conflict peace-building, and the role United Nations
peacekeeping operations can play in the conduct of these
activities. The European Union endorses in general terms
the goals established in the report and urges that
appropriate follow-up be given to the recommendations
contained therein by the Security Council and relevant
United Nations departments and agencies, as well as by
other organizations and by Member States.

As the Secretary-General points out, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration activities can represent
the window of opportunity to advance a peace process, a
window that may close if the international community
does not swiftly and vigorously act by providing the
United Nations with the necessary political support and
adequate resources to pursue on the ground the mandate
that has been given by the Security Council. It is
interesting that all these points were reaffirmed in the
Fifth Committee this morning, at its resumed session.

Like other essential activities that complement the
efforts of peacekeeping operations, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes must be
effectively integrated into multidisciplinary peacekeeping
operations when they have been mandated. The European
Union also believes that the most effective way to ensure
this is for such programmes to be determined in the peace

 
agreement that provides for the end of a conflict. As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, this would ensure the
clarity and timely implementation of the programmes and
build confidence among the parties. The role of the Security
Council in this regard is to reflect the importance attributed
to these programmes by calling for the necessary expertise
and resources to be made available.

As requested, the Secretary-General paid particular
attention in his report to the problems of child soldiers.
When dealing with this issue, we must have the best
interests of these children uppermost in our minds. By
identifying the existence of child soldiers at the outset in
the peace agreement and by addressing their concerns in the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, as the Secretary-General
suggests, we will be moving towards that goal, particularly
in the long term. Nothing is gained from denying their
existence and perpetuating their unfortunate condition,
which can only augur badly for a long-lasting peace.

The European Union fully endorses the Secretary-
General's recommendations with regard to child soldiers in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes,
particularly with respect to strengthening the performance
of United Nations peacekeeping in addressing the special
needs of children, and it welcomes the declared policy of
including within all operations, where relevant, personnel
with appropriate training in international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law, including child-related and
gender-related provisions. The European Union also shares
the Secretary-General's recommendation that a holistic and
long-term view be taken of the demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers, comprising social and
economic aspects of the problem.

The Secretary-General has usefully identified the ways
in which United Nations peacekeeping can assist in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes.
Drawing on its impartial character and universal legitimacy,
United Nations peacekeeping can play a crucial role in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes
by building confidence and trust, by conveying a sense of
security, by sustaining momentum and by channelling
expertise.

The report shows clearly how peacekeepers participate
actively in the process of disarmament of combatants -
from the monitoring of ceasefires and the separation of
forces to the supervision of disarmament sites, and from
taking custody of surrendered weapons to the destruction of
arms and addressing the problem of arms flows into a
conflict area. They also have a role to play in monitoring
and verifying the demobilization of troops and in
providing security for quartered personnel. In the
reintegration process, peacekeepers can assist in the
transportation of former combatants to their homes and in
the distribution of "reinsertion" packages to allow former
soldiers to begin a civilian life.

But the Secretary-General is also right to point out
that, while peacekeeping operations play a crucial role,
the ultimate success of a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process may require sustained efforts long
after the withdrawal of a multidisciplinary peacekeeping
operation. It is therefore necessary to take a long-term
perspective on how the process is to be carried out,
identify clearly the role of the peacekeeping operation in
that process, provide it with the necessary resources and
ensure the continuation of the process beyond the end of
the peacekeeping mandate. Essential to those goals is the
effective coordination of efforts in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, both at Headquarters and
in the field, as well as with other United Nations agencies
and international organizations crucial to these activities.
An obvious model of such an approach - which would,
of course, need to be adapted to each circumstance - is
the activities of the United Nations in Mozambique, as the
Secretary-General's clear references to that success story
indicate.

The European Union looks forward to seeing the
results of the work of the Lessons Learned Unit of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the
elaboration of a set of principles and guidelines for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

In the context of wide-ranging European Union
support for peace processes and peace-building activities,
financial and in-kind contributions and support for
capacity-building have been provided by States members
of the European Union to, inter alia, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in the Central African Republic
and in Sierra Leone.

With regard to disarmament, the European Union
attaches great importance to the particular problems
caused by the alarming increase and spread of small arms
and light weapons. The European Union adopted a joint
action approach to small arms in December 1998, with a
view to building consensus in the appropriate regional and
international forums on the necessary principles and
measures as the basis for regional and incremental
approaches to the problem and, Where appropriate, global

 

international instruments on small arms. The European
Union continues actively to pursue this approach and
particularly looks forward to the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, to be convened in the summer of 2001.

The European Union is also undertaking specific
actions, through financial and technical assistance to
programmes and projects related to small arms problems,
notably in Albania, Cambodia and Mozambique, and we are
considering specific action in other areas as well. The
European Union is also providing assistance to the small
arms moratorium put in place by the Economic Community
of West African States, which seeks to prevent the illicit
manufacture and trade of small arms and to ensure that
these weapons are collected and put out of use.

A valuable tool in this area is the set of guidelines
adopted by consensus by the United Nations Disarmament
Commission in April 1999 on conventional arms
control/limitation and disarmament with particular emphasis
on consolidation of peace. The guidelines contain specific
recommendations for the collection, control, disposal and
destruction of arms, especially small arms and light
weapons, and for the conversion of military facilities. They
address the criteria required for a successful and well
organized programme for the demobilization of combatants
as well as measures needed for their effective integration
into civil society. These guidelines can assist the
international community, as well as regions, subregions and
countries directly affected, in this area, and should be
drawn upon in the design of mandates for future United
Nations peacekeeping or preventive operations. In this
context, we also acknowledge the importance of the
recommendations of the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms.

The European Union supports the specific
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report with a view to strengthening the role of United
Nations peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. To assist the United Nations in providing the
necessary expertise for such difficult tasks, the European
Union supports the maintenance of databases of expertise
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
inclusion of these areas in national training programmes for
peacekeepers. This would help overcome the difficulties
sometimes experienced by the United Nations in locating
experienced disarmament experts and trainers for United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

Attentive consideration should also be given to the
question of offering incentives for disarmament, to the
destruction of weapons and to the monitoring and control
of regional arms traffic, taking into account the economic
dimensions of arms flows. In this context, the European
Union especially welcomes the work and the initiatives of
the group of interested States. That group supports
concrete projects of practical disarmament, including in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and serves
as a forum for the exchange of information about relevant
lessons learned in this field. The initiative has the support
of the Secretary-General.

With regard to the demobilization process, the report
rightly emphasizes the importance of giving peacekeeping
operations a strong political role and ample resources,
including a deterrent capacity. The European Union
agrees with the Secretary-General that demobilization and
reintegration programmes need to be placed on a firmer
financial footing and that provision also needs to be made
for special measures for child soldiers. The European
Union invites the Secretary-General to explore with, inter
alia, Member States and the World Bank, a range of
possible options, and to make further detailed
recommendations on this subject, as necessary.

United Nations peacekeeping operations can also
play a crucial role, as the Secretary-General has
described, in the creation of the physical, political and
social infrastructures necessary for successful reintegration
programmes. In this regard, the activities of United
Nations peacekeeping operations in institution-building,
elections, human rights and the judicial system, including
the police, are vital.

In view of the lead responsibility of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, coordination within the
Secretariat and with relevant agencies within the United
Nations system, as well as with regional organizations,
intergovernmental bodies, bilateral programmes and non-
governmental organizations, is essential to the success of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and should
continue to be strengthened. In the same sphere, the
consolidation of the authority of special representatives
over all United Nations entities is most welcome and
should be further strengthened by the appointment of
resident coordinators as deputies to heads of mission.

This is an important report and will serve amply to
continue to develop the vital capacity of the United
Nations in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

 

At stake is the long-term resolution of conflicts; these
activities are a small price to pay for peace.

