Ms. Borges (Timor-Leste): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate.

Allow me to express on behalf of the Government
and people of Timor-Leste our sincere gratitude for the
recent visit by the Security Council. In particular, my
delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Kumalo and
members of the delegation for the manner in which
they engaged with all stakeholders, demonstrating
extreme sensitivity, respect and understanding. The
report of the mission (S/2007/711) is comprehensive
and identifies the challenges and priorities that need to
be addressed in order to consolidate peace and
stability.
07-64195

The visit was overwhelmingly positive in that it
provided all stakeholders the opportunity to engage
with members of the delegation in a frank and honest
assessment of the complexities and challenges
currently facing the country. Furthermore, in the eyes
of the Timorese, the visit was a reaffirmation of the
continuing commitment and support of the United
Nations and the international community for
Timor-Leste. That reaffirmation of support and
assistance is timely as the country comes to terms with
the consequences of the crisis and searches for
sustainable solutions for the maintenance of peace and
stability.

The 2006 crisis caused widespread looting and
destruction in the capital, where more than 30 people
died, more than 100 were wounded and tens of
thousands were displaced. We are slowly recovering;
however, tens of thousands of people remain in camps
in the capital and elsewhere. The Government has
pledged to cooperate with all stakeholders to address
the situation of internally displaced persons in an
adequate and sustainable manner.

Law and order have been restored. However, the
relative tranquillity prevailing in the country is a
precarious one and is due in large measure to the
effective role played by United Nations police and the
International Stabilisation Force. This will remain the
case until such a time when our police force has been
reconstructed and turned into a professional, credible
and effective force. This will take two to five years at a
minimum.

While significant progress has been made in
establishing a democratic legal and institutional
framework, centuries of non-self-government and
marginalization, including two decades of violence, the
lack of any meaningful investment in the intellectual,
socio-economic, or physical infrastructure of the
country in the past, and the absence of any lasting
experience in governance and law enforcement have
left the country with profound challenges to its future
stability and prosperity. They are compounded by the
high levels of unemployment, illiteracy and
displacement.

At this critical juncture, the most pivotal short- to
medium-term objectives of the Government continues
to be the further consolidation of political stability and
the maintenance of law and order, while at the same
time gradually improving Timor's developmental
3
prospects by entrenching a culture of democratic
governance and strengthening key institutions. There
will be no political stability without respect for the rule
of law and adequate law enforcement. There will be no
lasting socio-economic development, including foreign
investment, without political stability and public peace
and security.

While development is the ultimate goal, a
premature limitation to this goal without the still
necessary capacities and assistance of the United
Nations in the police and security sector, as well as
their partnership and good offices in support of
institution-building, would unnecessarily jeopardize
the recovery and cautious progress of the past one and
ahalf years.

In this regard, Timor-Leste concurs with the
recommendation contained in the report of the Security
Council's mission to Timor-Leste to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT). As stated in the report, all Timorese
interlocutors called for the continued presence of the
United Nations while democratic structures are being
built in the country.

The Government strongly believes that UNMIT's
mandate should be extended for a total of five years,
until 2012. It foresees a continued need for the present
police and security sector capacities for at least two
and a half years, until 2010, to be followed by a
Security Council-mandated peace-building mission
focusing on governance, police and security-sector
assistance and capacity-building for another two and a
half years, until 2012.

The Government is mindful of the concerns of the
Security Council delegation that the support and
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community be seen as strengthening democratic
institutions, rule of law and self-reliance rather than
fostering a climate of dependency. We are conscious
that the Timorese leadership and the people must make
every effort to consolidate peace and stability in our
country. The crisis in 2006 was of our own making,
and we must take full responsibility with courage and
humility. My delegation wishes to assure members of
the Council that in the meantime, we the Timorese will
continue our national dialogue so that we may
reconcile and heal the wounds of the past which will
further contribute to a peaceful, stable, democratic and
united country.
However, the reason for our endorsement of the
Security Council mission's recommendation for a
mandate extension is not dependency. It is the need to
develop sustainable, democratic institutions and
capacities that have never existed before in Timor-
Leste. Timor-Leste has been independent for only five
years - a short time frame, considering the enormous
challenges of building a nation. When sovereignty was
transferred to Timor-Leste in May 2002, only the
sketch - the idea of a modern and democratic State -
existed. We had to build our country from scratch.

Yet the crisis of 2006 has strengthened rather than
weakened the democratic institutional framework and
our commitment to the rule of law. For example,
throughout the crisis the civil service continued to
function and salaries were being paid - a remarkable
achievement compared to experiences elsewhere.
Democratic, free and fair elections were held free of
Violence, and the National Parliament has come out
strengthened with the active participation by all parties
in matters of national priority, including the budget.

I should like to conclude by expressing our most
sincere appreciation to the United Nations, the Security
Council and to all our bilateral partners for their
continued support since 1999. They responded without
hesitation to our appeals for assistance and have
maintained a continuous presence in our country. Their
commitment and friendship will not be forgotten by the
people of Timor-Leste.

