Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We extend our thanks to Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.

We welcome the relative calm in the Abyei Area,
although we are concerned about the sporadic incidents
of intercommunal violence, the presence of armed
elements and the abundance of small arms and light
weapons, as well as the growing criminality generated
by the difficult economic situation. We hope that
those events will not undermine the prevailing calm,
for which we believe that the presence of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
remains crucial.

We also share the feelings of frustration over the lack
of progress in the implementation of the commitments
undertaken by the parties in the Agreement on
Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area and the concern of
the Secretary-General over the intensification of the
political rhetoric on the appropriation of the Abyei Area.
We are hopeful that those events will not escalate and
that the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities and
their leaders will remain steadfast in their commitment
to peaceful coexistence and not be discouraged by the
elements attempting to disrupt the process. We call
on the Sudan and South Sudan to continue to build on
the positive progress achieved so far. In that regard,
we congratulate the Sudan and South Sudan on the
re-establishment ofjoint oil operations.

However, despite such progress, much remains to be
done. The disputed territory between the two countries
must not become another unresolved conflict. It is
necessary for the political process to continue forward
and for an agreement to be reached that improves the
lives of the people in the area - a population with
growing humanitarian needs, including some 200,000
people in a state of vulnerability.

Time is of the essence, especially in the midst of
UNISFA's ongoing reconfiguration process. Without
a sustainable peace plan and the eventual departure
of United Nations forces, the chances of a resurgence
of conflict are very high. If we take history as an
indicator, we know that a new conflict between the two
sides could have devastating results. We also hope that
the current dynamics in Khartoum will not negatively
interfere with Abyei. In that regard, we recognize the
efforts of the African Union to establish a consensual
and civilian-led transition process in the Sudan.

With regard to the reconfiguration of UNISFA,
we welcome the increase in police elements and the
proposal to strengthen political support, which, in
short, will help to alleviate the growing number of
crimes committed, effectively manage intercommunal
relations and in general, maintain peace in the Area.

Another aspect of particular importance that we
would like to emphasize is UNISFA's commitment
to increasing the number of women in the mission,
as shown by the deployment of a women and
child protection adviser to the Abyei Area and the
involvement of women leaders from the Misseriya and
Ngok Dinka communities in gender and women's rights
initiatives. In the same vein, we applaud the holding of
various seminars on resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, with special emphasis on the
role of women as agents of peace and the empowerment
of women to assume more active roles in community
conflict resolution mechanisms.

Another border element that is undeniably
critical is the need to fulfil UNISFA's mandate for
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping in the
Area. We are optimistic about the latest progress
in the implementation of five of the established
parameters, including the authorization for air and
ground patrols in the border areas, the establishment
of two bases of operations, community outreach
activities, the holding of meetings of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism and the demilitarization
of the border areas. We particularly commend the
reactivation of the Joint Border Commission and the
Joint Demarcation Committee.

In conclusion, the presence of UNISFA and its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism have played a decisive role in the stability
in the Abyei Area, especially in the rapprochement
between Juba and Khartoum and the Misseriya and
Ngok Dinka communities. However, in order for the
rapprochement to be sustainable, both the Sudan and
South Sudan must do more, as soon as possible, to
fulfil their commitments and we, in the Council, must
continue to seek ways to make UNISFA operations
more effective. In the end, those two elements together
will allow UNISFA to continue to operate successfully.

