Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): It is my pleasure to address
the Security Council today concerning the latest
developments in the Republic of Kosovo. Allow me to
begin by expressing my great gratitude for the ongoing
efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on behalf of
peace and progress in Kosovo and the Balkans.

Before turning to the main points of my
statement - namely, the progress made in Kosovo
since the previous reporting period and in consolidating
Kosovo's statehood - allow me to recall to the
Council that, just a few weeks ago, Kosovo's citizens
and institutions solemnly commemorated the fifth
anniversary of our declaration of independence. In that
time, Kosovo has made considerable progress in many
areas. Full credit for this achievement goes to the people
of the Republic of Kosovo, who were able to overcome
the effects of years of systematic repression and ethnic
cleansing and look forward to a prosperous future.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our highest appreciation to all the States and other
international actors who contributed greatly to our
democracy, freedom and progress. Let us not forget,
in this respect, the leading role of the United States
of America, all the States members of the European
Union and NATO and all the countries worldwide that
have proudly recognized the Republic of Kosovo and
thus enabled Kosovo to take its rightful place among
the free nations of the world. Special acknowledgment
goes to the United Nations, whose support was crucial,
first in building independent institutional structures
in Kosovo from 1999 to 2007; then in facilitating
negotiations for a final settlement of Kosovo's status
from 2005 to 2007 and former President Ahtisaari's
package as a constitutional and political reflection of
modern Kosovo; and finally, confirming the legality
of the declaration of independence of the Republic of
Kosovo through the affirmative advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 22 July 2010.

Thus began a new chapter in the history of the
newest State in Europe - a State with a difficult past
marked by many sacrifices, but with the intention
of being an equal player in the democratic world, a
prosperous, developed, fair, safe State of which future
generations can be proud, regardless of their race,
ethnicity or religion.

On this fifth anniversary of independence, the
State of Kosovo has become stronger, thanks to the end
of international supervision and the assumption by the
institutions and citizens of Kosovo of responsibility for
all matters. That is additional proofofthe State-building
maturity of the citizens of Kosovo. Kosovo, as an
independent and sovereign State, is a reality that has
already been accepted and has become a factor of
peace and stability by contributing to regional and
international processes. Despite its difficult birth as a
State, Kosovo is one of the most successful examples
of state-building in the history of the United Nations,
and the result of conscience and international justice.
Kosovo's independence is as the result, on the one hand,
ofthe combination of continuous efforts of the sacrifice
of the people of Kosovo for freedom and dignity, and
on the other, of the contribution and support of the
international community to end the chapter of the
violent breakup of the former Yugoslavia.

The consolidation of Kosovo's statehood is
tangible. Kosovo is now recognized by more than half
of United Nations Member States, and the spread of its
recognition has proven to be irreversible. Many other
countries are in the process of recognizing Kosovo's
statehood and independence, and I can assure them
that that is the most just decision they can make for
Kosovo and its citizens. I recall that these recognitions
and other recognitions to follow derive from our right
to statehood, confirmed by the International Court of
Justice in The Hague, from the constructive role Kosovo
plays in strengthening peace and stability in the Balkan
region, and from our commitment to the implementation
of the Ahtisaari plan and the protection of minorities in
accordance with the highest international standards.

In this respect, after joining the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development on 27 February,
the Republic of Kosovo has become a member of the
Regional Cooperation Council, an umbrella organization
for regional cooperation in South-East Europe that
has 46 members. With this membership, the Republic
of Kosovo has embarked upon an irreversible path
towards integration into the European Union, because
the Regional Cooperation Council - as successor to
the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe is the main
instrument of pre-accession into the European Union.
Kosovo will have the same rights of representation,
voting and signing as all other States members of
that Council. In addition, Kosovo will benefit in
terms of the social and institutional strengthening of
its human potential, and will enjoy the support of a
number of social and economic initiatives, including
investment facilities, development initiatives for small-
and medium-sized enterprises, trade liberalization,
improvements in public health, social dialogue and
other reforms.

In terms of accession to international organizations,
let me inform the Council that on 22 January the
Council of Europe adopted a resolution paving the way
for the establishment of direct formal relations with
the Republic of Kosovo. The resolution allows direct
cooperation, especially in the key areas of human
rights, freedom of expression and the protection of
cultural heritage. That act is important because it will
directly strengthen the rule of law. Furthermore, the
Assembly of Kosovo will be able to directly monitor
the work of the Assembly of the Council of Europe. As
of today, 34 of the 47 members of the Council of Europe
have recognized the Republic of Kosovo.

Internal developments in Kosovo have been
characterized by political and economic stability. Let me
emphasize that Kosovo continues to maintain financial
stability and sustainable economic growth despite the
ongoing global crisis. Moreover, a free market economy
and market security for foreign investors are important
foundations for increasing the welfare of the citizens of
Kosovo.

As indicated in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/72), Kosovo has undertaken
significant judicial reforms that came into force on
1 January through legislation such as the Law on Courts,
the new Criminal Code and the new Criminal Procedure
Code. Those reforms are compatible with European
standards and as such are aimed at strengthening the
sustainability of the judicial and prosecutorial sector in
Kosovo, in full cooperation with European expertise.

In the context of the war on corruption, on
11 February a law was enacted by the Assembly to
increase powers to seize assets gained from criminal
acts. A law for the prevention of money-laundering
and terrorist financing has also been adopted by the
Assembly. The Assembly of Kosovo also approved a
new anti-corruption strategy on 11 February. By late
2012, strategies and action plans had been adopted for
the fight against organized crime, terrorism and drug
trafficking, and on integrated border management.

Considerable progress has been made in relation
to the protection of cultural and religious heritage.
On 12 February, the Government of Kosovo, and in
particular the Ministry of Environment, Mining and
Spatial Planning, signed an administrative instruction
for the establishment of an implementation and
monitoring council. The establishment of the council
provides for more focused monitoring of Serbian
religious and cultural heritage institutions, and is
among the priorities derived from the feasibility
study for the start of negotiations on the Stabilization
and Association Agreement. It also contributes to the
normalization of relations between the institutions of
Kosovo and the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo.

The implementation and monitoring council will
assist and monitor the implementation of the legal
provisions of the Republic of Kosovo regarding the
protection of Serbian religious and cultural heritage in
Kosovo, including in particular the provisions of the
Law on Special Protected Areas, the Historic Centre
of Prizren and Hoce e Madhe Village. The council,
set up by the legislation of the Republic of Kosovo
and supported by the President Ahtisaari package, is
co-chaired by the Government, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Serbian Orthodox Church. This year,
my Government has allocated an initial €100,000 for
the operation of that mechanism. The European Union
and the United States of America have welcomed the
overall progress.

Through the Ministry of Communities and Returns,
Kosovo's Government has continued to provide
financial support for initiatives aimed at the return and
reintegration of minorities in Kosovo. Building houses
is a clear example ofthe ongoing efforts of the Republic
of Kosovo to accommodate returnees of different
communities - providing decent living conditions that
will, in turn, have a positive effect on other aspects
of life, such as employment, health and education.
Kosovo's institutions have responded to the demands of
the vulnerable by strengthening its policy and strategy
on internally displaced persons and returnees and by
creating more favourable conditions for sustainable
return and reintegration. In recent months, the Republic
of Kosovo has built or repaired 76 houses for returnees
in all regions. In the same period, the Government
completed 21 infrastructure projects in minority
returnee communities. All those investments contribute
to stabilizing the socioeconomic situation in Kosovo's
ethnic minority communities. Finally, we have taken
steps to facilitate the return from Montenegro of
persons displaced from Kosovo.

In addition, Kosovo has taken serious measures to
integrate Serbs living in northern Kosovo. However,
unfortunately, the destructive practices of parallel
structures have been a constant obstacle and have
undermined our good intentions and commitment to
socioeconomic investment in that part of Kosovo.

To date, the administrative office in northern
Mitrovica opened by the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo has provided services for more than 2,000
members of the Serb community living in the north.
That is further proof that even in the north of the country
there can be space for cooperation and integration. We
believe that the office will be beneficial to the local
population, because it is intended to improve their living
conditions by providing better local services, generating
employment and coordinating donor assistance planned
for investments in the north of Kosovo.

Unfortunately, the office has been targeted several
times by unidentified groups in the north. Recently,
violent attacks against senior officials of Serbian
nationality at the institution have increased, leaving the
operation of the office vulnerable to threats and acts of
violence, which prevent it from carrying out its daily
administrative services. In addition, at least 20 other
incidents have occurred in the north during the past
three months. We have evidence to suspect that Serbian
parallel structures are behind those criminal acts,
which aim to intimidate officials working at the office
and to prevent the Serbs from the north from taking
advantage of the services offered to them.

We call on Serbia to dismantle those illegal security
and justice structures and to stop trying to create
tensions in Kosovo. We are not alone in making that
call, which is supported by a large number of countries
that have invested a great deal for the sake of peace and
stability in Kosovo, as well as by the United Nations.
In addition to dividing Serbs in the south from
those in the north, the use of fear tactics in the situation
in the northern municipalities is preventing the north's
integration into Kosovo's institutions. That criminal
tendency reminds me of a terrible case just a couple
of years ago where the current Deputy Chairman of
the Assembly of Kosovo, Petar Miletic', was shot and
injured, and, due to that violent pressure, was forced
to migrate from northern Mitrovica. Therefore, for
the past 13 years, all the communities in that part of
Kosovo have been at constant risk due to the absence of
the rule of law and the resulting anarchy.

In addition, on 19 March a Kosovo police officer
was attacked in the municipality of Leposavic'. A
powerful explosion occurred near the gate of the police
station, causing considerable material damage. Such
orchestrated attacks are intended to keep the security
situation tense, not giving a chance to peace and the
rule of law.

I must again draw the Council's attention to the fact
that, as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General,
the situation in the three northern municipalities
continues to be a serious source of instability in
Kosovo, as well as a serious threat to the entire security
structure of our region. This difficult situation, which
aims to destabilize the functioning of the State of
Kosovo, is in complete violation of international norms
and resolution 1244 (1999). This situation must be
stopped as soon as possible.

Our offer to every citizen, regardless of ethnicity,
is simple and clear: our State is our common future,
and we will build it for our common good and for the
benefit of those of our citizens in the municipalities in
the north of Kosovo whose lives continue to be held
hostage by certain groups. The establishment ofthe rule
of law and order in the northern part of the territory of
the Republic of Kosovo is essential for its development
within the framework of the Constitution and the laws
of the country, and for peace, safety and welfare of our
citizens of the Serb community.

I want to believe that my counterpart from Serbia,
Prime Minister Dacie, is deeply concerned for the rule
of law in the north of Kosovo and that the Serbian
community living there develops normally and without
fear.

The freedom of movement remains one of the main
challenges in that part of the territory of Kosovo. Not
only are orchestrated barricades physical barriers but,
above all, they send political messages about ethnic
divisions. Even the international presence - the
Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) - are denied the freedom
of movement, leaving them unable to fulfil their
missions. We witnessed similar scenarios in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia during the war in the 19905.
I would like to reassure the Council, however, that
Kosovo will not be a place of divisions and barricades.
We will not allow the building of a new Republika
Srpska.

I have full confidence that the physical barricades
that are set up on various roads in the north to
prevent free movement will be removed voluntarily
by the citizens who live there. Self-isolation does not
bring about progress; obstruction of the freedom of
movement should not be a value promoted by Serbia.
Unfortunately, the role of Serbia continues to be
destructive by unlawfully using and operating illegal
structures in Kosovo, thereby further aggravating the
political and security situation.

In that context, on the occasion of the Orthodox
New Year this January, there was an incident between
the Kosovo Police - as the only legitimate and legal
force - and 10 members of illegal structures - the
so-called Civil Defence Corps - who were supposedly
engaged to protect a Serbian Government official,
Alexander Vulin, during his visit to the municipality
of Gracanica.

In that case, the Kosovo Police was hampered in the
performance of its official duty to protect public order
and severely provoked. As a result, they accompanied
the 10 individuals to the police station in Gracanica on
suspicion that they had ignored lawful orders of the
police. Those individuals had been escorted to the police
station in order to enable the police to carry out their
security duties and responsibilities. The action was thus
taken for the security of the Serbian official. Despite
the tendency to politicize the case and allow the media
to echo allegations of ethnic abuse, the decision of the
Kosovo police was fair and legitimate. In connection
with the occurrence, I would refer the Council to the
accurate and constructive reporting by the European
Union Rule ofLaw Mission in Kosovo, contained in one
of the annexes to the report of the Secretary-General,
"No complaints about their treatment by Kosovo police
were made on either occasion" (S/2013/72, annex I, 
p. 14).

After the removal of the Albanian martyrs monument
in the Presevo valley on 20 January by numerous Serb
gendarmerie forces, an emotional and violent reaction
broke out, with unidentified individuals demolishing
Serbian Orthodox cemeteries and Second World War
memorials in eight locations in Kosovo. The Kosovo
Government, local civil society and the international
presence condemned those incidents, and the Kosovo
police arrested a number of suspects and is committed
to pursuing an effective investigation of those cases.
My Government has allocated €97,000 for the swift
repair of damaged graves and monuments. I assure the
Council that we are not dealing with coordinated actions
here. I am also pleased by the immediate response of
law enforcement officials and the public condemnation
of the acts by the Kosovo leadership.

As to the allegations of war crimes in Kosovo that
are contained in the report of the Secretary-General,
we are sure that addressing those charges will confirm
the purity and justness of the war waged by our people
in their quest for freedom and independence. While the
Serbian State has so far failed to issue a formal apology
for its regime-sponsored human rights abuses and
ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, we welcome the statement
made by Yugoslav army general Dragoljub Ojdanie to
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in January, in which he admitted to having committed
war crimes against Kosovo Albanians in the 1990s.
His admission constitutes an important recognition
that violence was acceptable to and orchestrated by
the Serbian authorities at the time, a fact which had
already been recognized and documented by the United
Nations. We encourage other institutions in Serbia to
acknowledge the crimes committed in Kosovo and allow
for the telling and documenting of the truth. That would
obviously be a strong foundation and a breakthrough
moment for reconciliation and coexistence.

In that context, on 18 March my Government
created a working group to address the past and
reconciliation. The formation of the group had been
postponed until such time as we felt that our society was
capable of dealing with the past in one way or other, in
order to restore relations, seek and face the truth, and
demand reparations for war damages as is generally
provided for by criminal justice systems. Because we
do not have normal relations with Serbia, the process of
dealing with and facing the past has become even more
difficult. Nevertheless, the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo believes that we have to deal with the past,
taking into account the rights and status of each victim
of the war. However, we also believe that the signing
of a peace treaty regulating relations between Kosovo
and Serbia would have to include a Serbian apology,
compensation for war damages, and truth on the issue
of missing persons and other issues related to the war.
That would help create an environment more condusive
to facing the past and dealing with outstanding issues.

The Republic of Kosovo has entered into a political
dialogue with Serbia brokered by the European
Union, which has been brilliantly managed by the
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine Ashton. Of
course, the process has been strongly supported by
all the world's democracies, which are interested in
contributing to peace and stability. The dialogue is aimed
at normalizing relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
and is considered to be the main tool for integrating the
Serb population in northern Kosovo into the country's
social and institutional life of Kosovo by offering them
opportunities to improve their lives and providing them
with security, public services, the rule of law, economic
stewardship and democratic governance.

Based on the current rate of normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia, I remain
reservedly optimistic that by resolving practical,
technical and inter-State issues, we are fulfilling key
prerequisites that will lead us to the next stage of mutual
recognition. Of course, this is not at all an easy process;
indeed, it is extremely difficult for Kosovo and Serbia
because the bitterness of the past remains fresh. But let
me assure the Council that the process could succeed
with a minimum ofpolitical will coming from Serbia. I
therefore once again invite Serbia to be reasonable and
rational and seize the opportunity before us to reach
an agreement for normalization of relations between
our countries. Success in such a dialogue would benefit
both countries and above all our citizens. Ifthe dialogue
succeeds, there will be no losers - only winners.

At the same time, Kosovo intends to make
progress in its relationship with the European Union
by accelerating its process of European integration and
coordinating joint efforts to fulfil the requirements
for membership. We are also engaged in dialogue to
heighten our international profile by obtaining more
recognitions of our Statehood and memberships in
international organizations, including our legitimate
request for membership in the United Nations.

Our commitment to dialogue with Serbia is in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 64/298
and the relevant resolution of the Assembly of Kosovo,
and in full compliance with the Constitution and laws
of Kosovo. In the dialogue with Serbia, there can be
no negotiation on the sovereignty, political status
or territorial integrity of Kosovo. The international
support for those inviolable red lines is very important
to us.

There is no doubt that the Ahtisaari plan sponsored
by the United Nations remains the most generous
offer possible, providing the Serbs in Kosovo with a
broad space for self-governance and the ability to
exercise their political, socioeconomic and cultural
rights. The Ahtisaari plan provides the Serbs in the
north, inter alia, with broad local self-governance, the
right to use their mother tongue in all public affairs,
freedom of media, freedom of education at the primary,
secondary and university levels, the opportunity for
an overhaul of the health-care system, financial and
local fiscal management, and the right to select local
police leadership, establish associations in Kosovo
Serb majority municipalities, and maintain special ties
with other municipalities in Serbia. The Ahtisaari plan
is thus a very liberal and generous plan that offers a
wide range of self-governance capacities to minorities,
as has been proven by effective decentralization since
our independence five years ago, which resulted in
increased political participation of Serbs in Kosovo,
growing inter-ethnic stability and improved social
welfare.

In the dialogue process with Serbia, we have held
seven rounds ofmeetings since October2012. Significant
results have been achieved so far, which gives hope for a
successful conclusion of the process. We are now nearly
at the final stage of the process. Unfortunately, over the
past three months the Serbian side has come up with a
platform that demands territorial autonomy for Kosovo
Serbs and the creation of a separate entity in Kosovo.
Similarly, Serbia later proposed an association, or
community association, in Kosovo Serb municipalities
that would have legislative and executive powers and be
the result of direct elections. That proposal is another
failed effort to create a third level of government in
Kosovo. That is against our constitutional order, which
has been built together with our international partners.
We are very concerned that such proposals are aimed
at creating a new Republika Srpska in Kosovo, which
would make Kosovo non-functional and unstable,
complicate the internal political consensus, cause the
process of our European integration and the integration
of minorities in Kosovo to stagnate, undermine the
process of successful decentralization in Kosovo,
antagonize the majority population and undercut all of
the international political and economic investments
made in the past 14 years. That idea cannot be put into
practice in Kosovo.

We are witness to the fact that such arrangements
in the region have become structural obstacles to peace
and ethnic reconciliation, democracy, a multi-ethnic
citizenry and effective governance. It is important
to emphasize the international commitment and
determination with respect to the fact that a change
of borders in the Western Balkans or any tendency
towards territorial rearrangement could destabilize the
region, cause ethnic divisions to flare up and create
other problems.

The agreements reached so far in the context of
the technical and political dialogue are very important,
because they address issues that have preoccupied
us for a long time and made the lives of our citizens
difficult. The regional cooperation agreement allows for
Kosovo's independent representation in organizations
and at regional events, and does away with ambiguities
and indirect representation. The agreement on the
opening of a liaison office and the exchange of liaison
officers opens an initial chapter in the establishment of
diplomatic relations between the Republic of Kosovo
and Serbia as two independent countries and good
neighbours.

The agreement on customs stamps supercedes
informal arrangements, establishes proper governance
in the area of of customs and increases the economic
benefits to Kosovo and Serbia. The agreement on the
return of civil registry and cadastral books will enable
the resolution of property disputes.

Finally, the agreement on the recognition of
university diplomas allows for more youth employment.
It is a fact that in this historic process, Serbia has
gradually accepted the legitimacy and constitutionality
of the Republic of Kosovo.
The Supreme Court of Kosovo cadastral agreement
has been accepted as the final authority. Concerning
vehicle registration plates, the Ministry of Internal
Affairs of Kosovo has been accepted as the final
authority, just as Kosovo customs is the final authority
in the area of customs.

In the current dialogue, Kosovo has proved to be
more consistent, more responsible and more decisive
in the implementation of the agreements reached. We
have taken all of the necessary political and technical
measures for the implementation of the agreements
reached so far. We have also expressed a willingness to
increase economic investments in this part of Kosovo.

Unfortunately, Serbia has not shown the same level
of readiness, as evidenced by the many delays in and
obstacles to the implementation of the agreements
reached. Serbia is still trying to prevent Kosovo from
participating in regional events.

The agreement on free movement is hampered
by the barriers placed in the north of Kosovo, which,
unfortunately, are directed from Belgrade. The return
of cadastral and civil registry documents is being
unjustifiably delayed.

The agreement on the opening of liaison offices
and the exchange of liaison officers, which has not yet
been implemented, represents a significant step towards
the establishment of diplomatic relations between two
independent countries.

Other issues that remain unresolved in the context
of this dialogue are the fate of those persons who went
missing during the war in Kosovo, with 1,700 still
missing; the issue of energy and telecommunications;
and the dismantling ofSerbia's illegal parallel structures
in the field of security, which operate in the north of
Kosovo in violation of international law.

We rightfully expect dedication and determination
from Serbia as concerns the full implementation of the
agreements, as well as the immediate dismantling of
its structures in Kosovo. We assure the Council that
the Republic of Kosovo will play a constructive role in
this dialogue, as it has done in the past, in accordance
with the Constitution and our laws and with goodwill,
so as to improve the lives of citizens and reach an
agreement to normalize our relations with Serbia that
further strengthens and consolidates our statehood and
international recognition.

The Republic of Kosovo has proved and continues
to prove that it embraces European values. The
European agenda of my country has already become
a working plan for society as a whole, considering
that EU integration is an incentive to achieve the most
important goals of our society: political stability, respect
for human rights and the development of a sustainable
economy. The European agenda is a reform agenda, not
just integration. That process did not start yesterday;
since the Thessaloniki summit of2003, Kosovo has had
its own independent path in relation to EU integration.

Kosovo has already entered an important period
as a country, with significant advancements in many
fields, bringing Kosovo into the focus of the EU
enlargement policy. That has been done as a result of
the reforms carried out and the comprehensive support
and determination shown across the political spectrum
and by the citizens of the Republic of Kosovo. I am
honoured to represent a society where integration into
the EU and NATO has more than 90 per cent of public
support; it is maintaining that support at a much higher
level in relation to other countries.

The European Commission has confirmed that
our country has made significant progress on the road
to EU membership, emphasizing the fact that Kosovo
is ready to open negotiations on the Stabilization and
Association Agreement, with the short-term fulfilment
of specific criteria in the areas of the rule of law,
public administration, the protection of minorities and
trade. That joint success was reaffirmed recently by
the visit of the EU Commissioner for Enlargement and
Neighbourhood Policy, Mr. Stefan Fule, in Pristina.

Above all, the Republic of Kosovo is making
great strides towards the establishment of contractual
relations with the European Union. With the signing
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement, we
are taking the first, very important step on the road to
membership in and full integration into the Union.

The Stabilization and Association Agreement will
also enable Kosovo to have a long-term perspective
for sustainable economic development, improving
Kosovo's trade position and providing stability for
foreign investors. That will have a significant impact
on the advancement of democratic processes, the
promotion of internal reforms and the deepening of
mutual political and economic cooperation between
Kosovo and the European Union.

In that context, we welcome the European Parliament
draft resolution on Kosovo dated 11 February 2013. In
particular, we consider it very important that the draft
resolution encourages the five remaining EU countries
that did not recognize Kosovo's independence to do so;
rejects Kosovo's territorial division; affirms the spirit
of the Ahtisaari package and emphasizes that that plan
is an adequate platform to resolve disputes in the North;
welcomes the end of the supervised independence of
Kosovo in September of last year; welcomes the greater
participation of Kosovo's representation in international
organizations and initiatives; welcomes the Pristina-
Belgrade dialogue agreements reached to date; and
condemns the acts of violence in northern Kosovo and
the deviant behavior of the local groups.

In addition, Kosovo is advancing in the process of
visa liberalization for its citizens. My Government is
very much committed to this process being completed
quickly, so that the people of Kosovo can come out of
the isolation that they have been in for more than two
decades and move freely, like the other peoples of the
Balkans. Kosovo's Government has proved that it is able
to make progress on the criteria set by the European
Commission, including in the areas of readmission;
reintegration; document security; integrated border
management; migration management; asylum;
the prevention and combating of organized crime,
corruption and terrorism; international cooperation
on law enforcement; judicial cooperation in criminal
matters; data protection; and the fundamental right to
freedom of movement.

I should like to make it clear, however, that any
asymmetry that puts an additional burden on Kosovo
to implement new criteria that is not required of other
Western Balkan countries would hurt its image and the
credibility of the process. Kosovo has not even a day
to waste, because decades have already been lost as a
result of apartheid and conflict. Above all, we call upon
the European Union to foster internal unity in Kosovo,
without further hindrance to our deserved integration.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate that the
Western Balkans has no room for conflict or belligerent
policies aimed at violating territorial integrity at any
cost since the violent break-up of the former Yugoslavia.
Efforts to create frozen conflicts by destabilizing the
region are doomed to failure. The Republic of Kosovo
has encoded its Constitution to reflect that it has no
territorial claim against anyone.

Finally, I recall that Kosovo is one of the
most successful instances of State-building and
peacebuilding in United Nations history and in
international governance more generally. Resolution
1244 (1999) has been implemented for a long time.
We have implemented the Ahtisaari plan, resulting in
the successful conclusion of international supervision
last September. To date, Kosovo has been recognized
by more than half of the United Nations Member
States and is a member of the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, as well as many
other regional and international initiatives. Kosovo is
in the process of integration into the European Union
as a full member among all others. Kosovo has installed
a democratic Government, built a multi-ethnic society
and is maintaining sustainable economic growth.

The Republic of Kosovo has been internationally
recognized, which should be welcomed by all Security
Council members. Moreover, we rightfully anticipate
that in the near future, given developments in Kosovo
and the region, and in particular our conviction that
Kosovo and Serbia will normalize inter-State relations
as a result of the dialogue process, the Security
Council will draft and adopt a new resolution making
Kosovo an equal, peace-loving Member of the United
Nations capable of maintaining order and assuming its
international responsibilities.

