Mr. Konuzin (spoke in Russian): I should like at
the outset sincerely to thank all of those who spoke
today in support of the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and also for the kind words they
addressed to me. I am grateful for the ideas, comments
and assessments expressed in this Chamber. I thank
them also for the criticism, which is very useful to us,
so that the work of the CTC does not become routine.

As has been noted today, the destruction caused
by terrorist activities is constantly increasing. Today, in
the city of Voronezh, in Central Russia, a terrorist act
was committed, killing one woman and wounding
several other people. There can be no idea of routine in
the combat against terrorism. Russia, as Chairman of
the Committee, will not allow that to happen.

All statements made today will be taken into
consideration in the CTC. All of the points that were
made will be taken into account in our work.

I should now like to touch briefly on some of the
points made today.

We fully agree with the points made regarding the
need to revitalize the work of the CTC, primarily
through reform. That will be our top priority. However,
I should like to assure members of the Security Council
that in carrying out such reform, the CTC will not halt
its ongoing activities and will continue to use the
instruments it has at its disposal in discharging the
tasks entrusted to it by the Security Council.

I would take note here of a point that was made
by many speakers - that is, concern about the fact that
many States have not yet become parties to
Conventions relating to counter-terrorism. I would note
in that connection the view that was expressed that
perhaps many States require technical assistance in
order to become parties to those Conventions, and we
will take that point into account in the work of the
CTC.

A useful View was expressed here that reports
should be received not just from individual States but
from regional organizations as well. I am delighted by
the fact that many of those who spoke today supported
the idea of dispatching CTC missions to one country
with the consent of that country. We are now working
on this question in a specific manner, and we hope that
in time such a trip can be made.

One last point: many statements stressed the
importance of assessing the technical needs of States in
order to help them comply with resolution 1373 (2001)
and then to find an opportunity to provide them with
assistance commensurate with their needs. That is an
important area of the activities of the CTC, and, in that
connection, I would appeal to all States Members of
the United Nations not to wait to appeal to the CTC if
they have a specific request or certain preferences in
areas where they are experiencing a need for technical
assistance. They should come to the CTC. Donor
countries come to us and ask us what kind of assistance
is needed by States, and they are prepared to make such
assistance available.

The CTC is prepared to serve as a middleman in
establishing cooperation between donors and those who
need assistance.

