Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important briefing
on drug trafficking in West and Central Africa as a
threat to international security. We appreciate the
briefing delivered by Mr. Yury Fedotov and we take this
opportunity to commend the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for the good work that it
has been doing in the area of fighting drug trafficking
and other transnational organized crimes.
That is an issue that we have been dealing with here
in the Council in the context of discussions on a wide
range of conflict situations in Central Africa, as well
as West Africa and the wider Sahel region, including
Guinea Bissau, Mali and the Sahel. It has also been a
matter of discussion at the level of the African Union
Peace and Security Council.

The growing threat posed by international
organized crime and drug trafficking in some States
of West and Central Africa has indeed been a serious
challenge that undermines the peace and stability
of those regions. The challenge is more prevalent in
countries where institutions are weak and lack the
capacities necessary to effectively discharge their
responsibilities. That is why there is need to provide
support to those countries in building their capacities
to be more effective in preventing and combating drug
trafficking and other transnational organized crimes.
We appreciate what the UNODC is doing through
its regional offices to build the capacity of the law
enforcement agencies of those countries and strengthen
regional cooperation.

The need to address the challenge posed by drug
trafficking and other transnational organized crimes
through practical and action-oriented cooperation
at the regional level has long been recognized.
The exchange of information and intelligence, the
enhancement of border security, the establishment of
regular mechanisms for cooperation and the sharing of
experiences and best practices are indeed very critical
to dealing with those challenges. The role of the Group
of Five for the Sahel Joint Force and the Multinational
Joint Task Force in fighting terrorism, drug trafficking
and other transnational organized crimes is very
important, and they must enjoy the international
support necessary to carry out their responsibilities.

At the level of the Council, we believe that there is
need to reflect on the existing strategies and available
tools so as to enhance efforts to address the nexus
between drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. In that regard, we believe that it is imperative
for the United Nations and its relevant bodies to assess
their cooperation with the two regions and identify
gaps with a view to devising an appropriate strategy to
provide the necessary assistance to build their capacity
to address that challenge, thereby reducing the ability
of terrorist groups and other organized criminals from
taking advantage of drug trafficking.

It is to be recalled that the African members of
the Council - Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and
Ethiopia - organized an Arria Formula meeting in
June on maritime crime as a threat to international
peace and security. The discussion that took place
at that meeting is very much linked to what we are
discussing today. The Gulf of Guinea has been a major
hub for maritime crime and drug trafficking.

Criminal networks are increasingly moving heroin
through maritime routes and that is a significant
challenge that requires an enhanced response.
Important discussions took place during the Arria
Formula meeting, and we know that there have been
efforts to have a Council product on that important
issue. We hope that the Council will be able to
pronounce itself on that matter, and we fully support
the efforts of Equatorial Guinea, as a representative
of the Central Africa region, in taking the lead on that
important issue.

