Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure for me to see all Security Council Members
here at this public debate on a clearly important and
relevant topic. Terrorist attacks on civil aviation have
happened with alarming frequency in recent years.
They pose yet another threat to international peace and
security.

The Senegalese delegation also wishes to extend
its gratitude to the United Kingdom, sponsor of this
initiative, which gives us an opportunity to begin
considering the ways and means to effectively rise to
the new challenges civil aviation faces. That is why we
voted in favour of and co-sponsored resolution 2309
(2016), which the Council has just adopted. This is yet
another important step in the right direction.

In accordance with the provisions of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
every State has a responsibility to guarantee the
effective implementation of all security-related
measures to protect civil aviation against unlawful
acts. For several years, Senegal has undertaken a vast
programme to bolster its civil aviation security in both
its territory and in its air space. The policy has enabled
the adoption by the National Assembly of my country
of a new civil aviation code through its law 2015/10,
adopted on 4 May 2015.

Senegal has also set up a number ofaviation rules and
regulations to improve the implementation of security
measures and procedures. This regulatory framework
was significantlhy updated at the national level within
the framework of the implementation of the provisions
of annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on International
Civil Aviation and of the related Universal Security
Audit Programme. Senegal has also created a platform
to exchange sensitive information with other States in
order to affectively face the rise in new threats, attacks
and unlawful acts using aircraft and airports. Pursuant
to decree 2015/1969 of 21 September 2015, Senegal has

set up a monitoring system for civil aviation security,
based on ICAO's provisions. That will ensure the
security of air transport in our territory for the setting
up of a national civil aviation security programmes.
The national civil aviation security programme and its
annexes cover everything within the framework of civil
aviation security. This applies to security measures
for domestic flights, threat assessment, airport-safety
programmes, operator-safety programmes, personnel
selection and background checks, training and
performance standards, screening-agent satisfaction,
quality-management programmes and cooperation
among States.

Senegal has also ratified the relevant provisions
of the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(WAEMU) related to air transport, in particular
Regulation 10 (2013), on civil-aviation security, and
Decision 11 (2013), dated 26 September 2013, on the
implementation of safety practices and procedures
within the member States of WAEMU. These provisions
are aimed at creating a set of rules for preserving civil-
aviation security in the WAEMU space, with regular
updates based on the evolution of risks and threats as well
as on technological progress. Each member of WAEMU
reserves the right to apply more stringent measures to
meet a particular requirement following the results of a
threat analysis. Senegal supports the idea of improved
cooperation among ICAO, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee through its Executive Directorate.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes and looks
forward to the organization of the upcoming special
meeting on threats to civil aviation and awaits with great
interest the briefing on the meeting's results, which will
be presented to the Security Council in 12 months.

