Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Mr. President, I
thank you for having organized this strategic debate on
the Democratic Republic of Congo and for inviting the
European Union to brief the Council on its views. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important briefing and for the message that he has
conveyed, which the European Union (EU) supports.

The European Union's engagement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is based on two
axioms: the importance of local ownership and the
need to ensure a coordinated international effort with
the United Nations at its core.

Progress in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be achieved only if Congolese political
leadership is fully engaged. Since the conflicts of the
1990s, the Congolese authorities have shown their
commitment to working with the international
community, including the European Union, towards the
stabilization of their country. I welcome the
participation at today's meeting of Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda, Minister for International and Regional
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and thank him for his important message. In his
presence, I wish to reiterate the European Union's
engagement in support of peace and stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo require the full involvement of the
international community. Today, the United Nations
lies at the heart of this effort. The European Union will
continue to support United Nations activities, including
the essential security role played by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the
stabilization process.

Allow me to outline three challenges that lie at
the heart of the strategic relationship that the European
Union is building with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and with the region.

The first challenge regards the strengthening of
an open, democratic political system in the Democratic
Republic. Progress in this area was the centrepiece of
the political transition in 2006. The Congolese people,
with the support of the international community, have
made great efforts to set up democratic institutions.
These efforts need to be continued.

The European Union, which was the leading
donor to the electoral process in 2006, will remain
engaged. Working with the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the EU will pursue
a three-pronged approach: a financial contribution of
€47.5 million; support of Congolese and international
efforts to secure the elections, in particular through the
purchase of communications equipment for the
Kinshasa police; and a possible European Union
electoral observation mission. The European Union
will also make a special effort to support dialogue
among all Congolese stakeholders, including civil
society, before and during the elections process.

The second challenge lies within the crucial area
of governance. In its partnership with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the EU has prioritized security
sector governance - defence, police and justice.
Security sector reform must be the backbone of lasting
peace and stability in the country.

Two European Union missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - the European Union Mission
of Assistance for Security Sector Reform (EUSEC) and
the European Union Police Mission (EUPOL) - assist
and advise the Congolese Government in the reform
and reconstruction of the army and the police. These
two missions operate in close coordination with the
United Nations and other relevant international actors.
EUSEC is comprised of some 50 staff, mostly
military. The mission provides advice and assistance to
the Congolese authorities in the defence sector. It
focuses, inter alia, on human resources, logistics
management and officer training. EUPOL is a police
mission headquartered in Kinshasa, with a field office
in Goma. It consists of some 50 experts in the areas of
police, justice, human rights and gender equality,
including specialists on combating impunity and sexual
violence.

As indicated by the Secretary-General and other
speakers, the fight against sexual violence is indeed
one of the greatest concerns of the international
community with respect to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Strengthening security sector reform in the
country is therefore more important than ever.
Appropriate legislation is currently being drafted, but
much work remains to be done. A comprehensive
approach addressing the political and technical
constraints that the Democratic Republic is facing is
crucial and should be continued, including during the
upcoming electoral period. With regard to the justice
sector, where the European Commission is one of the
main donors, a reform plan has been set up, but for the
time being the ministry in charge lacks the capacity to
meet its objectives.

The third challenge relates to the economy. We
acknowledge recent positive developments in the
macroeconomic policies carried out by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless, further efforts
are necessary in order to ensure economic progress,
which is a key factor for sustainable stabilization.

The European Union is contributing
approximately €634 million to development in the
Democratic Republic under the European Development
Fund for the period 2008-2013. An additional
€40 million per year are being provided as
humanitarian assistance. These amounts constitute
some 25 per cent of the total contribution made by the
European Union when the bilateral contributions made
by its member States are considered. The aim is to
support the reconstruction of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo while pursuing stabilization efforts in
some regions of the country. the Focus is on physical
rebuilding, in particular on transport infrastructure, as
well as on the reconstruction of the State through the
strengthening of good governance. In addition, the
European Union supports public health and
environmental protection activities.
Success in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will also depend on sustaining the improved regional
context. The European Union has made considerable
political and diplomatic efforts by contributing to
resolving regional crises and promoting greater
cooperation between former belligerents. Today's
cooperation between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its eastern neighbours is reshaping regional
dynamics and creating renewed opportunities for peace
and economic growth. It is also a prerequisite for
addressing the remaining regional conflicts, in
particular in the Kivu provinces, where non-Congolese
armed rebel groups still pose a significant threat.

With that in mind, the European Union is
supporting the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries, a regional organization comprised of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi that works as a permanent post-conflict forum
for dialogue among the three countries. The
relaunching of this organization is bearing its first
fruits in areas such as regional security and the
development of a regional economic infrastructure.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
cornerstone of continental security. The European
Union is committed to remaining engaged in the
country and in the Great Lakes region stabilization
process. Joint, coordinated efforts by the international
community are necessary. We recently shared our
analysis with other partners in the international contact
group on the Great Lakes in a meeting in Brussels on
15 April. Those efforts must be supported by a strong
and ongoing commitment on the part of the Congolese
authorities, because sustained efforts and substantial
resources will be required to ensure sustained progress
on the main challenges that I have just identified. For
its part, the European Union will continue to make its
contribution to the goals of achieving peace,
development and stability in the country. In that regard,
we will continue our close cooperation with the
Congolese authorities, the United Nations and other
international partners.

