Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): It is with deep sorrow that I inform the Council that a cowardly attack perpetrated by individuals on motorcycles took place yesterday in Koure, 60 kilometres from Niamey. The attack regrettably resulted in eight deaths - two Nigeriens and six French citizens. Following that grave incident, the Nigerien defence and security forces, supported by elements of the Operation Barkhane and American special forces, launched operations that are still under way. In the context of this tragic event, I would like, on behalf of the President, the Government and the people of the Republic of the Niger, to convey my heartfelt condolences to the grieving families of the victims and to the French and Nigerien Government and people. Let me also, on behalf South Africa, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the Niger (A3+1), welcome the efforts to normalize the political situation in Guinea-Bissau, and thank the briefers Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Guinea-Bissau; Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Joao Genesio de Almeida Filho, Deputy Permanent Representative of Brazil, on behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their excellent briefings, which reflect their respective commitment to continuing to work to resolve the current political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau prepares to close its doors by 31 December 2020, I commend Ms. Sori-Coulibaly and her team for their good offices, which have strongly helped all Bissau-Guinean parties to fully commit to a process to emerge from this crisis. On behalf ofthe A3+1, we hope that the significant progress made to date will continue, including with regard to the peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the United Nations country team in Guinea-Bissau. Indeed, despite the political challenges, gains have been made in reducing Office troops, as well as in identifying peacebuilding priorities to be jointly pursued by UNOWAS and the United Nations country team. Since the end of the electoral process in Guinea- Bissau in December 2019, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has been constantly engaged in the search for a lasting solution to the political and institutional crisis in the country. At this juncture, I wish to commend the sustained commitment of international partners, including the group of five international organizations - comprised of the African Union, ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union and the United Nations - that has made it possible to strengthen the process of stabilizing the politicalsituation in the country. I also wish to commend the eminently positive role played by the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, whose mandate is coming to an end, following the completion of the electoral process and the gradual normalization of the political situation in Guinea-Bissau. The A3+1 welcomes the establishment of the tripartite integrated cooperation and coordination mechanism comprised of ECOWAS, UNIOGBIS and UNOWAS to support the United Nations political and transitional process in Guinea-Bissau. It is clear that Guinea-Bissau is now at a crossroads. It therefore needs our collective assistance and support more than ever. It is in this spirit that ECOWAS, in its communique of 22 April, recognized the victory of Mr. Umaro Sissoco Embalo and called on him to appoint a Prime Minister and establish a new Government by 22 May, at the latest. In the same communique, President Embaloe was invited to launch a reform process with a view to adopting a new Constitution to be put to a referendum within six months, in order to ensure the country's lasting institutional stability. In this regard, we welcome the establishment of a Constitutional review commission, comprising experienced Bissau- Guinean legal experts, to carry out that task. The recent approval by the majority of the Members of Parliament of the programme of the new Government should enable the appointed Prime Minister to continue the implementation of the programme until a Government of national unity is in place. We welcome the proposal of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to establish a high-level platform to accompany the reforms that the country so badly needs. Coordination of the many international and regional efforts in Guinea-Bissau is crucial at this stage. Despite all the efforts that we have commended today, the context created by the COVID-19 pandemic that has struck Guinea-Bissau has greatly slowed the pace of implementation of the various reforms under way, as some political actors have themselves tested positive for the COVID-19 virus. We encourage the authorities of Guinea-Bissau, who have the primary responsibility for ensuring the security of the population, as well as all political actors, to work together to mitigate the threat at this critical time. The A3+1 welcomes the decision of the West African Health Organization, a specialized agency of ECOWAS, to send health kits to all member countries, including Guinea-Bissau, as part of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As I have said previously, Guinea-Bissau is at a crossroads. Indeed, the holding of elections alone cannot solve the many challenges facing the country. As we move to a new configuration of the United Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau, we call on the international community to support national initiatives in the context of peacebuilding, particularly in the area of sustainable development, including food security and rural development. The strengthening and modernization of democratic institutions and the reform of the judicial sector are areas where substantial support should be provided. The A3+1 supports the expansion of socioeconomic development actions, which are gender- and youth-sensitive, so as to ensure the participation of all social strata in Guinea-Bissau. We commend Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho for the excellent work done by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard. With regard to the issue of drug trafficking, while we are concerned about a possible resurgence of this dangerous phenomenon following the progress made recently with the significant seizures made in March and September 2019 and the conviction of those involved, we must recognize that Guinea-Bissau is neither a producer nor a consumer of these illicit narcotic drugs. Guinea-Bissau is quite simply a victim of a situation that is beyond its control, owing to its fragility in terms of the lack of surveillance and control equipment on its many islands - a fragility that is unfortunately accentuated by its political instability. Today more than ever, the international community should provide greater support to Guinea-Bissau in all areas likely to strengthen its capacity to deal with this terrible scourge. In this regard, the A3+l welcomes the continued support provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the framework of capacity-building for actors engaged in the fight against drug trafficking and the terrorism- and _ organized-crime-related gateway crimes of corruption and money-laundering in the region. We remain convinced that, through the mobilization of substantial financial resources, Ms. Waly's Office will strengthen the important work it is already doing in this regard. This could be done through increased support for Guinea-Bissau in the implementation of its national strategic action plan adopted in December 2019. In conclusion, the promotion and _ protection of human rights and respect for the rule of law are essential for peace, security, development and political stabilization in Guinea-Bissau. To that end, we encourage the defence and security forces of Guinea- Bissau to observe strict neutrality towards the ongoing political process, as they have done up until now.
