Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Every six months for eight years now, we
have listened to briefings from the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the investigation
of the situation in Libya. Today is the seventeenth
report in a row. From one year to the next in this
Chamber we are assured that the ICC is the institution
that can play an important role in ending armed
confrontation, restoring the rule of law, bringing the
guilty to justice and strengthening Libyans' faith in the
possibility of fairness. Sadly, the reality testifies to the
complete opposite. Each year the ICC becomes ever
less of a meaningful factor in the international arena.
Its investigations have no momentum and no results.
Before the meeting I looked through the statements
on this subject in the Security Council by Russia's
representatives in previous years, and I could have
delivered any one of them today. They are 100 per
cent up to date. It seems that the ICC is chronically
unreceptive to fair criticism.

The conflict in Libya has deep roots. In 2011 the
attempts by the air forces of the United States, France,
the United Kingdom, Canada, Belgium, Denmark, the
Netherlands, Norway and a number of other States
to bomb democracy into the former Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya resulted in nothing but many human victims
and the creation of chaos, rampant crime and floods of
refugees. All ofthat has somehow mysteriously escaped
the attention of the Prosecutor of the Court. There are
clearly specific reasons for that.

I would recommend that anyone who still cherishes
a naive belief in the shining image of the ICC as a
champion ofjustice should examine thejudges' decision
of 12 April. I believe my United States colleague
spoke of it earlier. The Court flat-out declared to the
international community that in certain circumstances
justice proper can be disregarded. The interests of
victims and the severity of crimes are secondary
categories for the ICC. The most important criterion
is that of the so-called interests of justice. In the
interests ofjustice, from now on the ICC has the right
not to undertake an investigation if it has doubts as to
the feasibility or possibility of an investigation given
the lack of cooperation of interested parties against
a backdrop of sanctions pressure on the members
of the Court themselves or if it feels constrained by
budgetary limitations.

I fear that it will never be possible to restore the
Court's reputation in the wake of this oh-so-elegant
verdict describing the ICC's understanding of the
interests ofjustice. With a judicial policy like this one
it will also hardly be possible for the investigation of
the situation in Libya to achieve any credible results.

