Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): The sustained
attention of the Council to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is indicative of the fact that it recognizes
that the success or failure of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will determine the continuing relevance
of the United Nations and of this Council to many
troubled parts of the world. My delegation would
therefore like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate to focus on what is probably the
most critical component of the peacebuilding agenda.
We would also like to thank you for the concept paper
(S/2011/16, annex), which we found extremely useful.

I thank the Secretary-General for his remarks,
and I would also like to express our appreciation to the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste for his presence
here and for his presentation on the remarkable strides
that his country has made. I also thank the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Wittig of
Germany.

Out of respect for the President's injunction to
confine our remarks to four minutes, I will present only
a summary of what I have to say. A more detailed paper
has been circulated.

Peace cannot be restored to post-conflict societies
and their citizens cannot be freed from fear and want
unless national authorities are able to govern
effectively. The capacity for effective governance, in
turn, depends on the existence of institutions that
enable these authorities to respond effectively to the
aspirations of people.
Over the past two decades, this Council made
huge investments in terms of manpower and resources
in designing and running multidimensional
peacekeeping operations. These have shown, at best,
mixed results. A handful has delivered outcomes that
may be termed satisfactory. Many have meandered as
they attempted over a decade or more to be equal to the
task of implementing their complex and ambitious
mandates.

ll-2l268

Unfortunately, conflicts persist, and we are now
in the midst of another paradigm shift. One dimension
of this shift - the attempt to define the scope of
peacebuilding - is becoming ever clearer as fragile
States define areas in which the international
community can and is willing to support their nation-
building activities. A second dimension - the relation
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding - is also
being clarified. However, a third dimension - the
organizational context of peacebuilding - continues to
lack uniformity. Some peacebuilding efforts are being
managed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, others by the Department of Political
Affairs and yet others by the United Nations resident
coordinator system. At another level, the Peacebuilding
Commission is working to expand its effectiveness.
Peacebuilding, therefore, is very much a work in
progress.

India brings to the table almost 60 years of
experience in peacekeeping. We have contributed more
peacekeepers to more peacekeeping operations than
any other nation. We have also participated in every
type of peacekeeping operation from truce supervision
to the current generation of complex peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeepers are early peacebuilders, and
Indian peacekeepers have been among the earliest
United Nations peacebuilders.

Our experience in transforming a colonial legacy
into a modern, dynamic nation that enjoys both
democracy and a rapidly growing economy has made
Indian peacekeepers instinctively understand that no
peace can be effective unless it is accompanied by the
growth of local institutions. Indian peacekeepers in the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia,
the United Nations Operation in Somalia II, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti and elsewhere have made conscious efforts to
assist local authorities in restoring national structures
that had collapsed during conflict. Our peacekeepers
have donned peacebuilding hats and attempted to
restore administrative processes, strengthened local
policing and activated judicial mechanisms in the areas
they have served. They have attempted to work through
indigenous mechanisms for conflict resolution and
mediation in order to strengthen these local institutions
so that they become viable political institutions. They
have tried to get educational institutions to function
and provided services, such as livestock clinics, to help
local economies get going.

Political and administrative institutions that
decentralize governance are, in our experience, the key
to nation-building. Institutions must be locally relevant
and include all stakeholders, particularly the weak and
underprivileged.

India launched the largest-ever exercise in
democratic decentralization about two decades ago.
Administrative and legislative powers were transferred
to village- and district-level bodies, and considerable
thought and effort were devoted to making these
institutions locally relevant. The key to the success of
these institutions, we have found, lies in what we call
inclusiveness. Our process of democratic
decentralization has ensured the election of about
1 million women to representative offices at all levels.
Empowering those who have traditionally been at the
margins of society has strengthened and transformed
both democracy and governance in our country.

Inclusiveness works in interesting ways. The
decision of the Government of India to aggressively
recruit women police personnel allowed us to field a
female formed police unit - the first such formation
composed entirely of women - in UNMIL. We
understand that the presence of these Indian women
police personnel has not only assisted in restoring faith
in the local law enforcement system, but has served as
an example to Liberian women.

No amount of international will can replace
national will and commitment. Moreover,
peacebuilding cannot be undertaken in a hurry. Our
role as peacebuilders has to be to assist, through long-
term and patient involvement, the creation of an
environment in which this local will is allowed to
express itself. It is also to provide the resources and the
expertise that are often lacking in societies struggling
to re-engineer themselves. All of this calls for the
international community to make available a
predictable and appropriate level of resources over
extended periods.

It is hard to avoid the feeling that the United
Nations presence on the ground is a ponderous
bureaucracy rather than a lean institution that is quick
to adapt and respond. Symptomatic of this malaise is
the fact that the Secretariat takes up to 200 days to fill
positions in the field, leading to worrying vacancy

levels. The sourcing of these capacities must be driven
by the needs of national authorities and not by
priorities of the donors. It also stands to reason that
these capacities need to be sourced from the
Governments of nations that have experience of
relevance to these national authorities.

Serious consideration must also be given to the
idea of expanding the secondment of staff to the United
Nations. This would allow the United Nations to
rapidly access necessary capabilities, deploy them
swiftly and allow rapid scaling up and down. It is also
likely to be more economical.

In concluding, I would like to stress that, as a
responsible global citizen, India will not be found
lacking in responding to the challenge of maintaining
international peace and security through the
peacebuilding process. Through the Indian Technical
and Economic Cooperation programme, we give
training to some 5,000 foreign students and experts
from 158 countries around the globe in approximately
220 courses. Similarly, through lines of credit, South-
South cooperation and the India Development
Initiative, we have contributed to nation-building
activities in various countries. India has also
contributed to peacebuilding through innovate
multilateral mechanisms, such as the India-Brazil-
South Africa initiatives in Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and
other nations.

