Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her report and briefing today. The
United Kingdom would like to reiterate its support for
the work of the Prosecutor and for the role that the ICC
plays in bringing those responsible for serious crimes
of international concern to account.

Libya is in urgent need of progress towards full
political reconciliation, now more than ever. The scale
of the crisis facing the people of Libya is grave. It is a
crisis in which the fighting continues year after year,
and in which violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses continue
unabated. The people of Libya deserve a better future.
Establishing effective governance is key. Libya's
legitimate political institutions must work together to
break the political deadlock that is prolonging instability
and the suffering of the Libyan people. Libya's political
and social groups must seize the momentum offered by
the welcome meetings between Prime Minister Serraj
and Field Marshal Haftar earlier this week to lay out a
path towards Libyan reconciliation and unity. Security,
stability and prosperity can be achieved only when the
country's leaders choose to get together and work out a
plan for the common benefit of the Libyan people.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Prosecutor's
ongoing efforts to investigate alleged crimes, despite
the practical difficulties of conducting investigations
inside Libya. We remain deeply concerned about the
continued violence between armed groups across
the country, and particularly about the reports of
human rights abuses and violations by combatants
in Benghazi and elsewhere, including attacks on
innocent civilians and medical facilities. There is no
justification for attacking medical facilities protected
under international humanitarian law. We note that
the Prosecutor is giving consideration to opening
an investigation into alleged criminal acts against
migrants in Libya. Such alleged crimes provide further
justification for tackling migration upstream so that
the international community can help to create more
opportunities in migrants' home countries.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the Prosecutor's
update on the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. We support her call to the Libyan
authorities to do everything possible to ensure the
transfer of Al-Qadhafi to the ICC and to consult the
Court on any problems that might impede his transfer
to The Hague. We look forward to the outcome of the
Court's consideration of the report of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya on the domestic proceedings
against Mr. Al-Senussi.

The United Kingdom commends the continued
engagement of the Libyan Prosecutor-General and the
Libyan representatives to the Court. We call on other
States and relevant international organizations to assist
the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build the rule
of law in Libya. We thank the Prosecutor for the update
on the allegations of torture committed against Saadi
Al-Qadhafi in Al-Hadba prison, and we welcome the
fact that one of the accused who had been returned to
his position at the prison has now been removed.

We also thank the Prosecutor for her briefing on
the case against Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, who is
wanted for war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Libya in 2011. We fully support the
Court's call for cooperation from members of the
Council, Libya and all States to provide information to
facilitate the swift arrest of Mr. Al-Tuhamy and ensure
his surrender to the ICC. It is crucial that he and other
individuals responsible for war crimes in Libya not
become fugitives from justice.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom understands
the financial and resource constraints faced by the
Prosecutor's Office and the need to ensure adequate
funding for the Court's Libya investigations. We
are committed to working with others to ensure that
the Court has the resources necessary for its work,
while ensuring that the ICC budget is as streamlined
as possible.

