Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire would like to congratulate your
country, Mr. President, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to assure you of its full support throughout
your term of office.

Cote d'Ivoire emphatically condemns the terrorist
attacks on the headquarters Burkina Faso's armed
forces and on the Embassy of France in Ouagadougou.
We express our solidarity with France and Burkina
Faso at this difficult time.

I welcome today's presence in the Chamber of
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. C6te d'Ivoire
also congratulates Ms. Zerrougui, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO),
and thanks her for her briefing on the situation in the
country.

On the situation in that brotherly country, I would
like to make two main points, namely, with regard to
the adoption of the Political Agreement on 31 December
2016 and the security and humanitarian situation.

With regard to the adoption of the Political
Agreement, the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the progress made by the Independent National
Electoral Commission (CENI), in particular on the
publication of the electoral calendar and the finalization
of electoral lists ahead of democratic, credible and
inclusive elections. We urge the Congolese political
class to continue their efforts to create an environment
conducive to the holding of peaceful elections.

Cote d'Ivoire acknowledges and welcomes the
commitment of the Congolese Government to organizing
elections within the time frame set. We call on the
opposition to commit resolutely to the political and
electoral process under way and to play a constructive
role in the implementation of the 31 December 2016
Political Agreement.

Despite the progress made in the implementation of
the electoral calendar, my delegation remains concerned
about the delay in the effective implementation of the
Political Agreement. We call on the Government to
create the necessary political and social conditions for
the enjoyment of individual and collective fundamental
freedoms. Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the technical
and logistical support of the United Nations for the
electoral process under way and encourages greater
synergy among the efforts by CENI, MONUSCO and
the Congolese Government with a view to ensuring the
effective holding of the elections on 23 December.

With regard to the security situation, cote d'Ivoire
is concerned about the ongoing activities of armed
groups in several provinces of the country, particularly
in North and South Kivu. Despite the efforts of the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo,
those armed groups remain active in the provinces of
Tanganyika, Haut-Katanga and North and South Kivu.
My delegation is also deeply concerned about the
persistence of activities that have led to a mass exodus
of people, such as serious human rights violations and
deadly attacks against the United Nations forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes MONUSCO's commitment
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a particularly
difficultsociopoliticalandsecurityenvironment.Inorder
for MONUSCO to carry out its mandate - the renewal
of which we support - we encourage it to continue its
collaboration with the Congolese authorities. We hope
that an adjustment of its current configuration, as part
of its new protection-through-projection strategy, will
allow for a better assessment of its strategic priorities
in the areas of protecting civilians and supporting the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The humanitarian situation also remains a matter
of great concern, with nearly 13.1 million people in
need of protection and humanitarian assistance across
the country, including 4.5 million internally displaced
persons, and 670,000 refugees in neighbouring
countries.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire would like to call
on regional organizations and the international
community 4 namely, the Southern African
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the African Union, the
United Nations and the Security Council - to provide
all the necessary assistance to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with a view to the holding of elections on
23 December.

