Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I speak on behalf of
Colombia, Ethiopia, Ghana, Indonesia, Jordan, Mexico,
New Zealand and my own country, Norway. We are
eight countries that came together early in 2015 to form
a cross-regional group, the so-called UN70 Group,
with a view to developing reform ideas for the United
Nations. In November last year, we handed over a set of
recommendations to the Secretary-General. One of the
five key messages conveyed to Mr. Guterres was that he
should strive to place conflict prevention at the heart of
the United Nations peace and security agenda.

Last year, Member States agreed on the concept
of sustaining peace in the landmark resolutions on the
peacebuilding architecture (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262).
Sustaining peace encompasses activities aimed at
preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, addressing root causes,
assisting parties to conflict to end hostilities, ensuring
national reconciliation and moving towards recovery,
reconstruction and development. That is quite an
agenda. We need concerted efforts that involve the
whole of the United Nations system and that include
collaboration with national Governments and other key
partners, such as international, regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
civil-society organizations, women's groups, youth
organizations and the private sector.

The Security Council has a unique mandate and
position. The Council has various means of preventing
conflict at its disposal, as reflected in the concept note
(S/2017/6, annex) for today's meeting. With opportunity
comes responsibility. The United Nations system is in
need ofa renewal of its conflict prevention and conflict
resolution mechanisms. We, the cross-regional UN70
Group, strongly urge the Security Council to use all
the means at its disposal to prevent the emergence of
new crises like those in Syria or South Sudan. The
Security Council needs to work closely with our new
Secretary-General, give him space to work proactively
on preventive diplomacy and be willing to respond
when the Secretary-General recommends action by
the Council.

We are very pleased that the new Secretary-
General will put conflict prevention at the very top of
his agenda. We would like to see a greater proportion
of resources allocated to that area, as well as a more
coherent approach by the United Nations system
to identifying and addressing conflict risks. We
welcome the Secretariat's initiative to convene monthly
situational awareness briefings for Council members,
and we underscore the importance of the Secretary-
General providing strong leadership to the Secretariat
and the wider United Nations system.

The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
conflict prevention. However, the Council cannot do it
alone. We, the States Members of the United Nations,
must come together and advance the sustaining peace
agenda. National ownership is fundamental in order
to achieve results. Preventing conflict and sustaining
peace, with the assistance of the international
community, does not undermine State sovereignty. On
the contrary, it strengthens State sovereignty. The shift
to prevention is not an opportunity, it is a necessity.
