The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
invitations under rule 37 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Mirko Sarovie,
Presiding Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Sulejman Tihic',
Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
His Excellency Mr. Dragan Covic', Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and His
Excellency Mr. Dragan Mikerevic', Prime Minister of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Mirko Sarovie, Presiding Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr.
Sulejman Tihie, Member of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Dragan Covie,
Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Mr. Dragan Mikerevic', Prime
Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, were
escorted to their seats at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the Members
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the
Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jacques Klein,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Chief of Mission.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2002/1314, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jacques Klein, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Chief of Mission, His Excellency Mr. Mirko
Sarovic', Presiding Member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Sulejman Tihic',
Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and His Excellency Mr. Dragan Covic', Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Kofi Annan, to whom I give the floor.


