Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Sir, for getting this meeting together. I share the warm
appreciation of colleagues for the Angola sanctions
Committee Chairman' s excellent briefing. I really think that
we are right to be applauding the time, work and spirit that
Ambassador Fowler and his team have put into this subject.

It is not just right that the Council should be doing all
it can to improve and tighten the implementation and
enforcement of the sanctions it has imposed on UNITA. It
is also part of the action that we should be taking as a
council to support legitimate Governments in Africa -
something, I think, we are going to have to spend an
increasing amount of time on. It is too common in Africa
that political opposition is expressed only through armed
force and we have to get international support together for
legitimate Governments against rebellions and for
democratic expression of political opposition. The subject
of UNITA sanctions should lead us into a wider discussion
of what we do overall in the continent of Africa to further
the spread of democratic expression.

The United Kingdom agrees with many of the
recommendations identified in his reports to the Council by
Chairman Fowler, as my United States colleague calls
him - I think we perhaps need a bit of autocracy on this
subject. Many of these recommendations can be
implemented now and we urge the sanctions Committee and
member States to do so immediately. In particular, the
United Kingdom can agree that there should be closer
international coordination between regional organizations
and the United Nations and that licensed foreign diamond
purchasers should liaise with the Committee in devising
practical measures to limit UNITA's access to the world
diamond market.

Here, we welcome the statement issued by the
International Diamond Manufacturers Association on 5 July,
which urges its members to refrain from purchasing any
diamond from Angola without a certificate of origin. The
cooperation of the diamond industry is essential if the
revenue that UNITA enjoys from the sale of diamonds is to
be reduced. We also agree that measures should be taken
by the Government of Angola to create a more effective
certificate-of-origin scheme than the one that exists at
present, and we agree that sanctions-busting should
become a criminal offence in all Member States in an
effort to deter those who seek to profit at the expense of
the helpless.

Some of the remaining recommendations will,
obviously, require further study by the expert panels
established by resolution 1237 (1999) to investigate
violations of sanctions against UNITA. The United
Kingdom looks forward to the final report from these
panels, which will form the basis for the Council's
consideration of further measures against UNITA. To
assist the work of these expert panels, the United
Kingdom is ready to contribute the sum of $300,000 to a
trust fund, should it be required to fund the work of the
expert panels.

Finally, I have a couple of questions for Ambassador
Fowler. First of all, after the establishment of the panels,
what does he foresee as the next steps for the Council and
the sanctions Committee to improve the enforcement of
the sanctions regime, or are we only waiting for the
results of the panels? Secondly, what plans does he have
to undertake Visits to other States that have close
involvement in the diamond trade?

