Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first join previous
speakers in thanking Special Representative Doss for
his briefing. We should also like to welcome the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Belgium and the
participation of the Permanent Representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in
today's meeting.

We, too, are of the view that there is no military
solution to the conflict. The Council and all the
members of the international community therefore
need to continue to urge all parties to re-engage in the
political process in the frameworks of the Nairobi and
Goma processes. The long-term success of the peace
process in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will depend not only on the sustained
political engagement of all stakeholders, but also on
the continued support of the country's international
partners.

With regard to the issue of illegal armed groups
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
wish to underscore that their existence and activities
remain a core problem that needs urgent attention. All
parties need urgently to implement all relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1794
(2007), lay down their arms and engage voluntarily and
without further delay or preconditions in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. The United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
for its part, should continue its support in that regard.

The involvement of neighbouring States could
further complicate the situation and escalate the
existing tension in the region. At the same time, we
recognize that the refugee issue and its spillover to
neighbouring States would naturally create additional
pressure for external intervention. The immediate
neighbours of the Kivu provinces have enough of their
own problems to contend with, let alone having to be
prepared to address a massive humanitarian crisis.
Moreover, fighting and instability could also spread
across the border, raising further tensions in the region.
All necessary steps should therefore be taken to
address the cross-border issue consistently with the
existing framework.

We continue to support the good offices of the
Secretary-General, in particular his Special Envoy, to
work with leaders in the region to find a solution to the
problems underlying the conflict. We believe that the
Special Envoy will continue to provide his able
leadership to reverse the current escalation and
coordinate the full implementation of the Nairobi
communique and the Goma agreement.

With regard to the issue of MONUC's mandate,
we support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that it be extended for the next 12 months. We
also share the Secretary-General's views that
MONUC's mandate should be carefully reviewed over
the next mandate period. In that context, we wish to
underline the importance of retaining the issue of the
protection of civilians as the focus of MONUC's next
mandate. We would also like to emphasize that under
the existing Council resolution, MONUC has a
mandate to use all necessary means to protect civilians
under imminent threat of physical violence. We are
hopeful that the temporary increase of MONUC's
military strength, pursuant to resolution 1843 (2008),
will enable MONUC to reinforce its capacity to protect
civilians.

Finally, while most of our attention is focused on
the problem in the Kivu provinces, we should also
remain vigilant with regard to the security situation in
other parts of the country. It is important for the
Council to ensure that the deployment of MONUC
resources mostly in the eastern part of the country will
not create a security vacuum in other parts of the
country that could then become vulnerable to a
possible outbreak of violence.

