Mr. Sollberger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Jordan for having organized
this debate. The rise of radicalization and Violent
extremism, especially among adolescent and young
people, is among the today's most pressing threats to
peace, stability and development.

Switzerland is firmly committed to countering
violent extremism. This is a security imperative that
calls for a preventative approach and a broad-based
societal response. We must listen to the grievances of
those vulnerable to radicalization and recruitment by
terrorist groups, especially young people. We have
to offer a choice to these young people attracted to
radicalization - a sense of belonging and a purpose in
life, as the two professors who briefed the Council at
the opening of this debate pointed out.

It is for this reason that Switzerland supports the
Global Community Engagement and Resilience Fund.
This innovative public-private partnership based in
Geneva offers great opportunities to channel efforts and
collectively implement a long-term strategy aimed at
preventing the radicalization of young men and women.
We are ready to actively support the its campaign to
raise awareness among the private sector regarding the
need forjoint action to create jobs for young people.

Let me explain how Switzerland is integrating

preventative measures to fight Violent extremism in its
domestic as well as in its foreign policies. Domestically,
Switzerland's bottom-up design actions seek to empower
local communities - to people themselves - the means
to act. Swiss communal and regional authorities and a
multitude of civil society actors, including religious
organizations, play an active role in promoting a
welcoming socioeconomic environment. Private-sector
companies offer jobs and vocational training. Paid
training offers significant advantages: as employees,
apprentices obtain a recognized status that builds their
confidence.

This bottom-up approach also informs Switzerland's
foreign policy approach, which includes a wide range
of relevant development and peacebuilding measures
aiming to make societies more resilient, for example
through youth employment in Kyrgyzstan, demobilizing
child soldiers in Myanmar and vocational training in
Tunisia.

Let me conclude by addressing two particular
issues regarding the link between Violent extremism
and youth. Switzerland has already expressed many
times its concern about counter-terrorism measures
that criminalize any humanitarian action or any contact
established for humanitarian ends with armed groups
considered to be extremists. It is the children in areas
controlled by such groups who are most affected and
directly suffer from the harmful consequences of
these measures. Counter-terrorism policies that often
seek to protect the most vulnerable should take such
consequences into consideration.

Finally, the enactment of counter-terrorism
legislation does not give sufficient consideration to
the fact that persons alleged of committing terrorism
could be under the age of 18. Many counter-terrorism
strategies, for example, provide for long sentences of
incarceration and solitary confinement, which not only
Violates the rights of individuals to a fair trial but also
has a devastating psychological impact on children.
Criminal legislation for countering terrorism should
therefore be considered in the light of the specific
situation of children so as to integrate international
standards for juvenile justice.

