Judge Agius: On a Tuesday evening back in May
1993, against a backdrop of ongoing atrocities, mass
murder and war, this organ, acting on behalf of the
international community, gathered to establish an
international tribunal for the prosecution of persons
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. Spurred on by the belief that this
was possible and necessary, by a prevailing faith in
multilateral solutions, and by a determination and
willingness to do something - anything - to try to
halt the conflicts in the ex-Yugoslavia, the Security
Council adopted resolution 827 (1993). The challenge
was offering a bold and innovative response to conflict.
The odds were zero to none. The score is 161 out of 161.

In retrospect, and knowing that evenings like
that fateful and memorable Tuesday are much rarer
today than in the golden age of political optimism of
the early 1990s, many would agree with me that the
establishment of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was one of the international
community's proudest moments. In supporting the
creation and continued existence of the Tribunal, our
predecessors and those present here today have put their
signature on a very important page in the history of
internationaljustice and the fight against impunity. We,
together with the Security Council, will be remembered
for what we have achieved; for having done something
good - something meaningful.

But there is another history - the history of those
who, almost from the very beginning, were afraid
to accept the Tribunal and even denounced it. It is a
history that belongs to those who did not choose to
fight impunity, but rather, for reasons of political or
personal gain, blind nationalism and ethnic hatred,
preferred immunity to impunity and chose to protect,
and even glorify, those who had committed atrocities.
Both histories will be remembered. However, in time
the first will be judged favourably, and the second will
be condemned.

Despite all the sceptics, naysayers and deniers who,
from the very beginning, embarked on a campaign
against the Tribunal and have been at pains to question
our legitimacy and integrity and to portray a doomsday
scenario, I am proud to appear before the Council today
and say "mission accomplished". The Tribunal has,
as of last Wednesday, 29 November, finished all its
judicial work, firmly in line with previous forecasts.
We are now only three weeks away from the ultimate
conclusion of the ICTY mandate and the fulfilment of
its completion strategy, having achieved over almost a
quarter of a century what no one back in 1993 would
have thought possible. Allow me to recall just a few of
the Tribunal's defining moments.

From 2 October 1995:

"What is inhumane, and consequently proscribed,
in international wars, cannot but be inhumane and
inadmissible in civil strife."

From 10 December 1998:

"Rape may also amount to a grave breach of
the Geneva Conventions, a violation of the
laws or customs of war or an act of genocide,
if the requisite elements are met, and may be
prosecuted accordingly.'

From 22 February 2001:

"[T]he presence of a state official or of any other
authority-wielding person in the torture process
is not necessary for the offence to be regarded as
torture under international humanitarian law."

From 5 December 2003:

"Acts of violence wilfully directed against the
civilian population with the primary purpose of
spreading terror constitute a violation of the laws
or customs of war."

The aforementioned statements constitute points
of no return that forever changed the landscape of
international justice. They have been embraced by the
Council in its decisions, by other international courts
and tribunals in their judgements, and by numerous
actors in domestic jurisdictions. These are but a handful
of examples, and the Tribunal has broken new ground
in areas too numerous to mention here, but which are
set out in the report before the Council today (see S/2017/662).

In his initial report to the United Nations (see S/1994/1007), that great man Antonio Cassese, first
President of the ICTY, proclaimed that the establishment
of the Tribunal could constitute a turning point for the
world community if it proved that it could work in an
effective and dispassionate way and if the necessary
cooperation of all States and United Nation bodies were
forthcoming. I firmly believe that these two conditions
have been met in the years since and that the Tribunal
has fulfilled President Cassese's prophecy.

In relation to the first condition, the tasks entrusted
to us have indeed been daunting. The experiences
we have lived through have been sobering, but the
ICTY has demonstrated time and time again its
resilience and determination to deliver justice. And
we have done exactly that - rendered justice by
prosecuting and adjudicating crimes committed by
individuals - and I repeat individuals, not peoples
or countries or Governments - in an impartial,
independent, effective manner.
To that end, we developed and implemented a
completion strategy, and we constantly searched for
ways to improve our operations and increase efficiency.
With the delivery of judgments in the final trial case
against Ratko Mladic' on 22 November, and the final
appeal case against Jadranko Prlie and others on
29 November, the Tribunal's core work has now been
concluded, in line with its previous commitment to
the Council.

It is only fitting that the judges who presided over
both final cases are present here today. I am delighted
and honoured that Judge Alphons Orie, Presiding Judge
in the Mladie Trial Chamber, is seated next to me
today as I present the Tribunal's final-ever completion
strategy report (S/2017/1001, annex II). And, of course,
I was the Presiding Judge of the Prosecutor v. Prlic' et
al. case. Both judgments were significant and followed
closely around the globe.

In relation to the Prosecutor v. Prlie et al. case, we
can all agree that what happened in court last Wednesday
was extremely unfortunate. The Tribunal attaches
the utmost seriousness to this incident, which is now
being thoroughly investigated. However, regrettable
as they are, these circumstances must not be allowed
to overshadow the ICTY's final weeks or somehow
undermine the Tribunal's legacy and judgments. It is
extremely disturbing, however, that some appear to be
exploiting this situation. They should not be allowed to
get away with that.

In relation to the second of Cassese's
conditions - the cooperation of all States and United
Nation bodies - I shall not recount all the logistical,
financial and other problems that bedeviled the initial
life of the Tribunal and that have plagued its closure,
or the myriad circumstances outside the Tribunal's
control that led to delays in the arrest of fugitives and
the conduct of proceedings. Indeed, these and other
challenges, and the Tribunal's responses thereto, are set
out in the report before you. However, the difficulties
faced by the ICTY should in no way lead one to
conclude that it is not worth it to resort to international
criminal tribunals.

In all fairness, as it turned out, the Tribunal
ultimately received all of the resources and support
it needed to complete its work. But let us be honest
here. If we are to believe in international criminal
justice at all, then we must accept that it will always
be time-consuming, unwieldy and expensive, and that
it cannot be compared with criminal proceedings at
the domestic level. Could we have done things better?
Probably. Could we have been more efficient? In
hindsight, yes. Let me assure the Council, however, that
this was not for lack of trying. Did we have a choice?
No. Because, rest assured, to live with the alternative of
doing nothing or giving in to impunity, is to pay a much
higher price. Can anyone in this Chamber honestly
argue with the family members of victims that justice
for their loved ones is not worth fighting or paying for?

In these brief minutes, it would be impossible
to specifically recognize everyone who has played
a role in the creation, development and fulfilment of
the Tribunal's mandate. From the unfailingly helpful
Office of Legal Affairs, to the Tribunal's outstanding
host country, the Netherlands; from the forthright
Chairpersons of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, to the European Union
and numerous individual States that have provided
generous voluntary contributions to the Tribunal; from
all the countless legal advisers here in New York to the
civil society representatives, victims' associations and
members of academia both in the former Yugoslavia and
around the world; and, significantly, from the members
of the Security Council, who in 1993 had the courage
to take the initiative - indeed, the risk - of setting up
the Tribunal, to those State representatives here today,
and all those who have sat on this esteemed Council in
between, it is thanks to your guidance and assistance
throughout, your extension of Judges' mandates and
ensuring the adequate provision of resources, that we
have been able to carry out our work and get the job
done. To all of those stakeholders and supporters, it is
only befitting that I convey our sincerest gratitude on
behalf of the Tribunal.

In relation to the Tribunal's final biennium, I wish
to personally acknowledge Ambassador Rosselli Frieri
of Uruguay for being an eloquent and leading voice
in the Security Council in the fight against impunity;
Ambassador Cardi, who on behalf of Italy vigorously
upheld and advanced the rule of law during his term
on the Council; Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares and
Mr. Stephen Mathias, our formidable legal support team
in the Secretariat; and to Ambassador Van Oosterom.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands could not be in better
hands as he prepares to assume his term in the Security
Council. We trust that he will continue to advance the
agenda of international peace and justice, which is
his country's trademark. Of course, I am personally
indebted to many more, including - and certainly not
least - the Tribunal's Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz,
and the Tribunal's Registrar, Mr. John Hocking.

As to my own, personal reflections, I would like
first of all to say that, while serving as the Tribunal's
last President has been a tremendous honour, ensuring
that the ICTY closes in a timely and dignified manner
has been an extremely heavy responsibility to shoulder.
It has required extraordinary effort to balance and
absorb pressures from both within and outside the
Tribunal. There has never been any question of failure,
because if the Tribunal had failed, through us the
whole international community would also have failed.
I believe that we have been successful, and I want to
stress that success cannot only be measured in terms of
numbers ofjudgments delivered or cases concluded, but
must also mean acting professionally and honourably,
and being proud of what we do every day. I take great
pride in closing down an institution of the calibre of the
ICTY and in having kept my word to the Council that
we would close by the end of this year.

Secondly, the achievements of the ICTY do not
begin and end in The Hague. The completion of our
work, and of our restricted mandate as a court of law,
does not mean that the job is done. It is with a heavy
heart that I leave the Tribunal, deeply troubled by the
huge numbers of crimes yet to be prosecuted before
domestic courts in the former Yugoslavia and by the
thousands of victims who continue to cry for justice.
While it is commendable to see that many cases have
been adjudicated through special war crimes courts
and that specialized war crimes prosecutors continue
to investigate and bring charges against perpetrators,
much more needs to be done. In that respect, I urge
the United Nations to continue to assist and support the
relevant institutions and actors on the ground.

Further, the rise of revisionism and nationalism
throughout the region cannot be ignored. The
international community must not delude itself- the
absence of war does not mean peace, particularly in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, where political conflict and
unrest continue to reign. Itherefore urge the international
community to assure those of all ethnicities throughout
the region that they will not be abandoned after the
Tribunal's closure, and to keep to that promise.

Thirdly, ending impunity for mass crimes is not the
preserve of any one institution; it is a common goal and
aspiration that ties us all together in our shared quest
for justice, peace and stability. We at the Tribunal have
made our contribution, and indeed the Tribunal has
spurred on the creation of other courts and tribunals.
However, the international community must take steps
to ensure that the contributions of these institutions are
not undermined, or even reversed, by a lack of political
support, and that their legacies are preserved. The ICTY
is fortunate to end with a strong successor institution in
place - namely, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals - and I know we can count
on the Residual Mechanism, under the leadership of
my renowned colleague, Professor Theodor Meron, to
carry the Tribunal's legacy forward.

Fourthly, I want to reflect on the people who have
breathed life into the ICTY - the precious staff,
principals and judges of the Tribunal who have been
entrusted to carry out its mission. Not only has working
with dedicated, talented individuals from around the
world been the professional experience of a lifetime;
it has also been deeply enriching and rewarding on a
personal level. I only wish that each Council member
could work with people as motivated and committed
to the cause of justice as I have over my 16 years as
an ICTY Judge. At the end of this month, there will
not be a single staff member left, yet together with the
judges, they have made it possible for the Tribunal to
enrich international humanitarian law and to constitute
a beacon of hope in the fight against impunity. I have
faith that, wherever their journeys take them, they will
continue to contribute to what is right andjust. On behalf
of the entire ICTY, I express my heartfelt gratitude to
all staff, judges and principals for their outstanding
service to the Tribunal and to international criminal
justice. It would be remiss of me not to also mention
and thank all of the defence counsel and members of
defence teams who throughout the years have always
been considered a crucial part of the Tribunal.

I also take this opportunity to congratulate and
convey my best wishes to Japan for its term as President
of the Security Council for the remainder of the year. I
also wish to thank all outgoing members ofthe Security
Council and, since I will not be at the Secretariat when
it happens, to greet the incoming members who will
start their terms in January.

A great statesman and diplomat once said that
"justice will not be served until those who are unaffected
are as outraged as those who are". The setting-up of our
Tribunal was a powerful signal that the international
community would not stand idly by and watch while
barbaric acts were being perpetrated far away in the
former Yugoslavia. The Members of the Organization
decided that heinous crimes such as rape, torture, ethnic
cleansing and the wanton killing of civilians affect each
and every one of us simply because they imperil the
great principles of civilization, as protected by the rule
of law and enshrined in internationally recognized
standards of human rights and humanitarian law.

In closing, I cannot help but wonder what Nino
Cassese or the ever-so-brilliant CherifBassiouni would
say on this occasion. I can only hope that we at the
Tribunal have made them proud and contributed to
alleviating the anguish and sorrow ofthose who suffered
during the conflicts of the 1990s. As the international
community now looks on while mass crimes continue to
take place, even as I speak, and geopolitical roadblocks
impede any kind of comprehensive justice solutions, we
must not forget the political courage that sparked the
ICTY's existence, the Tribunal's long trajectory and the
need to stay the course.

