Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the
Slovak Republic and Slovenia; the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey; as well as the European
Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area, Iceland, declare that they
align themselves with this statement.

Despite the remarkable progress that has been
achieved in Afghanistan since the Bonn Agreement,
significant challenges remain. The European Union
commends the efforts made so far by President
Karzai's Government to implement the Agreement and
stands firm in its commitment to assist the Afghan
Administration to this end. We also support the United
Nations, and in particular Mr. Brahimi, in their
important tasks in that country. In this respect, there is
also a special role for the Special Representative of the
EU in Afghanistan, Francesc Vendrell.

Nevertheless, a lot remains to be done to ensure
viable and lasting peace and security. Post-conflict
resolution always represents a tremendous challenge,
and even more so in Afghanistan, which is one of the
poorest countries in the world. It has been through over
20 years of war, strife and natural disaster. It is
essential that the international community fully
participate in the economic and institutional
reconstruction of the country and fully support the
political process that underlies the reconstruction. The
signing of the Kabul Declaration On Good-neighbourly
Relations in December last year also emphasized the
importance of peaceful and constructive regional
cooperation.

The lack of security continues to be an issue of
grave concern. We deplore the loss of lives, such as
that suffered recently by two European countries, Spain
and Germany, in the conduct of the activities of their
troops under the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF).

As a contribution to this vital sector, many EU
member States play a key role in the deployment of
ISAF, the bulk of which is comprised of troops from
the EU countries and which has significantly improved
the security situation in and around Kabul. European
Union member States are also actively participating in
efforts to reform the Afghan security sector through the
strengthening of the Afghan national army and police,
including anti-narcotic units and border police, as well
as judicial training and reform. Security sector reform,
including the restructuring of the Ministries of Defence
and Interior and the intelligence agencies, is of the
utmost importance for the viability of the forthcoming
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
which is to begin in July 2003.

Another important challenge is making newly and
already established institutions work in an efficient,
transparent and accountable manner and to expand
their influence to the provinces. The European Union
has a long-term commitment to assist in the creation of
a viable Afghan State based on democracy, the rule of
law and universal standards of human rights, including
women's rights. To this end, the European Union
underlines its support for the work of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission.

In this regard, it is noted that the future viability
of the Afghan State will to a large degree depend on its
Government's being broad-based and fully
representative and recognized as such by a majority of
the Afghan people. The impending Constitutional Loya
Jirga process, which will lead to a new constitution
being adopted in October, and the national elections to
be held at the latest in June 2004, will be of
fundamental importance to the political future of
Afghanistan. The European Union stresses the
importance it attaches to the preparations for the new
Afghan constitution and the holding of full and
democratic elections in Afghanistan, as set out in the
Bonn Agreement. This new Afghan Constitution
should be the cornerstone for the development of such
a democratic Afghan society. The European Union
strongly supports the role of the United Nations in the
preparations for the elections and underlines that it is
important that the process leading towards these
elections be sustained.

The European Union is fully committed to
delivering a substantial contribution to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan, having been one of the
key donors from the very beginning of the process. The
total EU commitment for 2002 - that of member
States plus the Commission - was about 850 million
euros. To date, 800 million euros have been disbursed.
European Union pledges for 2002-2006 are $2.25
billion, or approximately 45 per cent of the total
pledges made at the January 2002 donor conference in
Tokyo. The EU has funded approximately one third of
the current budget expenses of the Afghan
Government, thereby directly supporting the budget for
teachers, nurses, police, administrators and
Government infrastructure.

European Union Member States have taken
leading roles in crucial areas of administrative and
technical assistance. The European Commission has
also provided technical recovery and reconstruction
assistance, with emphasis on public sector reform and
budgetary support, rural development and food
security, rebuilding infrastructure, in particular the
Kabul-Jalalabad-Torkham road and basic health care.

The European Union notes the serious lack of
funds for the budget and urges donors to consider ways
of filling the gap, including delivery in a timely
manner of pledges made in Tokyo. The Union
encourages the allocation of development aid in a way
that strengthens the role of the central government and
ensures that a visible peace dividend reaches the entire
Afghan population as soon as possible.

In addition to its leading role in the
reconstruction effort, the European Union is a major
source of humanitarian assistance to the people of
Afghanistan. European Union contributions through
2002 total $650 million and span programmes from
food aid - through the World Food Programme, to
emergency health, water and sanitation services -
through the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations.

Besides the immediate tasks of stabilization and
reconstruction, one of the key aims of European Union
assistance to Afghanistan is to improve availability and
access to food and to promote alternatives to poppy
production. The European Union strongly believes that
drug production and trafficking undermine
development efforts, destabilize political systems,
engender corruption, fuel organized crime and might
even finance terrorist activities. The smuggling of
opiates and cannabis undermines the economic and
social stability of countries and jeopardizes peace and
security in the region as a whole.

We are committed to coordinating our assistance
with the United Kingdom, which is leading
international counter-narcotics efforts to support the
Government of Afghanistan in eliminating the
cultivation, processing and trafficking of opiates. We
also recognize that international efforts to tackle the
drug problem involve both development concerns and
priorities, demand reduction and the strengthening of
law enforcement capabilities. We should also focus on
the drug routes, since the drug fight must be
geographically comprehensive and address
simultaneously the problems of production, trafficking
and consumption at all points on the routes along
which drugs move from producers to consumers.

We stress the need for intensified cooperation
with the Government of Afghanistan in implementing
the Afghan National Drug Control Strategy. We should
also assist in transforming Afghanistan's economy into
a normally functioning one, away from drugs.
Mainstreaming of the drug fight into coherent and
sustainable development policies in producing and
trafficking countries should be a priority. Drugs must
be dealt with as part of a broader set of development
and human welfare issues, which should include both
poverty reduction and public health considerations.

Lastly, the international community needs to
redouble its efforts to assist the Afghan Government in
carrying out its commitment to uphold international
law and offer its long-suffering people a better future.

