Ms. Rice (United States): Let me begin by
welcoming High Representative Inzko back to the
Security Council. We thank Ambassador Inzko for his
comprehensive briefing and his service in support of
the Dayton Peace Agreement.

The signing of the Dayton Accords helped Bosnia
and Herzegovina end a terrible conflict and established
a framework for a lasting peace. That framework has
been the cornerstone of the country's stability for over
16 years. Today, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
demonstrated that it is a strong and responsible
member of the international community in a variety of
ways, including through its tenure on the Security
Council and with its continued participation in the
international security force in Afghanistan. Bosnian
leaders have shown that cooperation and consensus are
possible on complicated matters of international peace
and security. We remain hopeful that they will continue
to work together to overcome their internal political
difficulties. In order for the country to keep pace with
progress elsewhere in the region, it must be able to
function as a State that can deliver results for all its
citizens, regardless of their ethnicity.
I would like to make three points in reaction to
the report of the High Representative (see S/2011/682).
First, the United States remains fully committed to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace established
by the Dayton Accords. We are concerned by
continuing challenges to the Framework, including
statements that undermine its constitutional
arrangements and challenge Bosnia and Herzegovina's
statehood. Such statements are unacceptable. Bosnian
politicians should demonstrate their commitment to the
Dayton Framework and their willingness to abide by
the decisions of State institutions.

During our debate on this issue in May
(S/PV.6529), we agreed with the High Representative's
assessment that the conclusions adopted by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly in April
presented a serious challenge to the Framework. While
we note today that the National Assembly repealed its
decision to hold a referendum on the High
Representative's decisions, we share Ambassador
Inzko's concern that other controversial conclusions
have not been repealed. The High Representative has
our full support in condemning unwarranted and
unlawful challenges to his authority. He will likewise
have our full support in any steps he takes to uphold
Dayton and to defend and preserve the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As I
stated in the May debate, we will continue to consider
our own measures in support of Dayton and Bosnian
State institutions, should any become necessary.

The United States also agrees that there is a need
to safeguard the Office of the High Representative's
efforts by protecting it and its staff from politically
motivated legal actions. We recognize that the Dayton
Accords provide for immunity only within Bosnia and
Herzegovina and neighbouring countries, and believe
that we must find mechanisms for providing protection
against unwarranted court proceedings in other
countries as well. We understand that some States are
not in a position to adopt domestic legislation, as the
United States has done, and we would welcome a more
thorough discussion with partners on this issue.

Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
functioning political institutions. We agree with the
High Representative's assessment that cooperation
within the tripartite Presidency has improved, and we
remain optimistic about the Presidency's continued and
increasing coordination. However, 13 months after
general elections, the country remains mired in a
political stalemate. That stalemate has impeded
formation of a new State-level Government, hampered
progress on governmental reforms necessary for Euro-
Atlantic integration, and contributed to credit-rating
agencies downgrading the country's outlook.

To be considered for European Union candidate
status, Bosnia and Herzegovina must pass laws on a
census and State aid, as well as beginning a serious
effort to comply with the ruling by the European Court
of Human Rights in the Sejdic' and Finci case to
provide equal rights for all citizens, including members
of national minorities. To participate in NATO's
membership action plan, Bosnia and Herzegovina must
address State registration of defence properties. We
welcome the fact that party leaders have engaged in a
series of discussions on these issues, along with
Government formation, and we call on those leaders to
reach agreement that will result in concrete progress in
these areas as soon as possible. While the United States
looks forward to the day that the Office of the High
Representative is no longer needed, the outstanding
items on the 5+2 agenda must first be fulfilled, and we
note the lack of progress made in this area during the
reporting period.

My third point is that the United States supports
the European Union's enhanced presence under its
Special Representative, Peter Sorensen. We underscore
how important it is that he and his office have the
resources, the political support and the operational
flexibility to guide Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path
to European integration. We look forward to working
closely with the Special Representative, and strongly
endorse close coordination between the Offices of the
Special Representative and the High Representative.
We also note that the military presence of the European
Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR)
continues to contribute to a safe and secure
environment and should be maintained. We therefore
support renewal of the EUFOR mandate.

In closing, let me reiterate that the United States
remains committed to working in close coordination
with the High Representative, the European Union and
partners on the Peace Implementation Council to
support the Bosnian people on their path towards Euro-
Atlantic integration and a peaceful and prosperous
future.

