Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. Your presence here is a clear
demonstration of the importance that you yourself and
your Government attach to finding a common solution
to the scourge of HIV/AIDS. Let me also thank the
United States delegation, and in particular my dear
friend and colleague Ambassador Holbrooke, for their
vision and continued leadership on this matter.

I also wish to take this opportunity to welcome in
our midst the high-powered delegation from the United
States Congress. It is most welcome; its presence here
today is a clear demonstration of its members'
commitment to the eradication of the AIDS pandemic
facing us today.

Our gratitude also goes to Dr. Piot for his tireless
efforts and for the very informative briefing he
provided us this morning.

This second meeting of the Security Council on
HIV/AIDS will culminate in the adoption of a
resolution that we hope will contribute to the ongoing
efforts aimed at addressing the pandemic. Indeed, there
are many players in this field and, in our View, the
concerted efforts of all concerned should lead to the
eradication of this dreadful evil.

Many countries that are heavily affected by the
pandemic, including my own, Namibia, have
acknowledged the severity of HIV/AIDS and its impact
on our populations and have demonstrated the
necessary political commitment for the prevention of
the pandemic. However, prevention alone is not
sufficient, given the large numbers of people already
infected with the virus. Due to a lack of resources and
the inaccessibility of HIV drugs, not much progress has
been attained in the treatment of the disease. Thus,
Governments cannot do much for the people already
infected, who are therefore left to die without hope of
treatment.

The gains made in sustainable development will
be lost if a remedy to the spread and devastating
consequences of HIV/AIDS is not found. It is therefore
essential that populations in developing countries have
access to effective AIDS drugs that will help prolong
their lives. I would hasten here to stress that these
drugs should be provided at affordable prices.

We are grateful to countries and organizations
that have provided resources to fight the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. We encourage them to continue, and we call
on others to emulate their actions. Furthermore, we
welcome the announcement by the World Bank that it
will soon present a multisectoral AIDS programme for
Africa to its Board of Directors. This will no doubt
facilitate the efforts of Governments in implementing
their nationwide HIV/AIDS strategies. In the same
vein, we welcome the launching of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS initiative of the
International Partnership against AIDS in Africa.

We note the progress made on key issues relating
to HIV/AIDS at the Thirteenth International AIDS
Conference, which was held in Durban, South Africa,
as reported this morning by Dr. Piot. We are hopeful
that coordinated efforts of this kind will continue. We
note specifically that access to treatment emerged as a
key issue of the conference, with access to anti-
retroviral therapy being central.

We recognize that the issue of HIV/AIDS does
not fall directly within the purview of the Security
Council. In maintaining international peace and
security, the Security Council will contribute in a major
way to minimizing the impact of HIV/AIDS in conflict
areas and assist Governments in devoting more
resources to tackling social and economic problems.

We welcome the efforts being made by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in ensuring
that peacekeeping personnel are well informed about
HIV/AIDS prevention and the implications of HIV-risk
behaviour.

Finally, at the same time as we strive to make
treatment accessible to all the peoples of the world, the
search for a vaccine should be vigorously pursued.

