Mr. Abebe (Ethiopia): We thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court for her report and

briefing to the Security Council, pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).

The continued violations of human rights committed
by all parties to the conflict in Libya remain a source
of concern. The killing and wounding of civilians,
as well as their abduction, torture, displacement and
arbitrary detention, continue unabated. Due to general
lawlessness and the weakness of judicial institutions,
ordinary crime is widespread, creating a sense of fear
and insecurity in Libya. We condemn all the attacks on
civilians and civilian facilities that continue to cause
civilian casualties and suffering.

The suffering of all Libyans, including the most
vulnerable groups, such as women, children, migrants
and refugees, must stop. Those responsible must also be
held accountable. It is important to fight the widespread
sense of impunity in Libya. In that regard, Ethiopia
continues to strongly support the position of the
African Union that it is vital to combat impunity While
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States. We also believe that protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructures is critical. In that regard,
the capacity of Libyan State institutions, particularly
its judiciary and law-enforcement bodies, should be
strengthened, with the ultimate objective of ensuring
the rule of law.

The lasting solution to the problem of ending
Libyans' suffering and the violations of their human
rights will be through a comprehensive political
settlement that meets the legitimate demands of all
Libyans. In that regard, we support the continued
diplomatic efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame,
to bring all Libyans together so that they can agree
on a sustainable path to peace, stability and national
reconciliation, according to the United Nations action
plan for the resumption of an inclusive Libyan-owned
political process under the facilitation and leadership
of the United Nations, which has been endorsed by
the Security Council. We encourage all Libyans to
continue to work together in a spirit of compromise
and to engage constructively and meaningfully in the
inclusive political process set out in the action plan, so
as to bring about concrete results that could facilitate
its full implementation. While Libyans themselves
have the primary responsibility to ensure peace and
security, the international community, particularly the
Council, should continue to support their efforts in a
coordinated manner.

