Mrs. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands):
The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks China for
convening this debate on enhancing African capacities
in the areas of peace and security.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

Today's complex security challenges require
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the African Union (AU). The
operationalization of those partnerships requires our
full attention. Today's debate serves to underline the
acknowledgement by the United Nations of the need
for close cooperation with the African Union in the
areas of peace and security in Africa. We welcome the
progress made since the adoption of resolution 2320
(2016). The signing of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, in April, was an important step forward.

The May report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/454), in which different modalities for future
support of the United Nations to the AU peace support
operations are explored, provides useful insights on
today's topic. It acknowledges the need for more support
to ensure African Union peace operations, in line with
the premise that the African Union will reform and
secure human, financial and logistical resources. It also
highlights the importance of compliance and oversight,
particularly in the areas of human rights, conduct and
discipline. We acknowledge the positive steps that have
been taken by the African Union to implement reforms,
in particular the element of increased self-financing.

In today's debate, we want to emphasize two
elements: first, the importance of operationalizing
the modalities to support the African Union's peace
operations; and, secondly, the need to address the root
causes of conflicts with a view to sustaining peace.

We acknowledge the positive steps that have been
taken by the African Union to build its capacities to
plan, finance, sustain and oversee its own missions.
Those steps are fundamental in order to strengthen the
African Union's capacity to address the multiple aspects
of the partnership, all while operating in accordance
with United Nations standards. Because of our shared
responsibility for peace and security in Africa, we must
stay on track to achieve a more institutionalized form
of cooperation.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on options for
authorization and support for African Union peace
support operations. It provides useful recommendations
to enhance the practical cooperation between both
organizations, including on financing, accountability,
compliance and oversight, joint planning and mandating
African Union peace support operations. As mentioned
in the EU statement, the European Union stands ready
to continue to look at how it, together with the United
Nations and the African Union, can contribute to
achieving progress in the discussion on sustainable
financing and a division of labour for peace operations
in Africa.

Peace operations are part of a broader, integrated
approach. They are an essential element in a range
of actions focused on all stages of a conflict cycle,
ranging from early warning and the rule of law to
humanitarian aid, stabilization and development, as
well as accountability. In the light of that, we must
address the root causes of conflict, which are often
also drivers for migration and displacement, in order to
effectively sustain peace. That is core business for the
United Nations as a whole. It makes working together
across the pillars of the United Nations a key priority.

Working on peace and security in Africa remains
a challenge on which we will keep working together
through partnership. Resolution 2320 (2016) and
the subsequent report of the Secretary-General are
important milestones that define concrete steps to be
taken to deepen that partnership. It is a partnership
based on transparency, accountability, common goals
and burden-sharing. We welcome the active approach
by Secretary-General Guterres and the Chairman of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports
intensified cooperation between the triangle of the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union. We trust that the necessary steps will be taken
in order to bring that partnership to the next level. We
look forward to contributing to the implementation of
those steps as a Security Council member in 2018 and
beyond. We will continue to strive towards a stronger
and more effective partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union for the people of Africa
and for the good of us all.

