Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me, too,
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/549)
and Special Representative Augustine Mahiga for his
very useful briefing, and commend him and his team
for their constant efforts. Allow me also to welcome
the presence of His Excellency the Prime Minister of
Somalia, Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, and to thank him
for his presentation, as I thank Mr. Diarra for his
contribution to today's debate.

There has been some encouraging progress in
Somalia. Within the framework of the Kampala
Accord, Parliament has endorsed a new Prime Minister
and a new Cabinet has been appointed. The Mogadishu
consultative meeting also took place and met its main
objective, which was the endorsement of the road map.

Despite these important steps, there are still
significant challenges ahead, as Ambassador Mahiga
outlined. It is therefore essential that the Somali
institutions build on the progress achieved so far and
on the existing consensus. Throughout the remaining
transition period, the Kampala Accord must be
implemented, as must the road map, in compliance
with the agreed benchmarks and timelines. We call on
the signatories of the Kampala Accord to ensure
cohesion, unity and focus on the completion of the four
priority tasks set out in the road map for ending the
transition - security, constitution, reconciliation and
good governance - so that the transitional period may
indeed come to an end in August 2012.

As Portugal has stressed before, ensuring respect
for human rights and paving the way for a better future
for Somalis, including for their economic and social
development, are also of paramount importance. We
underline in this respect the very positive role that
women can play in conflict resolution, and we
encourage all parties in Somalia to remove obstacles
and challenges to the participation of Somali women in
public life. In this endeavour, it is of the utmost
importance that regional and international partners
continue to be committed and to lend support to the
Somali people in helping it to address all the
challenges Somalia faces, the most recent of which is
at the humanitarian level.

We remain deeply concerned by the situation, and
we are particularly distressed by its terrible impact on
the lives of the Somali population, especially on
children, who have been severely affected by famine.
We are nevertheless encouraged by the efforts being
made on the ground by all the agencies, funds, regional
and local non-governmental organizations and
humanitarian partners against a background of very
challenging security conditions. We are also
encouraged by the mobilization of the international
community so far, and we welcome the holding of the
summit on the humanitarian response to the Horn of
Africa on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session. But these
combined efforts will be fruitful only if the aid reaches
those in real need. We therefore urge all parties and
armed groups to ensure full, safe and unhindered
access for the timely delivery of humanitarian aid to all
persons in need of assistance across Somalia.

At the security level, the Transitional Federal
Institutions should also capitalize on the recent
improvements in Mogadishu by ensuring the delivery
of basic services and providing good governance to all
of its citizens. By doing so, it will also be honouring
the efforts and sacrifices of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and of the Somali National
Security Forces, which we commend.

As the context on the ground is changing, new
challenges arise for the Mission and for the
Transitional Federal Government. In order to respond
to the immediate needs, we encourage the
strengthening of the Somali National Security Forces,
as the Government bears the primary responsibility for
safeguarding peace and security in Somalia. This is an
endeavour to which we are glad to continue to
contribute, including through the European Union's
training mission in Somalia.

Nevertheless, AMISOM. remains a crucial
element to support and protect the Transitional Federal
Institutions. We therefore reiterate our support to the
Mission, endorsing its mandate renewal, and echo the
Secretary-General's call for the acceleration of the
deployment of additional troops to fill the security
vacuum created by the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu. We will also favourably consider
expanding the scope of its support package and the
development of a guard force to provide security to
personnel from the international community.

But new challenges also arise for the United
Nations. In this regard, we welcome the efforts being
made to fulfil the Secretary-General's commitment to
the full structural integration of the United Nations
family in the country in the shortest possible time
frame.

Despite recent developments, the overall situation
in Somalia remains fragile. It is therefore important to
comprehensively address all the challenges Somalia
faces at the political, security, humanitarian, human
rights and socio-economic development levels. This
also means pursuing our joint efforts to combat piracy
through a multidimensional response to the problem.

In the strong commitment, engagement and close
cooperation of all Somali parties lies the main ground
for a successful path towards peace and stability in
Somalia. Portugal will pursue its efforts, within the
different forums, to assist the Somali people in
addressing the challenges before them.

Before concluding, let me once again extend a
word of sincere appreciation to the continuous
engagement of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Ambassador Mahiga, the African

1 1-49644

Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other regional organizations in the
Somali process. In this context, we naturally share the
position of the European Union that will be expressed
later in this debate.

