Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is truly
a pleasure, Sir, to see the delegation of your friendly
country preside over the work of the Security Council
for the month of May. I also thank you for taking
the initiative to organize this particularly important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict under the presidency of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, whose presence among us earlier we
wholeheartedly commend.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing on the current
status of the protection of civilians, while shedding
light on the challenges that the international community
must overcome in that regard. I also thank Mr. Peter
Mauer, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello for their especially
important briefings.

This year marks the commemoration of the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions - the
cornerstone of international humanitarian law 4 and
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999) by the Security Council that introduced
the protection of civilians on its agenda. Since then,
the protection of civilians has become a key item on
the agenda of the Security Council and has contributed
to building a culture of awareness-raising on the need
to prevent violations, other concerns involving the
protection of civilians and how to address them.

Without any doubt, over the past 20 years the
initiatives taken by the Council have strengthened the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and helped save
many lives. Nevertheless, an evaluation of the situation
concerning the protection of civilians demonstrates that
civilians continue to make up the staggering majority of
victims. Twenty years later, the protection of civilians
is as pertinent and urgent as it has ever been.

I shall underscore the following points.
First, we reiterate that the protection of civilians is
first and foremost incumbent on the States concerned.
It must be noted, however, that in periods of conflict
the capacities of some States are inadequate or even
non-existent. In such cases, the international community
shoulders the responsibility of supporting them by
strengthening their capacities and providing them with
the means necessary to fulfil their obligations.

In that regard, strengthening the rule of law is
essential to ensuring the effective implementation
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Member States should develop
national policies based on good practices and establish
specialized agencies working for the protection of
civilians. Addressing the problems related to political
will and the lack of capacities and resources at the
national level and pursuing the strengthening of
regional and global initiatives remain imperative.

Secondly, prioritizing the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations, in accordance with their
mandates, is well established and even more important
now that the relevant policies and guidelines have been
developed. The operational approach to the protection
of civilians has been made clear, and tools and systems
have been developed to make the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping contexts more effective, such as
through joint protection teams and community-alert
networks. The protection of civilians requires adequate
human and funding resources, whether in terms of the
number of Blue Helmets deployed, their equipment
or training. We also need to be able to manage the
expectations of all the parties involved, whether it be
local populations, the authorities of the host country or
the members of the Security Council.

Thirdly, violence against humanitarian workers,
in particular national staff, as well as their detention
or abduction, continues to hamper humanitarian
operations. In that regard, immediate measures should
be taken to facilitate safe, prompt and unhindered
access for humanitarian workers to populations in need
and to ensure their access to assistance. In that context,
refugee populations are extremely vulnerable to
violations of their rights. The international community
must ensure that all their rights are respected and that
the assistance provided to them actually reaches them
and is not misappropriated or looted. Registration of the
refugee population is essential to upholding their rights,
as recognized under international law and in Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. In addition,
States must fulfil their obligation to fight against
impunity and to fully investigate and bring to justice
those responsible for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity or grave human rights violations.

Lastly, we believe that it would be desirable to
promote a preventive approach in order to assess threats
and coordinate actions to prevent any deterioration.
The preventive dimension could be developed by
strengthening the capacities of the countries concerned,
promoting the rule of law, ensuring good governance,
entrenching a culture of human rights and establishing
early-warning mechanisms to identify potential
conflicts and prevent them from becoming overt and
deadly confrontations.

In conclusion, Morocco applauds all those who
work for the protection of populations in conflict areas
and would like to take this opportunity to pay them a
heartfelt tribute.

