Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

A genuine reform of the Security Council to
transform it into a transparent, representative and
democratic organ and which is in line with developments
experienced by the United Nations and developments in
international relations over the past 70 years continues
to be an outstanding issue. Without that reform, the
reform of the Organization will be incomplete. Changes
to the Security Council's working methods are an
essential aspect of its reform. In our view, the changes
that have been made to date have been merely formal
and do not guarantee the genuine participation of
Member States in the work and decision-making within
the Council.

Fundamental agreements - above all on sensitive
or highly relevant issues - continue to be taken just by
the permanent members of the Council and, on occasion,
not even by all of them. The remainder of the members
have a limited margin to influence the process. The
majority of them face the dilemma of accepting or not
accepting the final product presented to them without
having had a possibility of participating in genuine
negotiations that would address their opinions and
interests.

The public debates should be the ideal opportunity
to channel the contributions of non-member States
to the Council in analysing specific aspects on its
agenda in order to contribute to the negotiation of draft
resolutions and decisions that will be adopted. However,
in practice those debates become a formal exercise and
the members of the Council do not even wait until the
conclusion ofthe debates before effectively taking their
decisions.

In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, Member States recognize that
the Security Council is acting on their behalf in the
exercise of its functions, which implies that it should
guarantee genuine participation on the part of the 193
States Members in its work and in its decisions. Cuba
reiterates that, at a minimum, it is urgent to make
the following changes in the working methods of the
Security Council.

There is a need to increase the number of public
meetings pursuant to Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter.
Closed-door meetings and informal consultations
should be held only in very exceptional cases.

The countries concerned should always be allowed
to participate in the Council's discussions that directly
affect them, pursuant to Article 31 of the Charter.

The Council's resolutions and presidential
statements should reflect the views of Member States
as expressed in the public debates.

Countries not members of the Council should have
access to the subsidiary bodies, including the right to
participate in their discussions.

We should formalize the rules of procedure
of the Council - which unfortunately continue to
be provisional rules, as has been the case now for
70 years - in order to increase transparency and the
level of accountability.

We are concerned about the growing trend in
the Security Council to consider matters and assume
functions that do not fall within its area of competence,
increasingly usurping the role assigned by the Charter
to other organs of the United Nations, particularly to
the General Assembly.

The Council is required to present annual reports
to the General Assembly. Such reports should be
genuinely analytical and make it possible to adequately
evaluate its work, including the reasons that prevented
it from taking action in a given situation or specific
case in fulfilment of its mandate. We reiterate the need
for the Council to present special reports mentioned by
the Charter in Articles 15 and 24, which unfortunately
continue to go unpublished.

The issue of the veto is intrinsically linked
to the Council's working methods, particularly
the decision-making mechanism. The veto is an
anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that should
be eliminated as soon as possible.

A more transparent Council will be a more
legitimate Council. And an inclusive and accessible
Council that takes into account the opinions of the
Member States of the Organization would be a more
effective Council.

Let us leave aside rhetorical devices as we discuss
this important subject. There is no lack of ideas or
proposals. What we need is immediate action. Let
us once and for all remove the secrecy and lack of
transparency in the work of the Security Council,
as well as the exclusion of the great majority of the
Members of the Organization from its work and its
decisions. Let us not delay this task any longer.
