Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting and the Secretary-General for his
report on small arms.

We note the participation in today's meeting of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru, Mr. Oscar

Maurtua, and thank the Officer-in-Charge of the
Department for Disarmament Affairs for her
substantive briefing on this issue.

The Russian Federation has consistently
advocated increasing the coordinating role of the
Organization in addressing the problem of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. Preventing the
illicit proliferation of such weapons is particularly
relevant in the context of combating terrorism and
mitigating the impact of armed conflicts.

We consider of great importance the United
Nations conference to review progress made in the
implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to
be held in July. We believe that, as its very name
indicates, the Programme of Action is aimed at
preventing and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects.

Unfortunately, it is clear that much remains to be
done in that field. In our view, therefore, it is still too
early to consider extending the Programme of Action's
scope to monitoring the legal transfer of weapons, as
such a proposal exceeds its framework. Although we
are not opposed to discussing the legal supply of small
arms and light weapons, we believe that such a
discussion is acceptable only in cases in which it
would directly serve the purpose of combating the
illicit trade in such weapons.

We would suggest that one of the principal
challenges before the international community in
addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is, above all, the implementation of those
provisions of the Programme of Action that seek to
increase the effectiveness of national legislation in that
sphere and to strengthen regional cooperation aimed at
finding concrete and practical means to combat the
illicit trade in those weapons.
In order to prevent small arms and light weapons
moving from the legal to the illicit trade, the following
national measures are needed.

First, we must limit the number of intermediaries
in the small arms trade and establish clear State
regulatory systems for brokerage activities in that area.

Secondly, we need to ban supplies of small arms
and light weapons to non-State structures and
organizations, as is currently being done with regard to
man-portable air defence systems.

Thirdly, we need to implement controls by
exporting States on how the authorized bodies of
importing States are respecting their obligations
regarding the proper use of imported small arms and
light weapons, including undertaking random checks
on storage conditions for imported weapons.

I should also like to draw particular attention to
one of the obvious sources of illicit weapons - their
manufacture and transfer without licenses or the
permission of the country of origin to the manufacturer
or owner of the technology to produce such weapons.

On many occasions, the Security Council has
considered the issue of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons with respect to conflict situations on
its agenda. The Russian Federation advocates the
adoption of strong and effective measures in cases in
which small arms and light weapons are provided to
illegal armed groups. Our experience with the
implementation of embargoes on small arms and light
weapons in conflict situations confirms the
effectiveness of such measures by the Security
Council. Of primary importance is monitoring
adherence to the Security Council's arms embargoes,
increasing the effectiveness of controls, and
investigating violations of embargoes.

Our experience in the settlement of conflicts has
convincingly demonstrated the direct link between the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
activities of illegal armed groups, the involvement of
child soldiers in conflicts, large-scale violations of
human rights and the norms of international
humanitarian law, and transnational crime. It is
becoming increasingly clear that we must prevent
small arms and light weapons - particularly in their
most dangerous forms - from falling into the hands of
terrorists.
We believe it important to continue to pay
particular attention to concrete measures to counteract
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons at the
preventive and post-conflict settlement stages. In that
regard, the experience of regional organizations is
extremely relevant and useful.

