Mr. Gumbi (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Security Council.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later today by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We also wish to thank the Ambassadors of
Palestine and Israel for their statements.

The Arab Spring has prompted the Council to
consider decisive actions in a number of cases. Yet, in
the matter of the longest-standing item on our agenda
pertaining to the Middle East, we remain paralyzed by
inaction. We meet every month to discuss the situation
in the Middle East. For the past several years,
statements made around the table have followed
similar lines. Yet, there is no real movement towards a
final settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian question.

Since our latest debate (see S/PV.6623) there
have been significant developments related to the
Palestinian-Israeli question, including the Palestinian
application for full membership of the United Nations,
the Quartet proposal for resuscitating direct
negotiations, and the exchange of prisoners. However,
the significance of those developments continues to be
diminished by Israel's continued building of illegal
settlements.

On 23 September, President Abbas submitted an
application for Palestine's full membership of the
United Nations. The near universal excitement and
support that accompanied that historic event is an
indication of how important the issue of Palestinian
statehood is, not just for the Palestinians but, in fact,
for the rest of the world. In that connection, South
Africa wishes to reaffirm its conviction that Palestine
is a peace-loving State and that it is willing and able to
carry out its obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations.

Furthermore, South Africa believes that the issue
of Palestine's membership of the United Nations
should be resolved expeditiously and in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter, the relevant rules of
procedure of the General Assembly and the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council. Above all,
South Africa believes that we cannot make Palestine's
membership of the United Nations conditional upon a
peace agreement.

Mindful of the political sensitivities inherent in
that process, we believe that it is now more important
than ever that we act in a manner that befits the stature
of the Council and recommend Palestine's full
membership of the United Nations. In addition, the
Council should further fulfil its obligations under the
Charter and simultaneously resuscitate the negotiations
process, with the aim of achieving a two-State solution.

While the Quartet proposal for negotiations is
welcome, and, in fact, long overdue, we should recall
that we have had concrete time frames for those
negotiations before. However, every time, the parties
have fallen short of an agreement within a given time
frame. We hope that the parties will this time commit
themselves to finding a solution even earlier than the
envisaged end of 2012. We also call on those countries
that have influence on the parties to encourage them to
participate in the negotiations in good faith and without
preconditions or changing the parameters of a final
outcome.

The single obstacle to the negotiations is clearly
the incessant building of illegal settlements by Israel.
Just last month, after the promulgation of the Quartet

blueprint, the Government of Israel defied unanimous
calls from the Council and the Quartet, and announced
its intention to construct 1,100 new units in the
settlement of Gilo. Certainly, that regressive act alters
facts on the ground and the parameters of final status
issues. That, not the Palestinian application for
membership of the United Nations, is an obstacle to
peace.

South Africa welcomes the recent agreement on
prisoner swaps. The agreement, which the Secretary-
General described as a significant humanitarian
breakthrough, is a positive step towards cooperation
between Israel and Palestine. We hope that those who
have been released will be allowed to live normal lives
without persecution, and that the Israeli Government
will fulfil its obligation to facilitate the release of all
the remaining prisoners as soon as possible. The
Government of Israel must also fulfil its obligations
under international humanitarian law with regard to the
remaining Palestinian political prisoners - by
ensuring their safety, allowing access to them by
family members and respecting the basic human rights
of the prisoners.

We reiterate our active concern about the abuse of
the human rights of Palestinian children and about their
detention. Needless to say, we are all very much aware
of the long-lasting adverse psychological effects that
such abuses will have on this vulnerable group. In that
regard, a 12 June statement by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East cited in the report of the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967 states that

"The impact of home demolitions on children can
be particularly devastating. Many children affected
by demolitions show signs of post-traumatic stress
disorder, depression and anxiety." (see A/66/358, para. 3] (c))

A few days ago, in a statement to the Third
Committee of the General Assembly, the Special
Rapporteur expressed concern about reports of
violence against Palestinian children, including their
arrest and detention by Israeli military authorities. We
regret that there has been an increase in detentions of
minors in recent years. Again, we call on Israel to fulfil
its obligations under international human rights and
humanitarian law and to protect the rights of children.
South Africa looks forward to welcoming
Palestine, sooner rather than later, as the 194th
Member of the United Nations. We also hope that the
process will achieve its stated objectives as soon as
possible and ultimately bring about lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine. My delegation looks
forward to meaningful progress that will bring us
closer to a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East region. In that connection, South Africa
will continue to contribute in any way that can lead to
the resolution of the Middle East problem in all of its
aspects.

Last, but by no means least, I would like to add
the voice of my delegation in pledging solidarity with
the people of Turkey in the aftermath of the natural
calamity that befell their country yesterday. Likewise,
we convey our sympathy to the people of Saudi Arabia
during this period of grief over the passing of their
Crown Prince.

