The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burkina Faso in which he requests
that his delegation be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of
Burkina Faso, dispatched by His Excellency Mr. Blaise
Compaore, President of Burkina Faso and Facilitator of
the Ouagadougou Agreement, to participate in the
consideration of the item Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djibrill
Bassole (Burkina Faso) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Djibrill
Bassole, Minister of National Security of Burkina
Faso.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire in which he requests that his delegation be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djedje
(Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/275 containing the thirteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Djibrill Bassole, Minister of National Security of
Burkina Faso.


