Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom; and the Head of the European
Union Delegation, Ambassador Joao Vale de Almeida,
for their informative briefings. I would also like to
welcome to the Security Council today Ambassador
Christoph Heusgen, Permanent Representative of
Germany, and cordially wish him and his country every
success as an incoming member ofthe Security Council.

Kazakhstan supports the Secretary-General in
pointing out that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) is the culmination of 12 years of
intensive diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, long-term and proper solution of
the Iranian nuclear problem. The extremely long and
difficult multilateral negotiation process was a credit
to the international community. My country has made
a significant contribution to the process by organizing
two rounds of negotiations between the E3+3 and Iran
in Almaty in 2013.

Kazakhstan firmly and consistently supports the
JCPOA on account of the following features. First, it
is recognized by many as an unprecedented - and
the only - way to ensure the exclusively peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. We consider
it to be an important factor in securing the regime of
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and strengthening
regional and global peace and security.

Secondly, this historic nuclear deal is valuable as it
fulfils its mission to, at a minimum, convince Iran stop
enriching the uranium needed for nuclear weapons. It
has given International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
inspectors access to facilities in Iran and put the nuclear
programme under international control. IAEA reports
confirm that Iran is in compliance with all requirements
under the JCPOA.

Thirdly, the JCPOA is a truly practical and
successful example of solving the most difficult issues
through negotiations, as it was developed and adopted
through dialogue and in an atmosphere of trust.

We share the position of the Secretary-General
and the overwhelming majority of States in regretting
the decision by the United States to withdraw from the
JCPOA and impose unilateral sanctions against Tehran.
We believe that the concerns of the United States about
Iran's ballistic activities and other issues should not
prejudice or impede putting this multilateral agreement
into effect. Furthermore, we would still like to see the
fifth report (S/2018/602) presented in its most complete
and comprehensive form, namely, by including both
annexes of resolution 2231 (2015). Due attention
has not been given to the content and provisions of
annex A, which is the JCPOA. In order to give greater
importance and proper political significance to the
JCPOA, we suggest that resolution 2231 (2015), with
both its annexes, be fully covered in future.

In addition, we note that notifications by some States
Members of the United Nations in the report do not
contain complete and irrefutable evidence that proves
that Iran has violated the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015). They require further consideration, thorough
investigation and closer and clearer coordination
between the Council and the Secretariat so as to be able
to effectively respond to such allegations.

At the same time, we recall that the Security Council,
in paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015), calls on all
Member States as well as regional and international
organizations to support the implementation of the
JCPOA and refrain from actions that undermine the
realization of the commitments under that agreement.

To conclude, I would like to congratulate the
Facilitator, Ambassador Karel van Oosterom of the
Netherlands, on his first briefing and to commend his
committed and tireless efforts to ensure that resolution
2231 (2015) fulfils its objectives. We support his
endeavours to consistently maintain transparency,
a constructive and inclusive approach and optimal
operationalization of the 2231 format.

Kazakhstan will continue to advocate for
preserving and further implementing the agreement, to
which we do not see any alternative. We are convinced
that political and diplomatic solutions are the only
way to resolve all the issues pertaining to the Iranian
nuclear programme.

