Mr. Christian (Ghana): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, for
his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Ethiopia,
Darfur and Somalia.

My delegation is concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in the Ogaden region of
Ethiopia, where about 600,000 people require urgent
humanitarian assistance. We therefore welcome the
interagency assessment undertaken in August 2007,
which resulted in the United Nations dispatching about
9,000 metric tons of food to the five military zones in
the region. We also note that preparations are under
way to deploy mobile help teams to the region, and it is
our hope that the outstanding issues on the modalities
of their work will be worked out soon, to enable them
to respond to that serious humanitarian priority. The
Ethiopian Government's initiative in accrediting more
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to work in the
affected areas is commendable.

On the subject of Darfur, while we note that the
signing of the Joint Communique in the first quarter of
this year has helped to reduce some of the broad
obstacles hindering relief agencies, the many
bottlenecks must be addressed promptly to ensure that
humanitarian principles and norms are fully respected,
with assistance reaching all those in need. We have
noted that some internally displaced persons (IDPs)
have been able to return to their homes. That, however,
is not on a large scale, because of the insecurity that
persists in Darfur. The key concern for the Sudanese
authorities should be to ensure that the necessary
measures are put in place for IDPs to return voluntarily
to their places of abode and normal lives, in a safe and
secure environment and assured of basic services. The
early deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and progress
towards resolving the Darfur crisis at the peace talks
would enhance the pursuit of humanitarian objectives
and save lives, and it is our expectation that all
concerned will endeavour to attain those objectives.

The report we have just heard on Somalia
confirms that the humanitarian situation has not
improved since the last briefing presented to the
Council in May. The problems associated with access,
protection of civilians and security of humanitarian
operations persist. In recent weeks, displacements have
increased following worsening violence and bloody
clashes between Government troops and insurgents in
Mogadishu. This situation has obviously further
compounded one of the most difficult humanitarian
situations in the world, characterized by chronic food
insecurity, alternating droughts and floods and endemic
disease. In some areas, severely malnourished children
are at risk of death, without help.

Unfortunately, the prevailing insecurity in
Mogadishu has seriously curtailed the movement of
humanitarian workers. We ask donors to increase their
contributions, as well as support, for humanitarian
agencies working hard to increase their presence and
activities. Civilians are, more than ever, bearing the
brunt of these ongoing conflicts. The international
community's response to humanitarian problems
arising from these conflicts should be appreciated. It
has on many occasions called for priority to be given to
the protection of civilians.

We recognize, however, that to overcome these
material challenges, we need to translate our
commitments into action. We believe that the biggest
single incentive to humanitarian relief efforts is the
establishment of genuine stability so people can return
freely and re-establish their lives. This cannot come
from a military solution, but rather from inclusive
political dialogue and reconciliation.

