Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mansour and Ambassador Reuben for
their respective statements.

As we have repeatedly stated, the only way to
achieve durable peace in the Middle East is through
sincere negotiations in good faith between the parties
concerned. We strongly encourage both parties to
resume the direct negotiations that started at the
beginning of September. We support the United States
effort to resume the negotiations and achieve a
negotiated settlement.

Japan is disappointed that the Israeli moratorium
on settlement activities was not extended and that
Israel approved bidding for construction of housing
units in East Jerusalem. Japan urges Israel not to
implement this new construction plan and to extend the
moratorium on settlement activities.

Both parties must carry out their obligations and
commitments under the Road Map. We reiterate our
call on the Israeli Government to freeze all settlement
activities in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
No actions should be taken that could prejudge the
final status negotiations. At the same time, we call
upon the Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to
improve security and fulfil its commitment to cease
violence and work against incitement.

The negotiations should achieve a two-State
solution by ending the occupation of those territories,
including East Jerusalem, occupied since 1967. Japan
supports the plan of the Palestinian Authority to build a
Palestinian State within 24 months. Japan will continue
to extend assistance and help build capacity for the
Palestinian people and institutions for the Palestinian
State. I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for mentioning
our "corridor for peace and prosperity" project, which
we are actively pursuing.

With regard to Gaza, we continue to call for the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). We also
call for Palestinian reconciliation and support the
efforts of Egypt in that regard.

With regard to Lebanon, we reaffirm our support
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and
political independence of Lebanon and the full
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. We are alarmed by some of the statements
made in Lebanon about the present situation, and we
call on all parties to act responsibly. We strongly
support the work of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006)
and maintaining calm in its area of operation.

We also firmly support the work of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, which is an independent and
international judicial entity. The Tribunal should
continue to carry out its mandate without any
interference; that will contribute to ending impunity.

Japan will continue to make every effort to help
the parties achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

