Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset allow me to express our thanks to Mr. Bernard
Miyet for his valuable briefing on the most recent
developments in Sierra Leone.

My delegation welcomes the progress made thus far
in implementation of the Lome Agreement by the return
of the leaders of the Revolutionary United Front of Sierra
Leone (RUF) and the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC), the two main militias in Sierra Leone,
as well as the establishment of the Government of
National Unity, the registration of RUF as a political
party and the noticeable increase in the number of ex-
combatants registered with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.

Commitment to the ceasefire is the cornerstone of
success of the peace process and national reconciliation in
Sierra Leone. Therefore, my delegation would like to
reaffirm the need for the international community to focus
on the disarmament aspect. My delegation wishes to thank
the Government of the United Kingdom and the World
Bank for their support for the DDR programme. We call
upon the donor countries and other international
organizations to provide the necessary support for this
programme in particular and for the peace process in
Sierra Leone in general.

Despite the efforts mentioned, the political and
military situation in Sierra Leone continues to be unstable.
This continued instability will have negative effects on
the general security situation in the rest of the country. In
order to contain the security situation, we affirm the
importance of the speedy deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) observers.

 

My delegation expresses its concern at the continued
acts of kidnapping, rape and plunder, in particular in the
eastern part of the country. Mr. Bockarie is currently
shirking his obligation and commitment to the Lome
Agreement and is casting doubt on its credibility. RUF
leaders shoulder the primary responsibility for containing
Mr. Bockarie, and we call upon them to make every effort
to convince him to accept the peaceful option for the
solution of the crisis in Sierra Leone.

My delegation condemns all acts of violence and all
crimes perpetrated against unarmed civilians and
humanitarian workers, the latest of which was the
kidnapping of two doctors from a non-governmental
organization. We call on the parties responsible for their
kidnapping to release them as soon as possible. What the
country currently needs urgently is a steady flow of
humanitarian assistance and havens and refuge for
thousands of refugees and displaced persons.

As you know, Mr. President, on more than one
occasion during our informal consultations, my delegation
raised the question of the need of the international
community to support the activities carried out by the
International Committee of the Red Cross concerning the
manufacturing of artificial limbs to rehabilitate war victims
whose limbs have been amputated, in order to reintegrate
them into society. My delegation had hoped that a centre
for rehabilitation and the manufacture of artificial limbs
would be established in Sierra Leone. It is our hope today
that the Secretariat will seriously consider this proposal.

In conclusion, my delegation calls upon all parties to
the Lorne Agreement to commit themselves to the spirit and
the letter of the Agreement and to put the interest of their
countries above all other narrow, personal interests and
considerations in order to develop the country at all
levels - political, economic and social - and in order for
Sierra Leone to return to the fold of the international
community, where it was before. On this occasion, and on
behalf of my delegation, I express our thanks and
appreciation to the Economic Community of West African
States and its Monitoring Group, ECOMOG, for their
efforts and the great sacrifices they made to help Sierra
Leone return to normalcy.

I also express our thanks and appreciation to the
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Francis Okelo, and the UNAMSIL troops. I wish
Mr. Adeniji all success in his work as the successor to
Mr. Okelo.

