The Secretary-General: It is with great pleasure
that I join you for this second ministerial meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Africa. Our meeting
is the fruit of your determination to make a difference for
peace and for prosperity in Africa. It is an expression of
the political will that I called for in my report

 

(S/l998/318) last April - the political will which is the
condition for any success that our endeavours may meet
with in Africa, as elsewhere.

Throughout the last six months, and most recently at
the Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, African leaders
have pledged to help implement the report's
recommendations. Just as importantly, ordinary men and
women in every part of Africa heard their United Nations
speak in a voice that recognized the realities they face, day
in and day out. Let us never forget that it is for them - the
peoples of Africa - that our ideas must matter and make
a difference.

The report aimed to contribute to Africa's progress in
two distinct but related ways: first, by paying the peoples
of Africa the tribute of truth - by honestly and candidly
reporting to the world their challenges and their aspirations;
secondly, by proposing realistic and achievable
recommendations for how those challenges may be met. I
am therefore very pleased to witness the serious and
constructive manner in which the Council, through its ad
hoc working group, has begun to address the report's
recommendations. We have had a good start.

Following the submission of the report in April, you
asked the Secretariat to provide ideas for practical actions
that could be taken by the Secretariat and United Nations
agencies.

I can report today that the United Nations Secretariat
is vigorously working on follow-up activities to the report
and that I have asked the Deputy Secretary-General to
monitor its implementation. Even before this plan is
finalized, however, we have begun our work.

In July, we convened two international conferences -
one on Guinea and the other on Sierra Leone - to focus
international attention on the efforts of those two countries
to restore or strengthen peace and stability and to help them
do so. We have also provided the Council with specific
proposals for the establishment of an international
mechanism to assist host Governments in maintaining the
security and neutrality of refugee camps. And we have
begun discussions on the need to stem illicit arms flows to
and in Africa.

The Council, for its part, has shown its commitment
to the aims of the report and to lasting peace in Africa,
first, by setting up active working groups and adopting very
important resolutions on the report's recommendations, and,
secondly, by authorizing new peacekeeping operations in
the Central African Republic and Sierra Leone. I am also
pleased to note that the General Assembly will be
considering my report in October, and I look forward to
the conclusions of the Administrative Committee on
Coordination's fall session devoted mainly to the inter-
agency aspects of the report.

In the report, I emphasized that any and all efforts
at securing peace had to be combined with steps towards
ending Africa's poverty. Specifically, I called for the
promotion of investments and economic growth, ensuring
adequate levels of international aid, reducing debt burdens
and opening international markets to Africa's products.
These are aims on which we can all agree; we can also
all agree that they are far from being met.

Yesterday, I convened an informal meeting of
Foreign Ministers of the Development Assistance
Committee countries to highlight five priority areas in
meeting Africa's economic challenges. Those needs are,
first, to increase the volume and improve the quality of
official development assistance; secondly, to consider
converting all remaining official bilateral debt owed by
the poorest African countries into grants; thirdly, to
liberalize access to the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Debt (HIPC) Initiative; fourthly, to ease access conditions
for African exports; and fifthly, to encourage investment
in Africa, which has largely been marginalized in the
process of globalization.

I am pleased to say that all the Governments
represented reaffirmed their support for the
recommendations in the report, and in particular for the
five priority areas I have just indicated.

At the same time, they stressed the need on the part
of African States to create an enabling environment for
investment and economic growth. There must be
reciprocity. No one can be expected to invest in unstable
or insecure neighbourhoods.

If we now recognize that peace and prosperity must
be sought as one, with equal priority and equal
persistence, then we must also understand the broader
nature of the human security we seek. That is why the
United Nations increasingly is taking a comprehensive,
holistic approach to all our peacekeeping and peace-
building activities. We have learned that electoral
assistance must be part of democracy-building; that
securing human rights will ensure genuine political
liberty; and that political development must be integral to

 

economic development. And we are applying these lessons
every day.

There have recently been positive developments in a
number of African countries seeking to escape conflict or
to make the transition from dictatorship to democracy. In
this regard, I would like to express my hope that the
leadership of Nigeria will continue on the path to good
governance and the rule of law, strengthening democratic
institutions and organizing free and fair elections in
February leading to the handover to civilian rule by the end
of May 1999.

Regrettably, however, this move away from the rule of
the gun has seemed the exception rather than the rule in
recent months. Indeed, in the six months that have passed
since I presented the report, we have witnessed fighting
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in Guinea-Bissau, in Angola and in Sierra
Leone, while the humanitarian crises in Somalia and the
Sudan seem only to grow with every passing day.

The United Nations, in partnership with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), is actively involved
in seeking an end to every one of these crises and in
alleviating the suffering borne by innocent civilians. But in
a larger sense we can only appeal to the wisdom and the
responsibility of leaders to put the interests of their own
people first.

Without the determination of the parties themselves to
reach political accommodation, there is little we can do
except offer the band-aid of humanitarian assistance, often
with great difficulty and at great risk. We are in no position
to impose the peace that the peoples so fervently desire and
so richly deserve.

What will it take for Africa's leaders finally to reject
military solutions to political challenges? When will the
realization arrive that not one - not a single one - of
these conflicts can end in the absence of compromise,
tolerance and the peaceful resolution of disputes? When
will the time come when we can all say that we did our
best for Africa, that its leaders came together and resolved
peacefully their differences and that we in the international
community finally did our part to help secure durable peace
and ensure lasting development?

Allow me to suggest that they, and we, look to Nelson
Mandela; that they, and we, listen to the final words of the
final United Nations address of his presidency; and that
they, and we, show ourselves worthy of his great hope for
the continent of Africa. We hope that there will emerge

"a cadre of leaders which will not allow that any
should be denied their freedom, as we were; that any
should be turned into refugees, as we were; that any
should be condemned to go hungry, as we were; that
any should be stripped of their human dignity, as we
were." (A/53/PV.7)

Against all odds, President Mandela achieved his
aim for his nation and for his people. Let that
achievement be a source of inspiration for all of us.

