Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the Bolivian presidency for organizing today's
open debate. The non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is a priority for Japan. I also wish
to thank the two briefers, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu and
Mr. Joseph Ballard, for their clear and informative
briefings.

Japan aligns itself with the joint statement of the
Group of Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004), which is to
be delivered later by the representative of Spain.

Japan once again welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016) in December of last year.
However, we must recognize and remain vigilant
against the threat posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction taking place now. The threat from
North Korea's nuclear and ballistic-missile development
has reached a new level. These activities are in blatant
violation of Security Council resolutions and present a
clear challenge to the global non-proliferation regime.
This is simply not acceptable. Japan strongly urges
North Korea to refrain from further provocations and
violations and to comply faithfully and fully with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2270 (2016), as well as its
other commitments.

The threat of WMD proliferation is also evident in
Syria, with the actual use of chemical weapons. Japan
strongly condemn such acts, which are not permissible
under any circumstances.

In the light of these clear and present threats, it is
the responsibility of every State to protect itself and
its people by strengthening international and domestic
non-proliferation measures. Malicious actors are
misusing rapid advances in science, technology and
international commerce for proliferation purposes.
Proliferation activities must be prevented whenever and
wherever they are attempted. States must be all the more
vigilant, as their people and entities can unwittingly
become complicit in proliferation activities. Japan
strongly believes that enhancing the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), especially the obligations set
forth in the resolution related to domestic and export
control, is imperative. Let me reiterate that resolution
2325 (2016) calls upon States that have not done so to
start developing effective national control lists.

State capacity-building is key for further
implementation because proliferation can occur through
the weakest link. The Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of Experts can
help States strengthen their domestic non-proliferation
systems by, for example, sharing expertise to formulate
national implementation action plans and clarifying
actual assistance needs. Facilitating direct interactions
between Member States and the Committee will
strongly bolster the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

This year, Japan disbursed $1 million to the Trust
Fund to support the work of the 1540 Committee. A
significant portion will be used to finance these types
of direct interactions. Japan urges interested States
to contact the Committee and would also be happy to
relay any message to the Committee as the Coordinator
of the Working Group on Monitoring and National
Implementation.

In today's security environment, we must urgently
strengthen the non-proliferation regime at the global,
regional and national levels. Japan will continue to
actively support these endeavours.

