Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me, at the outset, to also express my sincerest
condolences for the recent tragic accident in Ethiopia
that led to numerous deaths, including those of many
members of the United Nations family.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his insightful briefing and admirable
commitment to lasting peace in Afghanistan. I also
warmly thank Ms. Tapesh for her remarks and efforts to
promote women's rights in Afghanistan. Lastly, I would
like to thank Mr. Mohib for his briefing and presence
here today.

I would like to underscore three points today: the
peace process, the elections and the importance of
promoting and protecting human rights in Afghanistan.

First, with regard to consultations aimed at
establishing a peace process, Belgium hopes that
this year will mark a decisive step towards reaching
a negotiated settlement of what has been a long and
devastating conflict in Afghanistan. We believe that a
lasting peace agreement can be reached only through a
comprehensive and inclusive intra-Afghan dialogue. I
reiterate our support for the Kabul process, which must
form the basis of an Afghan-led and-controlled peace
process, and, in its second phase, must be able rely on the
support of the entire international community. Belgium
also calls on all parties to encourage the meaningful
and equal participation of women at all stages of
the peace process. Any agreement reached should
guarantee the protection and promotion of women's
rights in accordance with the Afghan Constitution. As
Ms. Tapesh also stated earlier, it would be extremely
unfair for women to have to pay such a price for peace.

Secondly, 2019 is also a crucial year for the
consolidation of democracy in Afghanistan. To meet
the challenges ahead, Afghanistan is in need of a
representative legislature. In that regard, it is necessary
that the results of the parliamentary elections be
finalized. Belgium underlines the need to learn from
last year's elections and to implement the necessary
electoral reforms. In addition, we call on all political
actors to act responsibly and ensure that the upcoming
presidential and other elections are free, transparent
and credible.

That brings me to my third point, which is the
human rights situation in Afghanistan. Belgium is
deeply concerned about the impact of the armed
conflict on the civilian population. The 2018 report
(S/2019/193) on United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), released in February 2019, on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, indicates
a record number of civilian deaths, many of them
women and children. Belgium calls on all parties to
take effective measures to prevent and end all serious
violations against children, including those resulting
from aerial bombardments and the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. Of particular concern
has been the observation of an increasing number
of anti-Government elements targeting civilians,
often using improvised explosive devices. The trend
involving increasingly violent and deliberate attacks
on health-care facilities and schools continues and is
unacceptable. International humanitarian law must be
respected by all parties.

As members are aware, Belgium attaches great
importance to the role of women in peacebuilding. In
line with its contribution of €2 million to support the
work of UN-WOMEN in the implementation of the
Afghan action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the Geneva conference held in November
2018, Belgium welcomes the measures taken by the
Government to protect and promote women's rights.
Those measures have resulted in women's increased
participation in public service and decision-making at
the local level. In that regard, we listened carefully to
Ms. Tapesh's recommendations. We encourage further
efforts to protect women human rights defenders and
expand access to education for women and girls to
allow them to participate fully in social, economic and
political life.

In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute to the victims
of violence in Afghanistan and to the resilience of the
Afghan people and security forces. The goal of peace
is achievable in Afghanistan. Belgium supports an
Afghan-led and -controlled peaceful settlement.

