Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I am grateful
to the members of the Council for having agreed to my
request to participate in this meeting.

My purpose today is to thank the members of the
Security Council on behalf of my Government for
having responded favourably to the request of our
Government to inscribe Guinea-Bissau on the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Council's
response once again today should be interpreted as its
agreement that our country deserves the attention of
the international community and to have the
Peacebuilding Commission focus on its case in
particular in order to determine how we can work
together to ensure that the situation changes for the
better. I would therefore like to say how pleased I am
with the choice of the Brazilian Ambassador as Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Members of the Council
will have noted from the briefing she has just delivered
the excellent quality of the work done to date and how
closely the whole of the Commission, the Guinea-
Bissau configuration, officials of Guinea-Bissau and
international partners are working together to ensure
that we can put in place a new process that can provide
more sustained attention to Guinea-Bissau.

We have taken note of the latest report
(S/2008/181) of the Secretary-General. We are very
pleased that he has recognized the efforts that have
been made in Guinea-Bissau, which have led to
substantial progress. In that regard, I do not think it an
exaggeration to say that we are moving in the right
direction to strengthen democracy. We now have in
place an inclusive Government comprised of numerous
parties. We are on our way to establishing an inclusive
democracy, for we want a participatory democracy in
Guinea-Bissau. We therefore agree with the Secretary-
General that further efforts must be made to ensure that
we can strengthen democracy in our country. There are,
however, some conditions to be met in order to do that.

We are a poor country with problems and are in
need of international assistance. I shall not refer to the
content of the report, as members are familiar with it. I
would simply like to say that we need the international
community to help us move ahead with reforms,
including the reform of the security and public
administration sectors, in order to give new impetus to
democracy and good governance alike. We also need
the international community's assistance for our
approach to human rights, which should not simply be
theoretical but should ensure respect for human rights,
civic protection and the access of all to genuine justice.

I should therefore like to dwell for a few
moments on the amnesty law that has been voted on in
Guinea-Bissau's National Assembly. This law does not
mean that we want to promote a policy of impunity -
quite the contrary. The amnesty law should be seen as
part of an effort at national reconciliation. Of course,
we will spare no effort to ensure that the crucial issue
of impunity is resolved and that those who have
committed crimes are brought to justice and receive the
punishment they deserve under the law.
08-28372

I would also like to refer to the upcoming
elections. As the Representative of the Secretary-
General pointed out a few moments ago, the date for
those elections has been set. The fact is that it is not up
to the country's President to unilaterally set the date for
elections. There is a democratic process in place,
which the Council and the international community
support and which we have followed. It is up to the
National Electoral Commission to assess the situation
and, after having consulted the political parties, to
make a recommendation to the President. I am pleased
that the President yesterday promulgated the law
setting 16 November as the date for the elections.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we are
pleased with the cooperation we have established with
the Peacebuilding Commission, and especially with its
Guinea-Bissau configuration. That configuration is
being led with great skill and determination and with
the sensitivity for which our Brazilian friends are
known - sensitivity which comes from their
awareness of the situation in Africa in general and in
Guinea-Bissau in particular. I am therefore hopeful
that, under the leadership of our colleague Ambassador
Viotti of Brazil, we will be able to work with the
members of the Council to ensure that good
governance becomes a reality in Guinea-Bissau, that
democracy is strengthened in our country and that the
elections - which constitute a decisive step towards
strengthening democracy - take place.

I also hope that our case can receive greater
attention and interest and that the international
community will assess the situation in Guinea-Bissau
anew, so that concerted efforts can be made to improve
the situation. The ultimate objective of the efforts of
the international community and our own efforts at the
national level is to improve the living conditions of our
people and ensure that we can at last live in a truly
democratic country at peace with itself.

