Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President,
I would like to thank you for organizing today's
meeting on Somalia. I wish to welcome the President of
Somalia, Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, and thank him
for honoring us with his presence and sharing his Views
on the situation in Somalia and his hope for the future
of his country. I would also like to thank Mr. Michael
Keating for his briefing and Ambassador Tete Antonio,
Permanent Observer of the African Union, for his
briefing on behalf of the High Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union.

The briefings provided enabled members of the
Security Council to better understand the progress and
challenges faced by the people and the Government
of Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the United Nations and other international
partners of Somalia, which have joined forces to build a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Somalia. The progress
we are all witnessing is a reward for the investment we
are all making towards peace in a country that has long
faced a very brutal war.

I take this opportunity to praise the Somalis for
reaching agreement on the electoral process. The 4.5
formula as the electoral model will allow for the holding
of elections in Somalia while taking into account the
various sensibilities and influential role of the elders
and traditional and religious leaders. We commend the
national consultative process regarding the electoral
process, which took into account the different points
of View expressed by the various communities that
compose the Somali ethnic mosaic. We also take note
of the commitment of the Somali stakeholders to the
universal ballot in the elections to take place in 2020.

Significant progress has also been made in the
constitutional review process and in the development
of the federal system, while relevant legislation
has recently been passed by Parliament regarding
money-laundering, counter-terrorism financing and
the protection and promotion of the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children. The national
gender policy, the national youth policy and the national
development plan for 2017-2019 were important
legislative milestones. We praise the Somali legislative
body for these important achievements.

While we take note of the continuous progress in
Somalia, the country still faces considerable challenges,
especially regarding the humanitarian situation, which
needs to be urgently addressed. Also, the fight against
and defeat of Al-Shabaab aew imperative if the country
is to make progress towards peace and stability. In this
regard, predictable funding is an absolute necessity that
we have to take into account for AMISOM.

We welcome the progress achieved in capacity-
building for the Somali National Army and the
Somali police force, and the financial commitment of
international partners to developing programmes and
projects for upgrading the Army and the police. This
is also another important requirement, as the country
needs to be organized to guarantee its own defence
as peace continues to be built. It is important that
the federal and regional authorities ensure the strict
compliance of security operations with international
standards regarding human rights and respect for the
rule of law. The Federal Government of Somalia and the
interim regional administrations need to create a secure
environment for the civilian population, bridging any
existing gaps and addressing intercommunal conflicts.

In conclusion, I wish to convey to the President
of Somalia Angola's full support. We know that it is
important that the country be reborn. The rebirth of
the country needs to be an absolute objective that can
be achieved. From the discussion this morning, the
Security Council is again reassured of that. We therefore
look forward to seeing a brighter future with peace,
prosperity and sustainable development in the country.

