Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to join the previous
speakers in expressing my delegation's appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his update of the
situation in Sierra Leone. We are also grateful to
Ambassador Dahlgren, who made a second trip to Sierra
Leone as the Chairman of the sanctions Committee. His
first-hand briefing this morning was very informative and
extremely useful. I would like to join Ambassador Mahugu
in his earlier comment that the visits of chairmen of
sanctions committees to the relevant countries can be very
useful in giving us first-hand briefings to form the basis of
our valuable discussions.

My delegation would also like to commend the role of
the United Nations in Sierra Leone, the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Okelo, and the members of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL), together with the invaluable role being played
there by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), to bring peace
and security to that country.

According to this morning's briefing, it is very clear
that the current military and security situation is very
worrisome. We are particularly concerned about the
immense humanitarian suffering caused by the rebels'
continuing attacks on civilians and about the plight of
children. Reports of children being forced into combat
continue.

On the other hand, the report of the Secretary-General
gives us some encouraging signs. For instance, we are
encouraged by the effort made by the Government of Sierra
Leone towards national reconciliation and by certain
progress made in the demobilization and integration of
former combatants. We also welcome the Government's
recent commitment not to involve combatants under the
age of 18.

For reasons of time, I would like to raise only one
issue this morning, namely, the question of how effective
the sanctions regime has been and how to strengthen it.
Ambassador Dahlgren came back with the news about the
concept of joint patrols on the common border with
Liberia, which is a very important subject. I wish to refer
not only to the effectiveness of the sanctions regime, but
also to subregional approaches aimed at producing
confidence-building measures between the neighbouring
countries. I would appreciate it if either Ambassador
Dahlgren or Under-Secretary-General Miyet could
comment on a few of these issues at the end of this round
of discussions. Indeed, the Secretary-General's report
talks about this concept in several paragraphs.

There are several concepts here. One is the joint
patrolling of the two countries' common border by the
Sierra Leonean Government force and the Liberian force.
The other is to do this internationally, for instance
through or with the assistance of ECOMOG.

My question here concerns the role of the United
Nations. Paragraph 6 of the report of the Secretary-
General notes that Ambassador Dahlgren was approached
by local authorities requesting that United Nations
military observers be deployed in assisting ECOMOG in
patrolling the frontier. Another paragraph touches on the
question of cooperation between the two countries in joint
border patrols.

This is perhaps a major issue, and I should like
some more information about the role of military
observers. While I appreciate, for instance, support in
terms of technical equipment, as mentioned by
Ambassador Dahlgren, with respect to the deployment of
military observers along the border and greater
involvement in joint patrols, my first question would be,
is this viable? Obviously, this is not part of UNOMSIL's
mandate at this time, and the current authorized level of
UNOMSIL does not allow it. Again, I would ask if these
proposals are viable, and if it is worthwhile pursuing the
expansion of UNOMSIL's mandate and strength, if
necessary.

