The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Angola and Zambia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carneiro
(Angola) and Mr. Walnbita (Zambia) took seats at the
Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): On
behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency General
Higino Carneiro, the Vice-Minister for Territorial
Administration of Angola, His Excellency Mr. Victor Lima,
Adviser to the President for External Affairs, and the other
members of the delegation of Angola.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
the Honourable Keli Walubita, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia, His Excellency the Honourable Dr.
Katele Kalumba, the Minister for Home Affairs,
His Excellency the Honourable Mr. Vernon J. Mwaanga,
Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Foreign
Affairs, and the other members of the delegation of
Zambia.

(spoke in English)

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
8/1999/203, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/ 1999/ 147, letter dated 12 February 1999 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/ 1999/ 166, letter dated
18 February 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Angola to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General; and S/ 1999/ 182, letter dated 20 February 1999
from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

The first speaker is the Vice-Minister for Territorial
Administration of Angola, His Excellency General Higino
Carneiro, on whom I now call.


