Mr. anald (Norway): Norway welcomes the
increased collaboration between the United Nations
and regional organizations. We are ourselves taking
part in the international peacekeeping efforts of the
United Nations and NATO in the Balkans and in
Afghanistan, and we are working with the European
Union (EU) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which continue to play
very significant roles in the Balkans as well.

Norway believes that possible contributions by
regional and subregional organizations should always
be considered when planning new peacekeeping
operations. In order to streamline such cooperation,
there seems to be a need for the United Nations to set
common standards and to establish a better framework
for entering into new agreements.

Africa has seen a number of violent conflicts.
These have seriously hampered development, caused
severe destruction and human suffering, and led to
instability and the dislocation of large groups of
people. We have also seen how African leaders
increasingly have taken responsibility for preventing
conflicts and building peace.

In West Africa, peace has been achieved through
active cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Norway sees ECOWAS as an important
factor in the building of peace and security. In Burundi,
the phasing and coordination of African Union (AU)
and United Nations peacekeeping operations has
proved the potential of increased collaboration between
United Nations and regional organizations.

The African Union and its mechanisms for peace
and security, especially its Commission, the Peace and
Security Council and the African standby force, can
play a very important part. Through the AU, African
countries are currently responding to the challenges of
Darfur and Somalia. The international community must
stand by the AU in its pioneering efforts to achieve
2
peace through complex operations that present great
challenges.

Norway is committed to supporting the United
Nations in Darfur. We strongly urge the Sudan to
accept the United Nations support package to the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). The
situation is critical. The Norwegian Government is
extremely concerned about the humanitarian and
human rights situation in Darfur.

We are now also in a critical phase with regard to
Somalia. There is a chance for peace and stability, but
the country could also very easily slide back into
lawlessness. It is therefore crucial that in this situation
the international community stand and act together.

The establishment of the African standby force is
at an early stage. Intensive work is under way to build
capacity and develop doctrines and appropriate
command and control systems for the force to be
operational by 2010. The African mission in Darfur has
revealed many challenges and underlines the need for
close cooperation between the AU and the international
community through the United Nations.

According to the United Nations Charter, the
United Nations has obligations that go far beyond the
maintenance of peace and security, one of the most
prominent of which is the promotion of respect for
human rights. We should discuss how cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU can further
contribute to the promotion of human rights on the
continent.

The General Assembly has also agreed that the
international community has a responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, wherever they
may occur. Any United Nations-mandated peace
operation has an obligation to promote these common
values established by the United Nations.

The African Union has called upon the United
Nations to examine the possibility of funding
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the African
Union or under its authority, through assessed
contributions. This is an important discussion. While
financing for United Nations-led operations is
guaranteed through well-established United Nations
mechanisms, funding for regional peacekeeping is ad
hoc, not coordinated and depends on donor financing.
07-28766
When it comes to Darfur and the financing of
AMIS, which may be setting a standard for future
cooperation, it will be crucial to find a way to ensure
that AMIS basic accountability, procurement and
managerial standards comply with United Nations
rules, particularly in View of the need to secure a
funding commitment from the General Assembly's
Fifth Committee. There needs to be clarity in command
and control. Strong United Nations participation will
be important.

Looking to 2010, when the force should be fully
operational, it is crucial that the operational principles
and doctrines guiding AU peacekeeping missions be
closely aligned with United Nations standards. Norway
therefore would like to congratulate the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for having established an AU
cell to assist the AU and its Peace Support Operations
Division with capacity- building for peacekeeping.

Integral to those challenges is the requirement
that AU peacekeeping missions be under civilian and
political control and that its doctrines enable the AU to
undertake multidimensional operations and to muster
the capacity to cooperate closely with United Nations
humanitarian agencies in the area of operation. Norway
is therefore assisting the AU in developing a road map
and plan for the establishment of the civilian and
police components of the African standby force.

Efforts should be made to establish closer links
between the AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council. Subregional
organizations such as ECOWAS, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) could be
better linked up with the peace and security institutions
of the AU.

The African Union has taken on a heavy burden
with regard to peace and security on the African
continent. We believe that it is crucial that African
countries themselves take on a leadership role and
ownership with regard to managing and resolving
African conflicts. We are ready to assist, together with
other international partners.

