Let me begin by thanking Germany for organizing today's meeting, as well as the Dominican Republic. I would also like to thank all the briefers for their particularly important and eye-opening briefings. Indonesia is resolute in recognizing that conflict-related sexual violence is a crime against humanity. Despite a decade of concerted focus in the Security Council to end this crime, we are confronted with increasingly complex challenges to protect all survivors and their families, especially during the coronavirus disease pandemic. As clearly reported, the level of compliance by all parties to conflict remains low. Against that backdrop, I would like to focus my statement on three fundamental points. First, we must ensure accountability to fight against sexual violence. Strengthening the reach and capacity of national authorities is vital to facilitate access to justice and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable. The stigma of being victims of such heinous crimes often prevents them from coming forward and seeking justice. Therefore, by treating them as survivors - rather than simply as victims - will help national authorities to address this issue better. We particularly commend some Governments' efforts to put in place a more protective legal and policy framework for women and children at risk. But much still needs to be done. In that regard, capacity-building must be proportional and responsive to survivors' needs in their reintegration process and to address the root causes of the culture of impunity. Secondly, comprehensive resocialization and reintegration processes for survivors must be developed. Aside from justice, this agenda has a strong connection to access to health care and psychological support. Support for resocialization and reintegration has been even more urgent and challenging during this pandemic. We have no option but to empower survivors to live their lives with dignity. We should provide assistance in terms of quality services, economic support, health- care services as well as legal assistance, so survivors may be seamlessly reintegrated into society. Promoting social reintegration and cohesion is important. It is therefore critical to engage local communities, particularly religious leaders and women-led organizations, to mitigate stigma and fully reintegrate victims in society. Together, we can provide a reliable vehicle for enhancing community- level protection and response mechanisms. Thirdly, meaningful women's participation to combat these crimes is necessary. Indonesia believes that the inclusion of women in peacekeeping missions may encourage victims to feel more secure working with them, and thereby help to eliminate sexual violence crimes. Women peacekeepers are well positioned to win the hearts and minds of affected communities. We therefore strongly encourage troop- and police- contributing countries to incentivize the percentage of women military and police in deployment to peacekeeping operations. Today there are 159 Indonesian women peacekeepers in various missions who have been trained to combat sexual violence in conflict at the Indonesian Peacekeeping Operations Training Centre. We must do things concretely if we want to see progress. Combating these crimes also requires women's participation as negotiators and mediators. Earlier this month, as a pathway to establishing a network in South-East Asia, Indonesia hosted a webinar on the role of women negotiators and mediators in the maintenance of regional peace and security. Practitioners across the region shared their views on enhancing the role and participation of women in peace processes. Today's debate is about standing behind justice and equity. We stand behind the brave survivors of sexual violence. We stand up for their rights. Indonesia attaches great importance to efforts aimed at eliminating conflict-related sexual violence, focusing on a survivor-centred approach and fostering compliance with existing commitments. Keeping them in our hearts, we must put the survivors at the heart of our work.
