Mr. Gambari: This past month, we have
witnessed an alarming escalation in violence between
the Israelis and the Palestinians, as well as political
developments in Israel, the occupied Palestinian
territory and Lebanon, almost all of which have a
negative impact on the prospects for peace and stability
in the region.

There have been intense confrontations between
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and Palestinian
militants, as the IDF's rolling military operation in
Gaza enters its sixth month. The operation is aimed at
curbing the launching of rockets by Palestinian
militants against Israeli civilian targets. The Council
has already been briefed on the tragic events in Beit
Hanoun, in which a week-long Israeli incursion
included an artillery attack that killed more than 20
Palestinian civilians. In addition to the high number of
human casualties, the IDF operation in Beit Hanoun
resulted in an estimated $3.7 million in damage to local
infrastructure, according to United Nations
Development Programme figures. As the Council is
aware, the General Assembly, meeting in emergency
special session, adopted a resolution on Beit Hanoun
(General Assembly resolution ES-10/16), which
includes a request for the Secretary-General to send a
fact-finding mission and report back in 30 days.

In the West Bank and Gaza, a combined total of
at least 128 Palestinians were killed and over 380 were
injured during the past month, including at least 19
children. One Israeli soldier and one civilian were
killed, and many injuries were reported.

Palestinian militants fired over 200 rockets and
mortars this month into the western Negev region,
06-62387
including several that struck just as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Louise Arbour,
was visiting Sderot earlier today. The rockets have
caused one death, multiple injuries and significant
damage. Schools in the area have been closed
intermittently since October. The town of Sderot, in
particular, has borne the brunt of these indiscriminate
attacks. Israel also expressed concern that weapons and
explosives continue to be smuggled into Gaza,
enabling militants to continue and possibly intensify
their attacks against Israeli targets.

Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has
continued negotiations on a national unity government
with Hamas and other Palestinian factions, and there
now appears to be an understanding in principle on the
elements for the composition and programme of a new
government. Prime Minister Haniyeh announced on
10 November that he would be ready to step down as
Prime Minister in order to "let the siege be lifted to end
the suffering of the Palestinian people". President
Abbas also met with representatives of Palestinian
factions yesterday with the aim of establishing a
cessation of militant attacks against Israeli targets, in
exchange for a cessation of attacks by Israel.

Despite the reported progress, announcement of a
full agreement on the government is not necessarily
imminent. Negotiations encompass a number of
outstanding issues, including the release of the Israeli
soldier who remains captive in Gaza. The official
nomination of the next Palestinian prime minister is
expected to occur only if and when the entire
agreement is concluded.

The Palestinian Authority's unprecedented fiscal
crisis looms in the background of these political
negotiations. The Palestinian Authority received only
$500 million between March and September, which
amounts to only 40 per cent of its revenues for the
same period last year. The wage bill has continued to
increase, as has net lending, reflecting non-payment of
bills by consumers. Palestinian Authority revenues
have fallen mainly because Israel refuses to hand over
indirect taxes it collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority, amounting to approximately half a billion
dollars.

The fiscal crisis has contributed to a serious
decline in the delivery of public services. A large
majority of public schools in the West Bank remain
closed, and West Bank public health facilities offer
06-62387

only emergency treatment, chemotherapy and dialysis.
Stocks of essential drugs and medical disposables
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory have been
depleted, and health centres in Gaza have been
hampered by electricity shortages.

Turning to Israeli political developments, Prime
Minister Olmert moved to strengthen his coalition at
the end of October by including the Israel Our Home
party in the Government and by appointing Avigdor
Lieberman, the party's Chairman, as Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister in charge of Strategic Affairs.
This appointment has caused concern in the peace
camp in Israel and alarm among Palestinians.

Prime Minister Olmert visited the United States
this month and held talks with Administration officials
in Washington on a number of issues, including, of
course, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Regarding movement and access, I would like to
observe that one year ago, on 15 November, the
Agreement on Movement and Access was concluded.
Implementation of that Agreement, intended to
promote peaceful economic development and to
improve the situation in the Gaza Strip, has been
limited. Despite the stationing of European Union (EU)
observers, the Rafah crossing between Gaza and Egypt
has been open for only 58 per cent of scheduled
opening hours over the past year and for only 9 per
cent of the scheduled time since June of this year. The
Karni crossing has been open for only 44 per cent of
scheduled opening hours, with opening hours changing
on an almost daily basis.

Gaza export targets, which the Agreement had set
at 150 trucks per day by end of 2005, rising to 400
trucks per day by end of 2006, remain just that: targets.
Over the past year, Palestinians have been allowed to
export on average only 18 truckloads of produce per
day, a small fraction of even the lower of the two
targets. It should be noted here that the targets were
calculated on the basis of minimum export levels
needed to prevent the further decline of the Palestinian
economy and suffering of the population.

No Palestinian worker has been allowed to cross
at Erez to access jobs in Israel since March 2006, and
no progress has been reported on bus or truck convoys
between Gaza and the West Bank. Similarly, there has
been no progress reported on plans to rebuild the
seaport and the airport. One year after signing the
agreement, the Government of Israel still has not
3
presented its plan to reduce internal closure measures
inside the West Bank. In fact, the number of obstacles
has increased from 400 one year ago to 542 today,
many of these manned by soldiers.

This month, the Israeli press reported that the
Government of Israel and the Settlers Council had
agreed on a plan to evacuate 15 illegal outposts,
partially evacuate four and legalize eight. However,
that report has not received official confirmation. An
official denial would help to dispel any lingering
impression that the Government plans to sanction the
establishment of a further eight settlements in
contravention of previous agreements. Despite the
stated intention of the Government to evacuate
outposts in accordance with the Road Map, no action
has been taken to date in that regard. The lack of action
to freeze settlement activities in response to repeated
Quartet appeals is a matter of serious concern.
Moreover, it has a direct and far-reaching impact on
movement and access: many of the impediments to
Palestinian movement in the West Bank exist primarily
to provide security for illegal settlements as opposed to
monitoring movement into Israel proper.

Israel also continued construction on the barrier.
The Secretary-General's report (A/ES-10/361) on the
establishment of a register of damage related to Israel's
construction of the wall was submitted to the General
Assembly on 17 October. The report presents the
institutional framework required for the register of
damage, the establishment of which was requested by
the General Assembly.

I now turn to developments in Lebanon. The
political and security situation in Lebanon continues to
deteriorate. Earlier today, Pierre Gemayel, Lebanon's
Minister of Industry and one of the leaders of the 14
March coalition, was killed by gunmen, who opened
fire as his convoy drove through a Christian
neighbourhood near Beirut. This assassination occurred
in the midst of an increasingly complex political
environment. From 6 to 11 November, Lebanese
political leaders engaged in a process of national
consultations initiated by the Speaker of the Lebanese
Parliament, Nabih Berri. In four sessions, the leaders
discussed critical issues facing the country but could
not, unfortunately, reach a consensus. This led, several
days later, to the resignation from the Government of
five Shia ministers and one Christian minister.
In our view, and with the threat of even greater
violence looming over Lebanon's political horizon, it is
imperative that the parties do their utmost to work
together for Lebanon to make progress towards the
important political and socio-economic objectives and
challenges that lie ahead. To this end, the Secretary-
General's Personal Representative for Lebanon, Geir
Pedersen, continues to encourage all the parties to
return to the negotiating table with the aim of finding a
consensus.

The cessation of hostilities with Israel continues
to hold, with no major violations of the Blue Line.
However, almost daily and often provocative Israeli
overflights over Lebanon, including mock attacks on
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
troops, continue, despite repeated United Nations calls
for an end to these violations.

The IDF has withdrawn from the areas
surrounding the village of Ghajar. The tripartite
meetings between the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF),
the IDF and UNIFIL continued to provide a
constructive forum, inter alia on the situation
pertaining to the village of Ghajar, and all sides remain
optimistic that finalization of the temporary security
arrangement for Ghajar can be achieved in the near
future. A more detailed report on progress in the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) will, of
course, be provided by the Secretary-General to the
Council on 30 November.

On 15 November, the Secretary-General
presented to the Security Council his report on the
establishment of a tribunal of an international character
pursuant to resolution 1664 (2006). In that regard, the
Legal Counsel, Mr. Nicolas Michel, addressed the
Council only yesterday.

We have seen another month of violence in the
Middle East, one that, for the tragedy at Beit Hanoun,
will almost certainly be remembered as a dark hour in
this very protracted and tragic conflict. Again, civilians
on both sides have suffered as a result of the conflict.
Palestinians are mourning the loss or injury of more
than 240 friends and relatives in Beit Hanoun, which
was devastated by repeated Israeli incursions. Only a
few kilometres away, in the Israeli town of Sderot,
Israelis are grieving the death of one person and the
injury of 14 others who were hit by Palestinian rocket
fire.
06-62387
The events of this month highlight once again the
fact that this conflict cannot be resolved through
military means. Once again, we fully acknowledge
Israel's right to self-defence, as long as it is exercised
in accordance with international law. However, the
incursions into Beit Hanoun produced a huge number
of non-combatant deaths, revealing a manifestly
excessive use of force. Moreover, there was a
subsequent increase in rocket fire into Israel, even
though the stated purpose of the operation was to stop
such attacks. Such actions and counteractions intensify
anger against Israel, both among Palestinians and
throughout the Middle East. They exacerbate existing
resentment over the continued occupation, with
apparently no end in sight. In the light of these results,
it is hard to see the effectiveness of such operations.
Palestinian rocket fire, which is legally and morally
wrong, is also counterproductive. The occupation of
Palestinian territory that began in 1967 will not be
brought to an end through indiscriminate attacks
against Israeli civilians.

It is of critical importance to return to the
political track. Israelis and Palestinians both need to
receive reassurance that the prospect of actually
solving the conflict is not dead. New initiatives from
the international community are taking shape, and a
reinvigorated third party intervention may help to push
the parties to move beyond the current impasse. The
Secretary-General fervently hopes that the Quartet will
take concrete steps - and take them soon- to
promote a return to negotiations.

At this moment, however, it is difficult to see a
breakthrough without the establishment of a new
Palestinian government that puts the Palestinian
Authority as a whole in a position to better address the
needs of the people, to fully engage with the
international community, to ensure the release of the
Israeli soldier currently held captive in Gaza and to
maintain a cease-fire. The establishment of such a
government as a culmination of President Abbas's
efforts is a worthy goal in itself.

Movement in the right direction should be
encouraged by the international community and
rewarded when it occurs. The United Nations,
therefore, continues to encourage the efforts of
President Abbas to establish a Palestinian government
whose political programme reflects the basic tenets of
the peace process, as the Quartet agreed on
20 September. Formation of such a government would

also help lift the restrictions on donor funding to its
institutions, which is crucial, given the gravity of the
Palestinian Authority's fiscal crisis.

Israel, for its part, must also act responsibly to
calm the situation and bring about conditions in which
negotiations can resume. Israel should act prudently
and proportionally in defending its citizens, so as to
avoid civilian casualties. Operating with area weapons
like artillery in civilian neighourhoods such as Beit
Hanoun makes civilian casualties inevitable. A review
of the entire policy of military pressure may well be in
order. Israel should also meet its agreements and
obligations, establishing a clear timeline and method
for dismantling settlement outposts, as set out in the
Road Map, and transferring value added tax and
customs revenues that it collects on behalf of the
Palestinian Authority. The absence of such transfers is
depriving Palestinian Authority civil servants of their
salaries and hurting close to a million dependents, as
well as weakening the Palestinian Authority
institutions on which a Palestinian State is meant to be
based.

Furthermore, progress on the regional peace track
is also necessary to stabilize an increasingly volatile
situation in the Middle East. The Syrian role is crucial
in a number of areas, and we continue to hope that
international initiatives to encourage a more positive
role will, in fact, bear fruit. We also continue to hope
that adversaries within the region will begin talking to
resolve their differences. Any and all opportunities for
dialogue, however difficult, should be explored.

Finally, I believe that the inspiration for peace
must come from somewhere, and where better than
from those Israelis and those Palestinians who have
been hurt the most by this prolonged conflict.
Statements from victims on both sides of the Israeli-
Palestinian divide suggest that there is a growing
fatigue with the current state of affairs and a desire to
progress towards a solution, rather than continuing to
engage in a never-ending cycle of punishment and
revenge.

We hope that, with the assistance of the
international community, Israeli, Palestinian and other
regional leaders will be able to achieve such progress
before the end of this year. Certainly, the people of the
region deserve no less.
5

