Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the New Zealand
delegation for convening this meeting on the terrorist
threat to civil aviation. We are grateful to Ms. Fang Liu,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), for her comprehensive briefing
on the crucial issue of civil aviation in contemporary
life.

The international community is faced with
myriad new threats to peace and security that are
a main cause for the weakening of the old system of
collective security that the international community
relied upon after the Second World War. Among those
threats is international terrorism, which has reached
an unprecedented dimension and boldness. Terrorism
has become a global phenomenon of unpredictable
character. As such, dealing with the issue of civil
aviation security and the threats posed by international
terrorism to that vital sector has become a top priority
to be dealt with.

International terrorism has changed the way in
which international aviation operates traditionally,
namely, as a symbol of freedom enhancing increased
intimacy among the peoples of the world. It is an
evolution that terrorists seek to curb and undermine.
Terrorist attacks against civil aviation, as any other
kind of international terrorist act, constitute a threat
to international peace and security, and as such are
criminal and unjustifiable regardless of the motivations
or aims of its perpetrators. The terrorist threat to civil
aviation has forced a more coordinated response on the
part of the international community, mainly towards
preventive anti-terrorism measures aimed at foiling
such attacks in conformity with international treaties
and conventions on civil aviation.

We commend the work of the International Civil
Aviation Organization and the enactment of regulations,
practices and procedures to protect civil aviation against
illegal interference and to ensure that those measures
are appropriate against the surge of security threats.

Angola, as a member of ICAO, has been working
closely with that agency with a view to aligning its
domestic practice and procedures with ICAO directives,
in particular with regard to transportation infrastructure
and technical expertise. We have adopted a vast number
of measures and legislations to verify and monitor
the civil aviation sector by incorporating the norms
enacted by ICAO into the national legal framework.
This has been at the forefront of our efforts as a means
of contributing to the protection and security of civil
aviation. The restructuring of the National Institute
of Civil Aviation in order to make it an efficient and
credible regulatory mechanism; the reform of the the
National Company of Airports Exploration and Air
Navigation to efficiently manage airport infrastructure;
and the restructuring of the TAAG Angola Airlines
are some of the measures adopted in line with the
recommendations of ICAO.

By adopting resolution 2309 (2016), which we were
pleased to co-sponsor, the Security Council is sending
an unequivocal message on the importance of fighting
the threat posed to civil aviation by terrorist groups.
It also highlights the importance of adequate security
parameters for civil aviation, enhancing technical
cooperation and mitigating the threat of attacks in the
framework of the global fight against terrorism.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate Angola's
commitment to working towards implementing
effective measures to counter and mitigate this
threat, particularly through reinforcing partnerships
and applying the norms and standards set by the
International Civil Aviation Organization in order to
strengthen security in this vital sector of contemporary
life.

