Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria fully endorses
the statement by the Irish presidency of the European
Union on behalf of the Union and would like to elaborate
on the following four points. First, I would like to thank
the members of the Security Council, in particular the
sponsors of the draft resolution, for their timely initiative
to address the issues related to nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons and their means of delivery. All of
us must pursue every avenue to ensure that neither
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) nor their means
of delivery fall into the hands of non-State actors.

Secondly, Austria is pleased to note that the latest
text of the draft resolution reflects in its preambular
part the mutual reinforcement of non-proliferation and
disarmament, although we would have preferred such a
reference in the operative part. My Government considers
it important to promote a transparent process of non-
proliferation, disarmament and arms control that covers
the whole spectrum of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and their means of delivery. It is also of
paramount importance that all States fulfil their
obligations under international disarmament, non-
proliferation and arms control treaties and arrangements.

Thirdly, the relationship between WMD and the
increasing number and variety of their means of
delivery merits particular attention. Our experience as
Immediate Central Contact for the International Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation, a
confidence-building and security-enhancing instrument
to which 113 States have so far subscribed, has
convinced us of the advantage of emphasizing this
aspect in the draft resolution. In this regard my
delegation holds the view that operative paragraph 6
(a) should refer not only to international treaties, but
also to non-proliferation arrangements.

Fourthly, should the Security Council decide to
establish a non-proliferation committee, Austria considers
close coordination with the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons essential to achieving the purposes
of the draft resolution.

My delegation would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for the transparent and
inclusive process employed in addressing this important
issue that directly affects each Member State.

I would also like to express our special gratitude
to Ambassador Gunter Pleuger for having arranged this
open debate. We are looking forward to a follow-up of
this highly important process.

