Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special Envoy
Romano Prodi, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim
and the representatives of the African Union and the
European Union for their statements this morning. We
welcome the continued international focus on the Sahel
region and appreciate the Secretary-General's personal
commitment and leadership in convening the high-level
meeting on the situation in the Sahel on the sidelines
of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly in
September.

The Secretary-General and the President of the
World Bank, during their joint visit in November, drew
attention to the economic and security plight of that
vulnerable region and heard from the Sahelian leaders
about how the international community can assist them
in turning around the dire economic situation there. The

participation of the leaders and representatives of the
African Union, the European Union, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the African Development
Bank made this a truly international effort. This
is synergy in action. It has raised international
consciousness about the problems in the Sahel region
and helped mobilize political and economic support
to address them. We also appreciate the determined
efforts made by the Special Envoy this year.

The Sahel region continues to face diverse
challenges, including weak governance, youth
unemployment, a worsening humanitarian situation,
food insecurity and the adverse impact of climate
change. The speed and gravity with which the crisis
in Mali unfolded last year was a stark reminder of the
vulnerabilities and marginalization of the entire region.
The institutional weaknesses, capacity deficits and lack
of resources faced by the countries of the region further
accentuate those problems.

Pakistan has supported the efforts of the Council
to take effective measures to counter the grave threats
posed by the rise of terrorism, transnational organized
crime, and illicit drugs and weapons trafficking in West
Africa and the Sahel. Tackling those threats requires
greater regional cooperation in border management,
as well as in the justice and law enforcement sectors.
Moreover, the international community must continue
to work with the relevant countries and regional
organizations to strengthen State institutions. In
that regard, the principles of national ownership and
close consultation with concerned countries must be
respected.

The wider regional ramifications of the Libyan and
Malian conflicts required a strategy that went beyond
the conventional security, political and peacekeeping
responses. The region needed a new paradigm.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General,
working together, have crafted and launched the new
paradigm, which encompasses security, governance,
humanitarian, human rights and development aspects,
and applies to all phases ofpeacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding in the countries affected by conflict.
A similar approach has been adopted for the Great
Lakes region in the form of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, which is already paying
dividends on the ground.

The social instability and economic volatility in
the Sahel region are a direct consequence of poverty,
marginalization and deprivation. No security or political
strategy would succeed without strong national and
international interventions for economic development.
We therefore welcome the newfound partnership
between the World Bank and the United Nations in the
Sahel region, and hope that it will continue to become
stronger in the years to come.

The real challenge lies in implementing the strategy
to produce tangible results. That is not an easy task. It
requires strong and persistent support and commitment
on the part of the national, regional and international
actors. The international community must continue to
mobilize resources for the successful implementation of
the Sahel strategy. At the same time, the regional States
will have to demonstrate political will to fulfil their
commitments and take advantage of the opportunity to
translate that strategy into tangible dividends for their
people.

For its part, Pakistan will continue to provide full
political support to the United Nations strategy and play
its role both within and outside the Security Council for
long-term peace and stability in the Sahel region.

Finally, we thank Morocco for its effective
coordination in producing the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/20), which we fully support and endorse.

