Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I thank the Republic of Korea
for scheduling this debate and for the concept note
(S/2013/75, annex). I will make a number of comments
pertaining to the Secretary-General's report of last year
(S/2012/376).

Ireland associates itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union, and I will abbreviate my
remarks to respect the time limit. A full version of our
statement will be circulated in the Chamber.

It is States that bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Where
States are willing but unable to discharge their primary
responsibility to protect civilians, peacekeeping
missions can play an important role in building up State
capacity and institutions. There are also situations
where a State is able but may be less than willing to
discharge its responsibilities or to cooperate fully with
the peace operation on the latter's protection mandate.
In that regard, Ireland is concerned by reports that
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur has repeatedly been prevented from accessing
areas in northern Darfur. We call on the Government
of the Sudan to allow the mission unhindered freedom
of movement throughout Darfur in accordance with the
status of forces agreement.

For various reasons, many States do not take
sufficiently resolute action to deal with the crime of
sexual violence in conflict situations. We are deeply
distressed by the finding of the International Rescue
Committee that many Syrians identified rape as a
primary reason that their families fled the country.
Yet we are encouraged by the work in other places of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, to foster the necessary cultural change and
encourage the political ownership and leadership at
the national level that are crucial to tackling conflict-
related sexual violence.

States also bear the primary responsibility for
ensuring accountability at the national level for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The Secretary-General's 2012 report urges
the Council to identify ways to encourage and assist
States to ensure accountability at the national level.
But where that is not forthcoming, the Council must be
prepared to act.

Last month, Ireland joined 56 other countries in
calling upon the Security Council to refer the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court. We repeat
that call today. We believe that a referral to the Court,
signalling clearly that atrocities will not go unpunished,
would be a dynamic element that could potentially save
lives in acting to deter future atrocities.

An imperative in any armed conflict is respect by
the parties for international humanitarian law and for
humanitarian workers. Ireland is deeply concerned by
the plight of Syrians living in areas worst affected by
the fighting, who have been unable to receive sufficient
humanitarian assistance. Ireland's commitment to
the Syrian people is steadfast and underscored by
our humanitarian support, which amounts to almost
$9.5 million over the past 12 months.

From Syria, too, there are reports of the deliberate
targeting of medical personnel, vehicles and facilities;
of doctors prevented from accessing hospitals; and of
attacks on patients and those seeking medical treatment.
Access to medical care and facilities is a matter of life
and death for civilians. We call on all parties to the
conflict to honour their legal obligations.

Even at a time of severe resource constraints, there
are smart approaches that relatively small peacekeeping
missions can use to better cover their sometimes vast
areas of responsibility and to enhance their protection
of civilians. Examples include the increased use
of unmanned aerial systems to enhance situational
awareness to the benefit of improved protection of
civilians, the mission deployment of more women
peacekeepers to increase reach into local communities
and a greater focus on preventing crimes being carried
out against civilians through early warning and decisive
early positioning.

Finally, the reports published over the past two
years by the Secretary-General's Panel of Experts on
Accountability in Sri Lanka and by the Internal Review
Panel on United Nations Action in Sri Lanka have cast
the tragic events in Sri Lanka into sharp relief. But
while we seek to learn from that particular failure, we
also know that the failure to protect civilians has cost
countless lives across many conflicts.

Protecting civilians in the extreme environment
of armed conflict is both a daunting challenge and a
grave responsibility. It falls to all of us, the wider
United Nations membership led by the Council and the
United Nations family itself, to work together to better
discharge that responsibility. We owe it to all civilians
who have died in conflict for want of protection to learn
the harsh lessons and to ensure that we do much more
to protect vulnerable civilians in Syria, Mali, the astern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all
areas afflicted by conflict.

