Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We commend
His Excellency Mr. Linas Antanas Linkevicius, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania, and the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this very important debate on ways to strengthen and
measure the effectiveness of the rule of law.

Kazakhstan considers its engagement in Iraq and
other interventions, as well as the future deployment in
coming months of its military observers to the missions
in Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire, Western Sahara and Haiti, as
part of the country's ongoing contribution to peace and
security.

Kazakhstan's commitment to the rule of law is
based on the following principles: respect for human
rights; compliance with international law; acting
within the framework of existing negotiating formats;
and refraining from actions that would result in greater
tensions and would worsen the humanitarian situation.

With regard to sanctions, we believe that they need
to be targeted; have time constraints, with specific
humanitarian exemptions, so as to minimize their
negative effects; and should be imposed as a last step, to
be taken only in cases where all political and diplomatic
means of reconciliation have been exhausted.

Peacekeeping operations must have adequate,
well-trained personnel and resources. We would
therefore focus on assessing the impact that the rule
of law has on the maintenance of national stability
by not only preventing the recurrence of conflict but
helping post-conflict societies to heal better and faster
by bringing perpetrators to justice, ending corruption,
and attracting investments for future recovery and
development. Other measures include the enforcement
of accountability and enlisting the cooperation of the
States concerned, as well as reparation programmes
for the victims of conflicts and the efficient delivery
of justice.

The question is, how can peacekeeping work
effectively to strengthen police, justice and corrections
institutions, as well as the institutions that can hold
them accountable, if most of them have been destroyed
following a conflict, with key legal records missing and
conditions that include insufficient independence of the
judiciary, political interference and a lack of the rule
of law.

In addition, all rule-of-law initiatives must be
based on national ownership and priorities identified
by the national authorities and civil society, consistent
with the culture and legal traditions of the host country,
yet not in conflict with international norms. In the
light of recent Security Council debates, we must also
ensure that peacekeeping operations more effectively
implement resolutions on the protection of women,
children and civilians in armed conflict.

The Security Council needs overall support in
adhering to the basic principles ofthe rule oflaw in order
to ensure the legitimacy of its actions. To meet those
challenges, the United Nations system must employ
country-level, sector-wide and thematic assessments
of rule-of-law implementation. Therefore, we should
consider mandating support for capacity-building in
national data collection, monitoring and analysis in all
United Nations missions and operations. However, we
do not yet have baseline data on the rule oflaw and look
to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
United Nations Development Programme as the global
focal point on the rule of law to provide those critical
benchmarks.

Restoring and maintaining the rule of law is a
long-term process that requires the close cooperation
of all stakeholders, including the United Nations
system, national and regional partners, international
organizations, donors, the private sector, academia,
civil society and the media. We call for new inclusive
global platforms, such as that held by the General
Assembly in 2012, to help to consolidate the current
fragmented approach of rule of law assistance.

Kazakhstan is committed to joining the international
community in enhancing international rules not only
for security but as an integral part of international
development and the global well-being, manifested as
lasting stability, peace, security, economic development
and social progress.

