Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes Chile's presidency of the Security
Council as a friendly Latin American country and
would like to recognize the importance of this open
debate convened by your country, Sir. We also welcome
the presence among us of President Michelle Bachelet
to preside over the work of the Council. She is without
a doubt committed to the objectives and cause of the
United Nations.

International peace and security are not viable
without sustainable, equitable and inclusive development
that benefits all peoples. The purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
international law are violated when certain States resort
to the use and threat of use of force and serious actions
against the sovereignty of other nations, including the
application of coercive unilateral measures.

Member States agreed in the Millennium
Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2)
that freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect
for nature and shared responsibility were essential
values that should guide international relations in the
twenty-first century. Those values are negated by the
selfishness and brutality of the capitalist neoliberal
globalization that has been imposed on international
economic, commercial and financial relations.

The establishment of a new international order
that is truly just, democratic and equitable remains a
chimera. The Council must be democratized through
a radical reform, but that has yet to occur. We need a
United Nations that is more democratic and effective,
with bodies that implement their respective mandates,
having at its centre a revitalized and strengthened
General Assembly that fully exercises the powers that
fall to it under the Charter.

The world has the resources necessary to eradicate
poverty, malnutrition, illiteracy and many of the diseases
that still decimate entire populations in many countries.
What is required is the political will to implement the
necessary changes to the current international system,
which is steering humanity towards self-destruction.

Promoting and maintaining international peace and
security will entail addressing the causes of poverty
and inequality. We cannot eliminate the conflicts in
the world if we do not eradicate the root causes that
motivate and fuel them.

Human history corroborates the theory that the
eradication of hunger, disease and poverty require
forms of cooperation that show solidarity and fairness
and do not involve a resort to arms. The arms race eats
up many of the resources that could be allocated to
economic growth and social well-being. World military
expenditure totalled $1.756 trillion in 2012, that is,
2.5 per cent of the global gross domestic product. It
is essential that concrete international measures be
taken to redirect the resources allocated to the military
towards activities that bring about development.

In 2014, global expenditure on armaments was 340
times higher than the biennial budget of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies. With the resources
allocated to armaments, we could have achieved many
of the modest goals set by the Millennium Development
Goals, which, unfortunately, will not be achieved.

For the cost of a nuclear weapon, medical attention
could be provided to tens of thousands of people.
Cuba supports the total elimination of weapons of
mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, which
threaten to exterminate humanity. Current stockpiles
of resources, which lead only to hardship and death,
could be better allocated to the full realization of the
right to development.

The Charter of the United Nations established the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly
as the principal organs with mandates in the area of
economic and social development. The work of these
bodies should be strengthened. This year the work ofthe
Assembly will be particularly important in the context
of the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
This agenda should be established on the basis of solid
precepts, with full respect for the principles enshrined
in the Charter, ensuring sustained economic growth
and sustainable development, with no exceptions. The
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
should form the cornerstone of our efforts to achieve
sustainable, equitable and inclusive development.

Peace, security and the exercise of the self-
determination of our peoples promote the conditions that
allow for the achievement of sustainable development,
with inclusion, equity and social justice. The greatest
contribution that the Security Council can make to
the strengthening of inclusive development is that of
exercising its obligation to serve as an impregnable
bulwark against foreign occupation, aggression and
wars of conquest, acting instead as a true beacon in
support of the sovereignty of States, large and small,
thereby ensuring full respect for international law and
the enjoyment of the right to peace or all.

The Latin America and Caribbean region is at the
vanguard of the promotion of peace and the peaceful
resolution of disputes, having formally declared
itself a zone of peace at the second summit of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
last year. That demonstrates the spirit of integration of
our region, which continues to seek to banish forever
the threat or use of force as a means of resolving
conflicts; social inequality; poverty; illiteracy; and
lack of free and universal access to basic services
such as health and education. It is a region in which
priority is given to solidarity and cooperation among
our peoples for prosperity and in which human rights
for all are promoted and protected, including the right
to development and to full freedom and dignity for its
citizens.

Cuba will continue to contribute, with its modest
resources, to the well-being of the people, especially
through supporting the neediest. Cuba remains
committed to supporting international cooperation so
as to achieve sustainable development with inclusion
and socialjustice. We will also forever be committed to
the defence of peace and international security.

