Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate, preparing
the concept paper (S/2014/572, annex) and advancing the
deliberations of the Security Council on this important
topic. NAM. also thanks the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their briefings.

NAM. has always favoured the idea of according
priority to conflict prevention, and stresses the need to
intensify efforts within the United Nations system to
move from a culture of reaction to one of prevention,
drawing on the lessons learned through a case-by-
case and in-depth analysis of the underlying causes
of conflict. Each year, billions of dollars are spent on
conflicts, while the human costs of war in terms of
death and injury, the destruction of civil infrastructure,
displacements and their repercussions for families,
communities, local and national institutions and
economies, as well as those of neighbouring countries,
are far more destructive and destabilizing. The message
is therefore clear: conflicts are too costly for humankind
and must be prevented as far as possible.

Conflict prevention is one of the primary obligations
of Member States. Efforts aimed at conflict prevention
must be in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. That must begin
with national Governments, assisted by the United
Nations. The international community at large should
support such efforts and assist Governments, upon
request, with national capacity-building. At the same
time, the most useful instruments for prevention are
to be found in Chapter VI of the Charter, which deals
with the peaceful settlement of disputes. In our view,
the following measures should be adopted with a view
to thwarting the outbreak of conflict.

First, preventive actions should be initiated as early
as possible in order to make it less likely that tense
situations deteriorate into violent conflict, while, at the
same time, the right of national authorities to resolve
internal crises should be respected.
Secondly, the preventive approach should be
multidimensional and focus on the root causes of
tensions.

The members of the Non-Aligned Movement have
stressed the need to strengthen the role of the Movement
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution, confidence-building and
post-conflict peacebuilding and rehabilitation within
or between NAM. member States.

NAM. also acknowledges the interconnectedness
of economic development, social development,
environmental protection, peace and security, human
rights and the rule of law. Efforts should be made to
ensure that any effort to transform the United Nations
into a more effective instrument for preventing conflict
should take into account the need for a balanced,
coherent and comprehensive approach, in accordance
with the Charter and international law, in order to
enhance conflict prevention and resolution and post-
conflict peacebuilding strategies, with the aim of
achieving sustained economic growth and sustainable
development. In that context, it is critical that all
principal organs of the United Nations play an active
role in designing and implementing a more effective
collective security system, in accordance with their
respective functions and powers.

With those principles in mind, NAM. is ready to
contribute to all efforts to strengthen the conflict-
prevention architecture at the international level and
make this world a safer place to live for this generation
and generations to come.

