Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate Guinea for the initiative
it has taken to convene this special meeting that allows
us to analyse and seek effective solutions to problems
which have gravely affected the stability of certain
regions of the African continent and that have thus
contributed to the economic backwardness of those
regions.

I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and those holding other
portfolios from the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS and the High Representative of Amara Essy,
who is Interim President of the Commission of the
African Union.

The problem of the proliferation of light arms,
mercenary activities and threats to peace and security
in West Africa have become a real danger, and they
concern us. They are also directly related to the
prolongation of conflicts and of the climate of tension
that reigns in some countries in this region. The
number of deaths and wounded is growing daily
because of the use of small arms. The causes of this
problem are many, and they vary from one region to
another. The inappropriate use of light arms in some
countries creates difficulties that harm the well-being
and safety of citizens and, in other countries, even
threaten the existence of the State.

In countries that have concluded peace
agreements, this factor creates impediments and
undermines the prevailing trust among the protagonists
of the peace process, while it blocks peacekeeping
operations, efforts at reconstruction and development
in countries in the post-conflict phase, and the normal
development of national democratic processes.

Given the current serious threat to peace and
security, and given the risk that it will spread to other
regions in Africa, the problem that is striking West
Africa is of such a scope that the solution cannot rest
solely with the countries or group of countries directly
affected. A more substantial commitment on the part of
the United Nations, and of the Security Council in
particular, is vital - thus the merit and importance of
today's meeting.

The growing concentration of light weapons in
different regions around the globe and the possession
and use of these weapons by civilian groups or
subversive armed organizations can be traced mainly to
the ineffectiveness of systems for controlling arms
imports and exports, faulty oversight of military
arsenals, and the illicit trafficking in arms, sometimes
carried out with the connivance of Governments
producing weapons.

As well, some countries selling arms have not
demonstrated sufficient restraint in exporting to regions
already destroyed by conflict. They have incited
belligerent groups to pursue subversive and
destabilizing wars.

The arms embargoes imposed by the Council in
order to control the proliferation of weapons have not
been fully respected. They have led to a transformation
of numerous regions, mostly African, into veritable
arms bazaars and sources of new conflicts.

The limited success of embargoes on arms for
Africa is due to the poor results achieved by a number
of States in controlling their borders, linked to a lack of
political will and to interference in the internal affairs

of other States. The experience of the Angolan conflict
has demonstrated that the importation of weapons that
were subsequently delivered to armed groups was a
fact in certain African countries that were using lawful
procedures. That situation continues to be true in the
case of other States engaged in conflicts.

We must therefore urgently speed up the fine-
tuning of an international mechanism enabling States to
identify and to trace the flows of small arms and light
weapons, including those arms of legal provenance. We
must create a mechanism that easily identifies any
individual or enterprise involved in the illicit traffic of
arms so that they can be severely punished.

Arms trafficking in Western Africa is not
inevitable. It can be eliminated. One appropriate way is
the implementation by all States of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in July 2001.
Southern Africa, to which my country belongs, has
already taken steps in that direction by adopting the
protocol of the Southern Africa Development
Community on firearms and munitions.

We should take note of the public denunciation of
States and individuals that have been shown to be
deliberately involved in the violation of arms
embargoes, as well as of the sanctions imposed on
them. That procedure has proven to be very effective in
significantly reducing violations of the embargoes
imposed by the United Nations during the period of
conflict in my country.

The United Nations must therefore play an
essential role on the question of the proliferation of
arms. To that end, it must provide assistance to help
Western Africa carry out programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration. The United
Nations must also promote all measures to seize and
destroy weapons arsenals in the framework of peace
accords. That very important measure will prevent
those who intend to persist in the choice of war from
gaining access to arms. My country's experience in that
area has been very positive.

Angolan legislation stipulates that the use and
carriage of firearms are strictly prohibited. We are fine-
tuning a compensation process based on the principle
of voluntary action, which comprises three phases. The
first phase is essentially administrative in nature and
consists of establishing structures for the registering
and reception of surrendered arms. The primary
objective of the second phase is to raise the awareness
of the public. It is aimed at the overall society and
should take into account the results of investigations
and of actions for the collection of large quantities of
small firearms. We envisage compensation for
informers. The third phase will begin immediately after
the end of the time period established for the voluntary
return of small firearms. Only at the end of the three
phases will we introduce new legislation to modify the
provisions on prohibition under the law on the use and
possession of firearms by civilians.

We also consider fundamental United Nations
support for the Moratorium declared in 1998 by the
Economic Community of West African States on the
importation and exportation and manufacture of small
arms in all their aspects, which enables the States of
the region to contribute to the creation of a culture of
peace, which should lead to the gradual elimination of
their conflicts.

Also, it must be underlined that some countries in
the region - countries that are already well known -
must halt their military, political and diplomatic and
material assistance to armed groups active in other
States. The Governments of countries in conflict must,
in turn, demonstrate political will by taking concrete
measures towards greater flexibility as a prior
condition necessary for a climate favourable to the
peaceful negotiation of conflicts.

We believe that the important conclusions
established as the outcome of this meeting will signal
the commitment of the States members of the Security
Council and of the Economic Community of West
African States to cooperate effectively in order to
lessen as much as possible the climate of tension
prevailing in Western Africa and to eradicate in the
short term the currently prevailing instability.

