Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): The situation in South
Sudan worries all of us, in particular those of us in
the region. We fully understand the gravity of the
situation, and we share the pain and suffering of the
South Sudanese people. However, we also know that
the seemingly unsurmountable multifaceted problems
facing the country can be addressed only through an
all-inclusive political process. We have made some
undeniable progress in that regard. It is understandable
if the seriousness of the South Sudanese parties and
the slow pace of the peace process are creating a lot
of frustration. We in the region are also extremely
frustrated. However, as much as we understand the
frustration of the many who have done a great deal to
help the people of South Sudan, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) is at the critical
moment of concluding the High-Level Revitalization
Forum and presenting its bridging proposal. The
adoption of the draft resolution before us (S/2018/515)
would be detrimental to the process. It is a very tragic
development indeed.

There has been a clear understanding on the part of
IGAD, the African Union (AU) and the United Nations
that there is a need to coordinate efforts to push the
peace process forward and achieve the desired result.
That unity of purpose and complementarity of efforts
is what has been dictating everything we do in IGAD.
The Security Council taking action now without
synchronizing or calibrating its position regarding the
AU would not only be unhelpful, it would also seriously
undermine the peace process at a time when there are
encouraging signs that a political outcome involving
compromise could be within reach. The possibility
that the peace process might collapse totally as a
consequence of this cannot be ruled out. And we mean
that. Those who are closer to the problem might also be
closer to the truth.

What is more ironic is that the draft resolution
before us for adoption comes at a time when IGAD has
reaffirmed its commitment to take targeted measures
against parties and individuals who are found to be
spoilers, and this was also reinforced by the African
Union. The IGAD Council of Ministers convened in
an extraordinary meeting today, and it deliberated on
those issues on the basis of the report provided by the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism. What was evident in the
outcome of that meeting was IGAD's resolve to take
punitive measures against commanders who are directly
involved and those who are found to be violating the
cessation of hostilities agreement.

An IGAD Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State
and Government is also expected to be held soon. It
therefore would have been logical and sensible for the
Council to adopt a short, technical extension of the
sanctions regime and drop the annex for now in order
to give IGAD a chance during this critical moment in
the peace process. Waiting two months would not have
caused the sky to fall. We have been working with the
penholder and all other members on the issue, and we
have been trying to convey this message in good faith
over the past couple of days. At the moment, we know
that the draft resolution on the table does not enjoy the
support of IGAD or the African Union. It also does
not enjoy consensus among Council members. We
know that a Council divided on this issue will not be
helpful to the peace process, and it will not send the
right message to the parties. That is what we have been
trying to avoid. That is also why we have been working
with the penholder in good faith and in a spirit of
cooperation. Unfortunately, our concerns have not been
fully taken into account, and we are forced to abstain
in the voting on the draft resolution. In fact, that is the
least we could do.

We seek the support and understanding of
members of the Council because we feel we have the
responsibility as Chair of IGAD and as the country
intimately involved in the mediation efforts. We are
duty-bound to salvage the peace process in spite of the
many challenges and difficulties. In conclusion, let me
say that politics is the art of the possible. Diplomacy
is not conducted to vent frustration. That is what this
draft resolution is the result of.

As a matter of principle, IGAD has not said that
sanctions should not be imposed; they should be. As
we have stated, we will abstain in the voting on the
draft resolution because the text is manifestly harmful
to the peace process. It undermines the efforts of the
subregion, the region, IGAD and the AU. We only
hope that it will not drive the parties away from the
peace process.

