Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Like other members of the
Security Council, we are very grateful to His Excellency
Mr. Frederick Chiluba, the President of Zambia, for the
briefing today. The Council is aware of the importance of
diplomacy conducted at the level of heads of State in
Africa, and we have been carefully following, with great
hope and expectation, the progress led by President
Chiluba. We are gratified that that process has succeeded
and we wish further success to take place.

Today's opportunity is in many ways unique. The
Security Council has entered a period in which it seems
that the unity of Council members and other factors are
contributing to the possible successful work of the
Council, and it is clear to all members of the Council and
others that the Council will not be successful, or
completely successful, unless it helps in the solution of
the four core problems in Africa today, one of them -
perhaps the largest - being the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We therefore very
much welcome this opportunity to hear the views and
comments by President Chiluba, which will inspire the
Security Council in its future work.

The tasks ahead with respect to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo could be divided into
several groups, some of which could be defined as short-
term tasks. These relate to the deployment of liaison
officers, a process which has begun and which we hope
will continue successfully. Another is full operational
action by the Joint Military Commission, where the
appointment of two members has not yet been completed.
We hope that the remaining representatives will be
nominated and that the consolidation of the ceasefire will

 

take place, and that the neighbouring countries will help in
that process. Those are all short-term tasks.

At the same time, as many members of the Council
have already stated, the Council will have to consider the
work necessary to establish an appropriate peacekeeping
mission at an appropriate moment, and the Council will
certainly come back to this matter at a suitable time soon.

There are also long-term tasks that have to be
contemplated. Others have spoken about a regional
conference which will give a solid and broader framework
to future cooperation in the region and ensure that peace,
once fully established, will be irreversible. I should like to
add that there is a wide variety of tasks related to the
protection of human rights and the investigation of
massacres that have taken place in the recent past, and all
other tasks which will help to consolidate peace on a long-
term basis.

And, finally, like many other members of the Security
Council, I should like to say that the Council needs further
and strengthened cooperation with the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). We have had very useful meetings
in the past with the Secretary-General of the OAU and we
need similar contacts in the future. We have had in the
past, and we have had today, a very fruitful exchange with
the head of State of an African country. This practice
should be welcomed and should be repeated as often as
possible.

