I congratulate the Niger on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of September. China will fully support your work this month, Sir. lalso wish to commend Indonesia for its tireless efforts and professional guidance during its presidency in August. I would like to thank the Acting Special Representative, Ms. Williams, and Ambassador Sautter for their briefings. I welcome Ambassador Elsonni to this meeting. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/832) and Ms. Williams have made clear, and China agrees, that the current situation in Libya is complex and fragile. We note the worrisome tensions in Sirte and Jufra, the serious problem of refugees and migrants and the dire humanitarian situation. Moreover, the Libyan people are suffering the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The international community should strengthen coordination to support all parties in Libya in achieving lasting peace and sustainable development. Let me elaborate on the following five points. First, China welcomes the 21 August statements calling for a ceasefire by the Government of National Accord and the House of Representatives, respectively. There is no way out through the military option, and there must be a ceasefire as the first step towards peace. We now have a rare window of opportunity. All parties to the Libyan conflict should effectively implement a ceasefire, immediately halt hostilities, resume dialogue within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and reach a permanent ceasefire agreement. China welcomes all efforts towards a lasting ceasefire in Libya and the positive response to the Secretary- General's appeal for a global ceasefire. Secondly, the international community should respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Libya, stay committed to the Libyan- led and Libyan-owned political process under the United Nations framework, effectively implement the outcomes of the Berlin summit and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and promote the implementation of the three-track approach by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We appreciate the recent discussions on Libya by the African Union and the League of Arab States and their unique role in mediating disputes among the parties. Relevant countries should use their own influence and play a constructive role in encouraging the parties to increase mutual trust and adhere to a political settlement. Thirdly, China supports the work of UNSMIL, and we, in principle, support extending its mandate for 12 months, as recommended by the Secretary-General. Under the current circumstances, UNSMIL should focus on promoting a ceasefire among the parties to the conflict, mobilize the international community to help the Libyan people cope with the pandemic and step up its efforts to assist Libya in making practical and feasible plans for national reconstruction and economic reform, so as to lay the foundation for sustainable socioeconomic development. The position of Special Representative of the Secretary-General has been vacant for six months. China calls for the appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary- General as soon as possible. Fourthly, it is China's consistent position that sanctions are a means, not an end. Sanctions regimes should always serve a political settlement. We call on all Member States to earnestly implement Security Council resolutions, avoid military involvement in the Libyan conflict and interference in Libya's internal affairs and strictly abide by the arms embargo. Meanwhile, attention should be paid to the negative impact of sanctions on Libyan civilians and third States. Sanctions should not harm the normal life and humanitarian needs of the Libyan people, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, and its Panel of Experts should act objectively and impartially, in strict accordance with the mandate, and play a positive role in advancing the Libyan political process. Fifthly, terrorism in and around Libya continues to threaten regional security and stability and causes serious spillovers in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. The international community must stay highly vigilant with regard to that trend and combat terrorism in all its forms across Libya, in particular to guard against the cross-border movement of foreign terrorist fighters. Libya must not be allowed to be the hotbed of regional terrorism. China is ready to work with the international community to actively promote the political process in Libya and support its early realization of peace, stability and development.
