Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency
of the Security Council during the month of February
and wish you and your country much success. I would
also like to express my gratitude for the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Argentina,
who is with us in the Chamber at this late hour listening
to her colleagues discussing this issue.

We align ourselves with the statement made
by Ambassador Mohammad Khazaee, Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Nicaragua is a firm and respectful supporter of the
sovereignty of States, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, international law, human rights,
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Any measure or action that is adopted
in order to address evolving situations or crises with a
view to protecting civilians in armed conflicts or for
whatever other reason must be undertaken in strict
accordance with those postulates and principles.

We firmly believe in the resolution of conflicts
through peaceful means and in the importance of
dialogue and negotiation as the basis of coexistence
among States. We are also firm believers that
Governments have the main duty and responsibility to
protect their citizens without the intervention of third
parties or entities. If assistance is required, the explicit
consent of the State in question for such assistance is
imperative.

In principle, the concept of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should be a laudable concept.
However, as we have all witnessed in recent years, its
implementation has been completely manipulated. The
action taken has contradicted the stated purpose and

proposed objectives and has exacerbated the problem,
with outcomes that are the opposite of protection. That
is the great challenge at hand in this area.

We should recall what happened in Libya, where,
under the pretext of protecting civilians and by using
the mislabelled "responsibility to protect", a war was
waged against a sovereign country. Its airspace, which
was called an "exclusion zone", was used to assassinate
men, women and children - the very civilians who
were supposed to be protected. Its head of State was
assassinated, the existing regime was changed and
a country with one of the highest levels of human
development in its region was destroyed. And, as if
that were not enough, the region was flooded with
arms, and terrorist groups, which were listed as such
by the Security Council, were promoted to the status
of liberation armies, the consequences of which we
are seeing on a daily basis today. That has all led to
suffering on the part of the peoples of that the region.

Let us briefly now turn to the case of Syria, where
some members of the Security Council and their allies
are carrying out interventionist actions - intervening,
boycotting the negotiations process, supporting terrorist
groups with sophisticated weapons and escalating the
humanitarian problem in order to then shield themselves
with pretexts and bald arguments for the need to protect
civilians and implement the responsibility to protect. It
is the same script that was used in Libya.

Let us now consider Palestine. The Palestinian
people have struggled for self-determination and the
establishment oftheir State, with Jerusalem as its capital,
for more than six decades and with immeasurable loss
of innocent lives. Regarding that case, the Security
Council has taken no significant action to resolve the
situation and protect Palestinian civilians from the
genocide of which they are the victims.

We have many questions on the issue being debated.
Many of the issues are of concern to us. Can the
protection of civilians perhaps be applied selectively?
Is the responsibility to protect applicable in some cases
and not others? We should ask ourselves why this organ
does not invoke the concept ofthe protection of civilians
in cases where innocent civilians, mainly children, are
being assassinated by the infamous unmanned aerial
vehicles. Why do we not discuss the actions of those
who bring about the vast majority of conflicts with
their sophisticated arms, their financing of terrorist
groups and their intelligence advisors and agencies
at work inside sovereign countries for the purpose of
overthrowing Governments that have independent
political visions?

Allow me to say that we believe that the work of
the Security Council on the issue under consideration
and the impact of the implementation of the so-called
responsibility to protect has only given rise to greater
divisions and suspicion within the international
community. That should lead us to reconsider our
analysis of it, its intended purpose and the functioning
of this organ in implementing these concepts.
That will require political will, legal certainty and
impartiality when it comes to implementation - and
not the development of new concepts and measures that
undermine the stability and sovereignty of peoples.

Achieving true international peace and security
must start with a truly holistic view of the international
situation. We must commitment ourselves to not
provoke more conflicts, not to intervene in countries
in order to illegally procure resources and not to seek
regime change for Governments that displease us.
Instead, we should prioritize providing assistance for
the sustainable development for peoples and complying
with all the legal commitments we undertook when we
signed the Charter of the United Nations. If we did that,
we could turn all of our efforts, energies and resources
towards solving the serious economic and financial
crises that affect both developed and developing
countries.

