Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (Spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I thank you, Sir, for the
attention you have accorded to the question of Kosovo
and Metohija through the regular exchange of views
in Security Council meetings convened to discuss this
topic pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).

The status-neutral role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
is paramount to the process of coordinating the
international presence and the stabilization of the
situation in the southern Serbian province. I would also
like to point out that UNMIK's strengthened presence
and role are of particular importance to the Republic
of Serbia and, especially, to the Serbs and other
non-Albanians living in Kosovo and Metohija, all the
more so in View of their confidence and trust in the
Mission. Serbia expects UNMIK to continue to fulfil
its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999) in the coming
period. In view of the overall political and security
situation in Kosovo and Metohija and the continuation
of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, we believe
that UNMIK must continue to carry out its mandate
in respect of all the issues relevant to the consistent
implementation of the resolution.

Also of exceptional importance are the contributions
made by other international organizations with
mandates under resolution 1244 (1999), includubg the
strengthening of security, the rule oflaw and respect for
human rights in Kosovo and Metohija, especially those
of the Serbs and other non-Albanians who, 17 years
after the arrival of the international presence, continue
to face numerous obstacles to the realization of their
basic rights and fundamental freedoms.

The ongoing presence in Serbia of over 200,000
internally displaced persons forced to flee Kosovo
and Metohija, along with many security and other
challenges faced by its non-Albanian population,
speak loudly and clearly. Only 1.9 per cent of those
200,000 internally displaced persons have been able
to return in a sustainable manner. I therefore reiterate
my call on the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as I did in my last statement to the Council
(see S/PV.7637), to explain why this information is
not presented in his reports, whether that 1.9 per cent
should be considered acceptable, and who stands ready
to remedy it. The Special Representative would be well
advised to present that information repeatedly in his
reports, as one of UNMIK's key goals and objectives
under resolution 1244 (1999) is precisely to facilitate
such returns.

Security incidents that negatively affect
interethnic confidence and trust continue to present
a serious challenge. Violence against non-Albanian
communities - especially returnees - inevitably
impacts their sense of security of and exacerbates
anxieties among potential returnees. Sadly, those in
charge of law and order have failed to act in almost all
cases, while the number of the legally valid sentences
passed against the perpetrators remains minimal.
The Community Rights Assessment Report of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission in Kosovo of November 2015 reveals
that intercommunity tensions surrounding the return of
displaced persons remain a recurrent issue. It goes on to
say that in most cases OSCE monitoring identifies only
limited municipal efforts to address those tensions and
build confidence and trust, and that during the reporting
period the OSCE recorded a total of 479 incidents in
Kosovo that had the potential to negatively affect the
security perceptions of communities belonging to a
numerical minority at the municipal level. More than
half of these recorded incidents - 310 * affected the
Kosovo Serb community, including returnees and the
Serbian Orthodox church. They range from theft, verbal
assault and severe damage to and illegal occupation
of property, including cultural heritage sites and
cemeteries, to incidents inciting hatred and aggressive
nationalism and physical assaults or intimidation.

The assaults on the cultural and religious heritage
of non-majority communities are particularly damaging
for interethnic relations. The case in point is the break-
in into the Orthodox church in the village of Pejcici,
municipality of Prizren, and the demonstrators'
desecration of the Church of Christ the Saviour in
Pristina after the demonstrations of the opposition in
downtown Pristina last January. This holy site, which
was a frequent target of Albanians' attacks and which
had served for years as a dump site, has been the subject
of persistent attempts by the Pristina authorities to
change the purpose of that location, even though it is
registered in the cadastre as property of the Serbian
Orthodox church.

The scribbling of graffiti on the walls of the Saint
Nicholas Church in Pristina glorifying the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the terrorist organization
around which the entire international community has

united to fight against, is another case in point. The
message of the desecrators of the religious site in the
heart ofEurope is "ISIL is coming". The assaults on the
Serbian cultural and religious heritage and identity are
painful evidence that the laws intended to protect and
promote the community rights in Kosovo and Metohija
are by and large dead letter. Only a serious effort on
the part of all relevant actors to address all outstanding
issues in a professional manner, in good faith and
conscientiously, aimed at promoting normalization and
creating conditions for genuine respect of human rights
and freedoms for all may guarantee reconciliation, life
together and respect for differences.

It is said in the current report (S/2016/407) that,
compared to January and February 2015, the number of
recorded incidents against minority communities was
reduced in the same period this year. Nevertheless, the
fact that inter-community incidents continue in Kosovo
and Metohija on a daily basis sends a strong negative
message to the members of the Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities. In view of the report's
almost complete failure to mention ethnically-based
incidents, let me point out just some of the incidents that
did occur in the reporting period: assaults on returning
Serbs and their property in the villages of Berkovo and
Pasjane, the stoning of returnees' houses at Klina and
Prizren, and the burning of, and the planting ofexplosive
devices in, Serbian houses at Orahovac and anilane.

Let me point out that measures to achieve durable
solutions for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Kosovo and Metohija, including the settlement and
execution of their property and legal claims, need
to continue to be taken. Let me also point out that,
with regard to internally displaced persons, Serbia is
strategically committed to fully supporting each and
every person in his or her quest either for sustainable
return or for local integration in the place ofdisplacement
as the case may be. Yet, my country's support to
potential returnees will be insufficient short of proper
engagement by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Pristina and the acceptance or at least
tolerance of the returnees by the receiving community
and an active role of the international community. The
drafters of all future reports should bear in mind that
those goals have not been fulfilled yet.

I call again on the United Nations and other sectors
of the international administration in Kosovo and
Metohija to help overcome the problems that hinder the
return of IDPs and jeopardize their position, including

continued personal threats and the usurpation of their
property. We all, the international community included,
run the risk of becoming gradually inured to the culture
of impunity for the criminal offences committed
against the Serbs and other non-Albanians. In the report
by Freedom House, entitled Freedom in the World
2015, it is stated that ethnic Albanian officials rarely
prosecute cases involving attacks on non-Albanians
and that returning refugees face hostility and bleak
economic prospects, and property reclamation by
displaced persons remains problematic. Similarly, in
the Kosovo 2015 Human Rights Report issued by the
Department of State of the United States, it is outlined
that the return process remained chronically plagued by
security incidents and by the reluctance of the receiving
communities to accept minority returnees.

The lack of security and marginalization of returnees
often discourage returns. In its Kosovo 2015 Report,
the European Commission says that authorities at local
and central levels did not do enough to facilitate return
and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, while the OSCE Mission in Kosovo concludes
in its report that full and effective institutional action
on returns-related programmes at local and central
levels continues to be hindered by a lack of strategic
support from the range of Kosovo institutions involved
and that relatively little has been done by municipal
and central institutions to discourage such incidents,
which inevitably have an impact on the sustainability
of return and future interest in return.

The non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija face
serious and manifold institutional, legal, administrative
and political obstacles regarding the protection of
their property rights. The obstacles run counter to the
provisions and standards of relevant Universal and
European conventions, while the property rights of the
Serbs are violated all over Kosovo and Metohija even
today, in particular by the sale of companies in Serbian
communities. By and large, the economic situation
of the Serbs and the members of other minority
communities in the province is characterized by legal
and physical insecurity and by numerous cases of
usurped property that cannot be restored. A substantial
part of the property of displaced Serbs has been sold in
transactions in which forged sales agreements or false
personal identification documents of alleged owners
have been used. The Serbian community and the
displaced Serbs, in particular, have therefore been much
more vulnerable to economic vagaries and poverty.

Inevitably, an effective resolution of the cases of
illegal occupation of property is essential for security
and the rule of law in Kosovo and Metohija; the serious
shortcomings in addressing these cases threaten the
unimpeded enjoyment of property rights. I cannot
but observe that, apart from the thematic report of
the OSCE Mission in Kosovo on fraudulent property
transactions in the Pee region, no other mission,
including the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), charged with monitoring the rule of
law, addressed this problem. It is precisely this problem,
it is said in a report of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe, that the Kosovo authorities and
the international community should seek to resolve
without delay.

The results of the work of the Privatization Agency
of Kosovo in Serbian communities are evidenced most
patently in the municipality of Strpce. Since the second
half of 2014, the Agency usurped and liquidated the
most important economic entities that accounted for
most of the jobs and provided the livelihood to most
of the people in the community. They include the
Lola plant, Mladost department store, an agricultural
combine, a veterinary clinic, Hotel Junior and the
planning agency for a national park. These entities
are now closed and their employees unemployed. The
deterioration of the economic situation brought about
by institutional violence may lead to the deterioration
of the security situation and serious consequences
for the local population wherefore greater attention
and engagement by the international presence in the
province, especially in northern Kosovo and Metohija,
are called for.

Indeed, it is in the field ofthe rule oflaw that various
international governmental and non-governmental
organizations often report that the independence of the
judiciary and the rule of law in Kosovo and Metohija
continue to be the weakest links. According to the most
recent Community Rights Assessment Report of the
OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 67 per cent of non-Albanian
respondents of a public survey stated that the lack of
trust in Kosovo and Metohija judicial institutions was
a serious obstacle in realizing their rights. As outlined
in the World Report 2015 of Human Rights Watch,
the justice system in Kosovo remains weak. This
assessment is upheld also in USAID/Kosovo Country
Development Cooperation Strategy 2014-2018. We are
also concerned about media reports of the Pec Basic
Court's indictment of 14 Kosovo and Metohija Serbs
from Klina municipality for war crimes allegedly
committed during 1999. According to our information,
the indictees are members of families that have
submitted official applications to return.

I would like to take this opportunity to point
out that the Republic of Serbia is committed to
conducting constructive dialogue with Pristina at all
levels and to implementing the agreements arrived
at to date, which reflects its firm resolve to continue
to actively contribute to promoting stability in the
Western Balkans and seeking exclusively political
and diplomatic solutions to all the remaining issues.
Unfortunately, Pristina has not yet taken the necessary
steps to fully implement the agreements reached in the
Brussels talks. I would also recall that in the absence
of proper mechanisms for ensuring the systematic,
institutional and effective protection of the interests of
the Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija, the
signing of the Brussels agreement was motivated by
the need to find ways to achieve that protection, which,
according to the agreement, would be done by the
association/community of Serb-maj ority municipalities.
Regrettably, owing to a lack of political will and the
institutional crisis in Pristina, the key provisions of the
Brussels agreement related to the establishment and
functioning of the association/community have not yet
been complied with.

Political radicalization and a deteriorating security
situation resulting from political ferment and the
rise of extremism are a threat to every resident of
Kosovo and Metohija, and as a rule to the returnees to
ethnically mixed communities most of all. The political
crisis in Pristina carries the serious risk that the
dissatisfaction of voters in majority communities will
spill over and be aimed at minority communities, and
the Serbian community in particular. It hardly seems
likely that the incendiary nationalistic rhetoric of the
politicians in Pristina will help to allay the tensions and
bring reconciliation.

The fragile security situation in Kosovo and
Metohija is also being exacerbated by rising extremism
and radicalism. According to data for January, about
300 Kosovan Albanian men and 36 Albanian women
joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in Syria, a presence that, compared to the population
of the territory of origin, represented the world's
largest percentage of foreign terrorist fighters in ISIL.
However, we have been informed more than once by the
security services of some of our foreign partners that
the unofficial number of the extremists from Kosovo
and Metohija fighting on foreign battlefields differs
wildly from the official data and that the actual number
is close to 900.

The political, social and economic conditions
of the Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija
remain very complex. Serbia therefore hopes that the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, will continue to provide assistance aimed at
building the confidence and trust that we believe are
essential to a firm foundation for a normal life for all
in Kosovo and Metohija. In our View, a commitment to
European integration is the driving force for normalizing
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, and we hope
that the European Union will continue to facilitate the
dialogue. UNMIK's continued engagement is especially
important, along with an undiminished international
presence in Kosovo and Metohija as a whole, because,
as the Secretary-General rightly concludes in his report,
much work remains to be done in Kosovo and Metohija
to promote greater tolerance and reconciliation among
its communities, ensure the protection of minority
communities, facilitate displaced people's return,
uphold their property rights and safeguard religious
traditions without impediment or stigma.

