Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing, which provided us with a
sombre picture of the dire humanitarian crisis in the
Gaza Strip. Israeli measures to permit Gaza to have
access to fuel for its power plant are clearly
insufficient. Much more needs to be done to avert a
genuine humanitarian disaster.

We would like in particular to underscore our
unreserved condemnation of all acts of terrorism,
including the firing of rockets against Israeli cities.
Those rockets are not only striking civilians; they are
also killing the hopes of Palestinians for a prompt
settlement of the situation. However, Israeli reprisals
should not lead to suffering and death among
Palestinian civilians.

Russia has consistently called for the lifting of
the blockade on the Gaza Strip and for addressing the
humanitarian situation there. Moscow's View is that the
Palestinian population should not be hostage to the
tensions within and surrounding the Palestinian
Authority. The international community should help
Palestinians to overcome the current crisis, prevent a
collapse of the socio-economic situation, avert
humanitarian disaster and help to establish Palestinian
governmental institutions and restore inter-Palestinian
harmony, thereby establishing favourable conditions
for progress towards a Palestinian-Israeli political
settlement.
Russia is participating in collective efforts to
provide assistance to the Palestinian people. In August
2007, Russia dispatched to Amman a major
consignment of humanitarian assistance destined for
Palestinian civilians. In October 2007, following
lengthy negotiations with Israel, the food and
medicines were sent to the West Bank of the Jordan
River to be forwarded to the ultimate recipients,
namely, the residents of the Gaza Strip. We plan to
provide additional humanitarian supplies during the
first half of 2008.

We are currently working to resolve practical
issues relating to the provision of humanitarian and
financial assistance to the Palestinian Authority in the
amount of $10 million, as announced on 17 December
2007 at the international donors' conference, held in
Paris. That assistance will go towards addressing
pressing humanitarian, social and economic needs in
the Palestinian territories, including the Gaza Strip.

There is currently a need for the parties to make
the utmost effort to stop terror, violence and armed
confrontation, thereby creating favourable conditions
to promote a settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict and implement the decisions adopted at
Annapolis. The issues surrounding the peace process in
the Middle East, and especially the situation in and
around Gaza, were at the centre of concerns at the
recent negotiations in Moscow between Russian
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and Israeli Foreign
Minister Tzipi Livni. During the talks, the Russian side
reaffirmed the need for the parties to refrain from any
steps that could undermine confidence, heighten
tensions and prejudice the settlement of final status
issues. The relevant obligations to be implemented by
all parties are clearly set out in the Quartet's Road
Map.

Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will
serve to promote a comprehensive resolution of the
question of the Middle East. Such a resolution must be
comprehensive and on solidly based international law,
and it must include the Syrian and Lebanese tracks.
Russia is consistently working towards that goal,
including during the current visit to the region by
Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Sultanov, Russia's
presidential special representative for the Middle East.

