Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): We wish to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for their briefings.

Malaysia remains deeply concerned about the dire,
ongoing and deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Syria. The parties to the conflict keep upping the ante
in a desperate attempt to defeat the other, seemingly
oblivious to the gruesome toll of death, mayhem and
destruction that they are inflicting on the Syrian people
in the very country that they claim to be fighting for.

We commend the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners for their commitment and
dedication to delivering humanitarian assistance to
the Syrian people despite facing numerous challenges.
While we commend the cooperation by the parties to
the conflict in facilitating and allowing humanitarian
access to reach those in need, we are concerned that
administrative and bureaucratic hurdles, such as delays
in responding to requests for humanitarian access and
restrictions on the prohibitions of surgical and other
medical supplies, remain in place. Those obstacles are
definitely not helpful to the international community's
efforts to alleviate the already worsening humanitarian
situation and ease the suffering of the Syrian people
on the ground. We call on the Syrian Government
to further facilitate the movement of humanitarian
supplies, especially to hard-to-reach areas. All parties
to the conflict must commit to implementing resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014). They must not be allowed
to thwart the objectives of those resolutions.

We commend the State of Kuwait for hosting the
third international humanitarian pledging conference,
which will be held on 31 March 2015. Malaysia looks
forward to its participation at the third conference to
demonstrate our solidarity with the Syrian people. We
are hopeful that the conference will help meet some of
the funding gaps of the 2015 Syria response plan.

We thank the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for the recent
release ofits ninth report (A/HRC/28/69). We are deeply
appalled at the continued violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law and atrocities
perpetrated by all sides to the conflict in Syria. In this
regard, we appreciate the victim-oriented approach
that has been adopted in the investigating reports on
allegations of human rights abuses and violations in
Syria. However, we regret that the Commission until
today has not been able to enter the country to enable it
to fulfil its mandate more effectively.

The inhumane atrocities and reign of terror of the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the areas
under its control has worsened the already grave human
rights and humanitarian situation in Syria. Malaysia
strongly condemns the recent abduction and killing of
more than a hundred Assyrians by ISIL on 23 February
2015 in north-eastern Syria. Such atrocities once again
demonstrate the brutality, intolerance and extremist
ideology ofISIL against people of all faiths, ethnicities
and nationalities. Malaysia strongly holds the View that
the perpetrators of all grave violations and atrocities who
have until now enjoyed impunity cannot go unpunished;
they must be brought to justice to be held accountable.

Malaysia supports the efforts made by Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, to seek a comprehensive political solution for
the Syrian crisis based on the Geneva communique.
We applaud Mr. De Mistura's continued efforts with
the relevant parties regarding the proposed freeze
arrangements. We are extremely hopeful that the parties
to the conflict will ensure the operationalization of
the Aleppo "freeze" proposal. The conflicting parties
should view it as a confidence-building measure to
facilitate humanitarian operations and as an opportunity
to restart dialogue and a political process.

Malaysia reiterates its view that there can be no
military solution to the Syrian conflict. Malaysia firmly
believes that the future of Syria should be determined
by the Syrian people themselves through a Syrian-led
political process. The international community should
continue to support, promote, encourage and facilitate
an inclusive political transition process and maintain
efforts to foster national reconciliation in Syria. In this
regard, Malaysia welcomes and supports all diplomatic
initiatives, such as the Moscow and Cairo initiatives, to
try to restart political dialogue between the conflicting
parties. We further call on parties with influence to
continue their efforts to encourage the conflicting
parties to seek a political and peaceful resolution.

Nevertheless, we firmly believe that there must be
a willingness on the part of the parties to the conflict
themselves to find a political solution to it. The
international community can only do so much. The
international community's efforts will be meaningless
and in vain without the conscious efforts and sincerity
of the parties to end the conflict and seek a peaceful
and political solution.

