Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I too
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for his briefing. I would also like to thank him and his
staff for their work to update the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The United States shares the concerns of the
international community with regard to the
vulnerability of civilians who find themselves in the
midst of conflict through no choice or fault of their
own. Women and children are particularly vulnerable
in those situations. While the need for the protection of
civilians is clear, how to achieve that goal is one of our
most pressing collective challenges.

The primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with all the parties to an armed conflict.
The United Nations also has an important role. The
protection of civilians is now specifically included in
half of the mandates of current peacekeeping
operations, and is the core mandate of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

The United States shares the view that we must
stand ready to help to promote the safety and security
of the dedicated humanitarian workers who attempt to
provide relief for civilian populations throughout the
world. As we all know, there is a lack of humanitarian
access in many areas of conflict, which should be
urgently addressed.

The situation in Gaza gives us all pause, as we
contemplate how the conduct of hostilities and
violence in both Gaza and southern Israel impacts the
civilian population. As suggested by resolution 1860
(2009), intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the
implementation of the two-State solution will provide
the ultimate guarantee of the protection of civilians in
both Gaza and southern Israel.

For the immediate term, the United States
reiterates the call, recently made in resolution 1860
(2009), that all violence against civilians, including
acts of terror, be halted, with an eye towards a durable
and fully respected ceasefire. We must not forget,
however, that this outburst of violence was instigated
by Hamas, a terrorist organization that called for the
destruction of Israel, by its barrage of rockets and
mortars that deliberately targeted Israeli civilians.

Ongoing hostilities in Gaza have exacerbated the
plight of the Palestinian people by making it more
difficult for the international community to deliver
much-needed humanitarian assistance and goods to the
people in Gaza. The United States echoes the call for
the unimpeded provision and distribution of adequate
humanitarian assistance to meet the growing
humanitarian needs of Palestinians in Gaza, including
provision of food, fuel, shelter and medical treatment,
as well as protection for the displaced. We further note
an additional obligation of all parties to refrain from
deliberately using the civilian population and religious,
educational and civic institutions to shield active
combatants, command and control facilities and
munitions stockpiles. The United States calls on Hamas
to immediately cease this reprehensible and cowardly
practice that places innocent civilians at grave and
unacceptable risk.

While Israel has an unquestionable right to
defend itself against terrorist attacks, we urge the
Government of Israel to take all appropriate steps to
ease access and movement for humanitarian goods and
workers, to avoid civilian casualties and to minimize
the impact on innocent civilians.

My Government also remains gravely concerned
about the ongoing and widespread use of sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations throughout
the world. This is one of the most significant protection
challenges, and one that is too often ignored. Sexual
and gender-based violence must be more effectively
addressed, and United Nations peacekeeping missions
have a clear role to play in preventing this violence and
addressing its impact. The United States condemns
sexual violence as an instrument of policy and calls for
an end to this gross injustice. We urge States to take
concrete steps to end both the use of rape as an
instrument of war and impunity for perpetrators.

We are also deeply concerned about the
recruitment of child soldiers by Governments and rebel
movements in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in the Sudan, by the Lord's Resistance Army, by the
Burmese regime, by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam in Sri Lanka, by the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia and by other groups and
Governments too numerous to name here.

The United States continues to seek
comprehensive approaches to resolve protracted
refugee situations in all parts of the world through
support for durable solutions. We also seek innovative
approaches to develop livelihood strategies and to
maximize opportunities for the self-reliance and
empowerment of refugees. Where conflict is causing
civilians to flee and seek asylum, we are working
actively with other Governments to provide protection
to those in need.

We call on Member States to renew their
commitment to uphold the right to asylum, to protect
civilians from forcible return to situations where they
fear persecution and to provide durable solutions for
refugees and stateless persons. The United States for its
part provides a significant portion of the funds needed
by United Nations agencies to do their good work, as
evidenced in part by our recent pledge of $85 million
to assist the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its work to
care for Palestinian refugees.

The United States is working in other ways to
actively promote the protection of civilians. A primary
example is our work in training peacekeepers through
the Africa Contingency Operations Training and
Assistance (ACOTA) programme. Through ACOTA we
provide training for African peacekeepers preparing to
deploy to regional or international missions on their
continent. In 2008, the United States trained over
26,000 African peacekeepers through this programme.
Ninety-two per cent of these ACOTA-trained
peacekeepers are deployed to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire,
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, with the additional
8 per cent standing by for planned deployment.

The United States remains committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, both in
connection with the work of the Council and in our
activities throughout the world. We applaud efforts by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other United Nations offices to assist the civilian
victims of armed conflict. We fully endorse the work of
the United Nations in this realm and pledge continued
United States support to prevent and mitigate the
effects of conflict on civilian populaces throughout the
world.
