Mr. Neil (Jamaica): Mr. President, I wish to thank
you and the members of the Council for allowing
Jamaica to participate in this open debate in response
to the request of the Permanent Representative of
South Africa, acting on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. This is a matter of great importance for the
world community.

Under Article 24 of the United Nations Charter,
the Security Council is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security on behalf of the membership of the
Organization. It further requires that in discharging
these responsibilities, the Council shall act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.

As it is thus accountable to the wider
membership, it is fitting and proper that the Council
should hear the views of Member States on a matter of
major importance involving the issue of war and peace.
There is a great deal at stake, as the eyes of the world
are on the Security Council and on the United Nations,
and whatever is decided will have significant
implications for the future of the Organization and for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

At the heart of the matter is the question of
compliance with the decisions of the Council by
Member States and the enforcement options that the
Council may choose to exercise.

The Security Council's resolutions 661 (1990),
687 (1991) and 715 (1991) among others, imposed
certain obligations to be fulfilled by Iraq, which may
only have been partially implemented. It should be
clear that Iraq is obliged to comply with these
resolutions, which require the destruction and cessation
of further development of weapons of mass destruction
and the fulfilment of certain obligations with respect to
the return of Kuwaiti property and missing persons.
These resolutions should be fully implemented.

Iraq should give unfettered access to the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) inspectors in order to verify
compliance with its disarmament obligations. Jamaica
is hopeful that such arrangements can be made in View
of the assurances given by Iraq and in the light of the
agreement reached on during meetings with the
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC, Mr. Hans Blix, in
Vienna from 30 September to 2 October 2002.

We believe that the matter can be resolved by
peaceful means. The prospect of war should be avoided
with all its manifold consequences, including death and
destruction and the humanitarian tragedy that is the
bitter legacy of war.

There is not much information available to us on
the direction in which the Council is moving, but we
would expect it to make reasonable arrangements for
inspections to be carried out in Iraq as soon as possible.

We must also register our concern at aspects of
the decision-making process in the Council, especially
with respect to the role of the elected members and the
pre-eminence of the members with the veto power. Our
View is that the full involvement of the elected
members of the Council at all levels of the decision-
making process is vital for giving legitimacy and
authority to the Council's decisions.

We ask the Security Council to act in a fair and
objective manner, bearing in mind its responsibilities
for the maintenance of peace and the avoidance of
military confrontation. We are concerned that the
integrity of the system of collective security under the
Charter will be endangered by any unilateral action,
which would weaken the fabric of international law.

We make these observations because of the value
we place in the United Nations system and the scheme
for collective security under the Charter. It is of great
importance for all of us in the international community
and particularly for small States. We should strengthen
it and guard against the acceptance of any doctrine or
policy which would circumvent the multilateral system
and undermine the principles that sustain a world order
of peace and security, the non-use of force, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the sovereign
equality of States. Jamaica would urge that whatever
action the Council should take, it should not
compromise these principles.

