Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for
his informative briefing. Japan appreciates the High
Representative's ongoing contributions to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Japan fully supports efforts by the Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to join NATO and the
European Union (EU). Progress in such efforts is
conducive to lasting peace and stability in the country
and in the Western Balkans. We particularly welcome
the application for EU membership in February last
year and the adoption of the defence review by the
Presidential Council last November. Japan strongly
supports further efforts by the central Government as
well as by the two entities.

Nevertheless, we are disappointed by ethnically
divisive actions, even 22 years after the signing of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. The leaders of every ethnic
group must pursue the broader national interests,
as opposed to more narrow concerns. The current
political dysfunction at all levels in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the attempted request for a revision
of the 2007 International Court of Justice' judgment is
deeply regrettable.

Japan has provided support to reconciliation efforts
among ethnic groups since the end of the conflict. In
partnership with the private sector, Japan is conducting
a project in Mostar for children of different ethnic
backgrounds to learn sports together. Children are the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we very much
hope that they will understand the critical importance
of cooperation, irrespective of their ethnic origin,
through soccer and other sports. An agricultural
project has also been carried out in View of supporting
reconciliation and economic self-reliance for citizens in
Srebrenica, who have taken steps to live side by side in
peace while overcoming difficulties. Moreover, Japan
will also continue to assist with demining activities in
order to ensure the safety of every citizen.

The international community should bolster
reconciliation and efforts to reduce ethnic tensions.
The Security Council must speak with one voice in
urging dialogue among various ethnic groups. As a
member of the Peace Implementation Council, Japan
emphasizes neutrality towards different ethnic groups,
and will contribute to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We fully support the efforts of Mr. Inzko
and the Office of the High Representative to that end.

