Mr. Feltman: This is my first briefing to the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East.
I look forward to working closely with the Council on
these important issues.

As we approach the one-year mark since the Security
Council was presented with the Palestinian application
for membership in the United Nations, we must work to
ensure that the occasion is used in a constructive manner
to encourage progress towards meaningful dialogue.
Last September, the Middle East Quartet put forward a
framework for negotiations (see SG/2l78) that required
systematic progress on core issues. The Quartet envoys
have remained in close contact with the parties and one
another, including in Geneva on 14 August, in order to
assess the situation and the Quartet's future steps. While
direct exchanges have continued, in an effort to agree
to terms that would create an environment conducive to
talks, we are concerned that we have not yet seen the
progress necessary for sustained negotiations that could
lead to successful outcomes.

At the same time, Israeli and Palestinian Authority
representatives have been meeting to identify ways
to enhance Palestinian Authority revenue capture by
reducing illegal trade and tax evasion. On 31 July Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad and Israeli Finance Minister
Yuval Steinitz signed an agreement. New measures
include the introduction of advanced technologies
aimed at improving monitoring of the flow of
Palestinian imports through Israel, and the construction
of pipelines for transferring petroleum products directly
from Israeli ports. Implementation of the measures is
expected to begin in January 2013. In another positive
development, 6,000 new permits are expected to be
approved for Palestinians to work in Israel, bringing
the total to 30,500. These are welcome steps that follow
others reported previously, and we encourage continued
positive gestures.

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee is expected to
meet on 23 September in New York, just before the
general debate. While in the short term the international
community may not be in a position to succeed in
helping the parties bridge their political differences, it
is critical that all those countries that are committed
to helping the Palestinians achieve their legitimate
aspirations for statehood focus their attention now on
addressing the difficult fiscal and economic situation of
the Palestinian Authority. The United Nations has joined
many countries in praising the institution-building
efforts that the Palestinian Authority has undertaken in
recent years under the leadership of President Abbas
and Prime Minister Fayyad. Those who suffer from
financial shortages in the Palestinian Authority are first
and foremost the Palestinian people.

A central aspect of the Palestinian Authority's
continuing fiscal crisis is a decrease in foreign aid and
the failure of donor countries to fulfil financial pledges
to the Palestinian Authority in a timely manner. As a
result, the Palestinian Authority has faced difficulties
in paying full salaries to its employees on time. The
Ministry of Health has also launched an appeal for
support in addressing a severe shortage of essential
medicines and drugs at the central medical stores.

The fiscal crisis is being compounded by a
decrease in economic activity. The first quarter of 2012
saw the economy contract by 3 per cent compared to
the previous quarter, mainly due to slowdowns in
construction and agriculture. Unemployment increased
to 24 per cent. A recent World Bank report on Palestinian
economic sustainability noted that reversing that
negative economic trend will require greater efforts to
enable economic activity throughout the West Bank and
Gaza, including through a further easing of restrictions
in order to allow the private sector to develop.

Private-sector-led economic growth is the key to
decreasing the Palestinian Authority's dependence on
foreign aid, as is slowing the growth of its spending.
The World Bank highlighted the centrality of economic
growth for Palestinian State-building; without it,
State-building progress could be at increased risk.
We repeat our urgent call on donors, particularly Gulf
countries, to help tackle the Palestinian Authority's
deepening deficit problems. All countries that tirelessly
promote the Palestinian cause in international forums will
have an opportunity at the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting to demonstrate in a tangible, practical way their
support for the Palestinian people and for the institutions
of a Palestinian State to enable them to thrive.

The reporting period witnessed continued
settlement construction. On 12 August, Israeli authorities
announced the approval of a housing project within the
settlement of Maale Adumim, east of Jerusalem. A total
of 150 housing units will be demolished and replaced by
750 new housing units. On 16 August, Israeli authorities
published a tender for 130 housing units in the East
Jerusalem settlement of Har Homa. As the Quartet has
stated on numerous occasions, any Israeli settlement
activity in the West Bank cannot prejudge the outcome
of negotiations and will not be recognized by the
international community. Any settlement construction
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is contrary to international law and should be
brought to a halt.

Operations by Israel security forces in the
occupied West Bank declined this month. Citing
security, there were 141 operations resulting in 116
Palestinians injured, including nine children and six
women. Two Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers were
injured by Palestinians. A total of 81 of the Palestinian
injuries and many of the 123 arrests of Palestinians that
took place during the reporting period occurred during
demonstrations against the barrier, which deviates from
the Green Line in contravention of the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice (see A/ES-10/273).
The United Nations recalls that the right of peaceful
protest must be upheld and that all protests should be
kept strictly non-violent.

Cases of settler violence persisted, with 17 incidents
that led to injuries or property damage, including an
attack on 16 August in Hebron, when a molotov cocktail
hit a Palestinian taxi, injuring six members of the same
family. A Palestinian teenager from East Jerusalem
was attacked and seriously injured by Israeli youth on
16 August. We note the condemnation of that attack by
Prime Minister Netanyahu and senior Israeli officials.
Such acts of violence are of serious concern, and Israeli
authorities must work to prevent such incidents from
recurring.

During the reporting period no displacement was
recorded as a result of demolitions. However, a total of
13 structures supporting the livelihoods of people were
demolished for lack of building permits. Additionally,
orders were issued against dozens of other structures,
including at least 24 stop-work, demolition and
evacuation orders issued against structures, including
residences, in the Jordan Valley area and the Hebron
and Tubas governorates. Israeli authorities have
further stated their intention to evict from their homes
approximately 1,000 Palestinians living in the southern
West Bank, as the area has been designated a "firing
zone" for military training.

We continue to be concerned by the ongoing
policy of demolitions and forced evictions implemented
by the Israeli authorities in Area C and East Jerusalem,
and we will pursue our dialogue with Israeli authorities
in that respect. I am also worried about the continuous
restrictions imposed by the Israeli authorities on the
provision of humanitarian access to Palestinian civilians
affected by, or at risk of, demolitions and forced evictions
in Area C of the West Bank. Since the beginning of
2011, the Israeli authorities have demolished a total of
162 items and structures in Area C that were funded
by humanitarian donor countries, including temporary
shelter assistance, water cisterns and animal sheds.
Demolition orders have been issued, but not yet
implemented, against 142 others. Additionally, since
the beginning of 2012, there were at least 15 incidents
in which relief items were confiscated by the Israeli
authorities.

Four Palestinian prisoners in Israeli administrative
detention continue to be on hunger strike. There
are concerning reports that the detainees are being
mistreated, while one of them is reportedly on his
eighty-seventh day of a hunger strike. We call on the
Israeli authorities and the detainees to find an agreement
that would permit the immediate ending of their hunger
strike and for the prisoners to be well treated, in line
with international law.

As Muslims celebrated the month of Ramadan,
restrictions remained on access to prayer at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. Israeli authorities did, however, ease access
for a large number of West Bank Palestinians to visit
East Jerusalem and Israel, for example by lowering the
age ofthose permitted to enter for prayers from 50 to 40
years of age.

Let me now turn to the serious events that took
place on 5 August in the Sinai at the border with Israel.
Terrorists attacked an Egyptian security post near Kerem
Shalom, killing 16 Egyptian border guards as they
broke their Ramadan fast. The attackers subsequently
breached the Israeli border, in what appears to have
been an attempt to kill Israelis. Israeli security forces
intercepted the attack, and Egyptian authorities have
stepped up their efforts to prevent a recurrence of such
attacks and to increase security in the Sinai.

The Secretary-General strongly condemned the
terror attack. Coming nearly a year after a similar
incident in the south Sinai that resulted in both Israeli
and Egyptian deaths, that latest attack is a sobering
reminder of the need for all of us to remain focused
on maintaining and strengthening regional peace and
security.

In a related development, Egyptian authorities
immediately closed the Rafah crossing with Gaza
following the 5 August attack as part of a security
operation that also involved the dismantlement of
a number of tunnels. In the meantime, the crossing
has been periodically reopened to permit travel for
humanitarian cases. The potential undue humanitarian
impact of the developments in and around Gaza this
month should be considered as well. Given the already
difficult conditions of Gazans, the basic rights of the
people of Gaza must be protected, including the ability
to move in and out of Gaza for legitimate religious,
educational, work, medical and other purposes, and
to ensure the continued availability of basic living
essentials, including for development. On 15 August,
one Grad missile fired from the Sinai landed near Eilat,
in southern Israel.

The events in the Sinai, as well as the continued
rocket fire from Gaza, one Israeli air strike and five
IDF incursions, underline the fragility of the situation
in Gaza. The Israeli air strike took place on 5 August
when the IDF targeted two alleged militants riding a
motorbike in Rafah, killing one and injuring the other.
A short escalation followed, which included the firing
of mortars and Qassam missiles into the area of Kerem
Shalom. One Palestinian civilian was injured during the
IDF incursions. In all, 35 projectiles were shot from
Gaza into Israel during the reporting period, including
one Grad missile and other shorter-range projectiles. We
strongly condemn the indiscriminate firing of missiles
from the Gaza Strip. Israel must also show maximum
restraint.

To revive the Gazan economy, restrictions related
to the closure of the Gaza Strip have to be relaxed,
allowing for trade between Gaza and the West Bank,
Israel and other countries. As was noted in last month's
briefing (see S/PV.6816), United Nations reconstruction
work is having a positive, but short-term, impact on
employment. We are working with the Government of
Israel to approve United Nations projects on a regular
basis: $360 million worth ofproj ects has been approved,
and projects worth $85 million are currently pending
approval. We also continue to urge the Government of
Israel to allow the unrestricted import of key building
materials, in order to allow for the more effective
implementation of reconstruction work in Gaza. It is
worth noting that most of those materials continue to
be readily available in the Gaza Strip from the illegal
tunnel trade. The recent release of 20,000 tons of
construction materials for the private sector in Gaza is a
welcome move, and we encourage Israel to further ease
the present restrictions. In addition, we urge donors to
continue to fund United Nations reconstruction work in
Gaza through the Palestinian Authority-United Nations
Trust Fund.

Palestinian factions remain deadlocked on the
way forward towards reconciliation, especially with
regard to the implementation of previous agreements.
The sequence of elections remains a central point of
division. The Palestinian Central Elections Committee
initiated a voter registry update in the West Bank from
5 to 9 August ahead of the local elections scheduled
for 20 October 2012. We continue to support efforts
to promote reconciliation through Egyptian auspices,
under the leadership of President Abbas and within
the framework of the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the positions of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The lack of unity is also having an impact on the
Palestinian population. In one example, between 16 and
27 July, Gazan applications for outside medical treatment
were not processed owing to a dispute between the de
facto authorities in Gaza and the Palestinian Authority
over the composition of the medical referrals committee.
The dispute was resolved on 26 July thanks to efforts by
civil society and professional health workers.

The Council discussed the situation in Syria at
length on 16 August. My remarks will therefore be
brief. As members know, as of midnight on 20 August,
the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic (UNSMIS) shifted to its liquidation
phase. A limited number of UNSMIS staff remain
in place to carry out that process. Last Friday, the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the
Arab League appointed Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as their
Joint Special Representative. He will be in New York
later this week.

Regarding the situation on the ground, violence
continues and, in some cases, has escalated. Both the
Government and the opposition are focusing on military
operations and the use of force, with Government forces
using heavy weapons on population centres. The Syrian
people are suffering grievously from the appalling further
militarization of the conflict. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly expressed his concern about the arms flows
to the two parties in Syria, which in some cases appear
to Violate Council resolution 1747 (2007) banning arms
exports under Chapter VII authority.

We View the rapid deterioration of the humanitarian
situation with growing alarm. About 2.5 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance, while the number
of displaced persons in Syria and the refugee flows to
neighbouring countries are growing. During her recent
visit to Syria, the United Nations Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Valerie Amos, noted the heroic efforts
being made by humanitarian relief organizations on
the ground, but she also identified access and growing
capacity limitations. She called on the Government of
Syria to open greater humanitarian access and to widen
the scope of the organizations with which the United
Nations and others can partner to deliver relief to those
in need.

The Secretary-General also reinforces Ms. Amos's
urgent call for a greater and more rapid response to
the United Nations humanitarian appeal for Syria. The
revised Syria refugee response plan of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which sought almost $70 million for its humanitarian
operations in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, remains
74 per cent underfunded. The United Nations calls
for more donor support for the rapidly increasing
population requiring assistance in Syria, as well as in
the surrounding countries.

As the crisis in Syria continues to deteriorate,
the situation in Lebanon has become more precarious
and the need for continued international support to
the Government and the Lebanese Armed Forces
(LAF) increasingly important. Cross-border shelling
continued in northern and eastern Lebanon, causing
several injuries. Tensions over domestic and security
concerns remain high throughout the country and are
easily exacerbated by developments in Syria. Clashes
reignited on 21 August between the largely Sunni and
Alawite communities of Bab al-Tabbaneh and Jebel
Mohsen in Tripoli, resulting in at least six deaths and
tens of injuries. The Secretary-General has repeatedly
expressed his concern about two-way arms smuggling
across the Syrian-Lebanese border, which poses risks
to both countries and is in violation of resolution 1701
(2006).

On Wednesday, 15 August, dozens of Syrian
nationals and a Turkish citizen were abducted by a Shia
clan in Beirut in retaliation for the abduction earlier
in the week of one of their family members in Syria.
While a number of abductees have since been released,
there have been reports of further kidnappings and
threats by the clan targeting Syrian, Turkish, Saudi,
Qatari and Emirati nationals, as well as reports of other
clans engaging in similar activities in the Bekaa. On
the same day, families of the 11 Lebanese Shia pilgrims
kidnapped in May in Syria reacted to reports that their
relatives had been injured in an attack by the Syrian
Army in the region of Azaz in which the road to Beirut's
international airport was blocked. The Government
of Lebanon condemned those developments, called
for restraint on all sides and established a security
committee to follow up on those events. In his report to
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General strongly
condemned kidnapping and retaliatory hostage-taking
in Syria and Lebanon, and called for the immediate
release of all those detained without due process and in
violation of their human rights.

On 9 August, Lebanese authorities arrested
former Minister and Member of Parliament Michel
Samaha for involvement in smuggling explosives
from Syria, allegedly as part of a plot against targets
inside Lebanon, with the supposed aim of provoking
Sunni-Shia conflict. Two senior security officers are
also being investigated for involvement in the same
incident. Mr. Samaha's public alignment with positions
of the Syrian Government has deepened concerns
about attempts to draw Lebanon into regional events,
despite President Sleiman's and Prime Minister Najib
Mikati's careful policy of disassociating Lebanon from
the Syrian crisis. The Secretary-General recently spoke
with Prime Minister Mikati and remains focused on
protecting Lebanon's stability and sovereignty.

Against that backdrop, Lebanon's national
dialogue reconvened on 16 August, with discussions
focused on a solution to the recent deterioration in
security. Reportedly because of growing security
concerns, not all political leaders were able to attend
the session. As stressed previously by the Council, the
commitment of Lebanon's leaders to safeguarding the
country's security and stability from regional events
is important. The national dialogue is scheduled to
reconvene on 20 September.

The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations remained
cautiously calm and stable. In close cooperation with the
LAF, UNIFIL maintained an enhanced presence across
its area of operations, as the LAF were operating at a
decreased strength owing to the temporary redeployment
of some units to address security requirements in other
parts of the country. Israeli violations of Lebanese
airspace continued on an almost daily basis. In a letter
dated 14 August, Lebanon informed the Security Council
of engineering work undertaken by Israel on 16 July on
the Blue Line in the vicinity of Mazra'at Fashkul in the
Shaba'a farms area.

Despite the current stagnation in the negotiating
process and the obstacles to be overcome, it is clear that
the two-State solution remains the best available and
most realistic option for the Israelis and Palestinians. It
is the view of the United Nations that not only the parties
themselves but all Member States have the responsibility
to consider their actions and their language in the light
of that goal. All Member States can ask themselves a
simple question as to whether a certain course of action
brings the Israelis and Palestinians closer to a two-State
solution or makes that goal even harder to achieve in
practice. Language that calls for the destruction of
one of the parties is unacceptable and undermines the
ability of the Palestinians to achieve their stated goal
of an independent State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. The Secretary-General has been
clear that all leaders in the region should use their voices
at this time to lower, rather than escalate, tensions.

In conclusion, allow me to underscore that regional
developments add urgency to the need to overcome the
persisting stalemate in the Middle East peace process.
The United Nations remains committed to work for a
comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the road map, and
the agreements previously reached between the parties.
While prospects for peace seem to grow dimmer we, as
the United Nations, continue to hope that leaders on both
sides will recognize and seize the historic opportunity
that is now before them to start seriously working
towards the goal of reaching a peace agreement that
meets the legitimate aspirations and fulfils the rights of
the people on both sides.

