Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland associates itself fully
with the comments just made by the representative of
Denmark on behalf ofthe European Union.

The work of United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) cannot be completed until the
interlocking violence and instability in the Mano River
Union as a whole have been replaced by real peace and
stability. I believe we all agree that the agenda
followed by President Taylor of Liberia is now the
critical contributing factor to the Mano River Union's
profound problems. The imposition of targeted
sanctions against the Government of Liberia until it
verifiably breaks its links with the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) has played a role in reducing chaos
in the region. However, we must ask whether it is
enough, given the failure hitherto of President Taylor
and his Government to respond at all adequately to the
clear agenda set out to him by the Council, by regional
leaders and by the international community generally.

In truth, no single course of action will produce
the solution. It will require linked-up, dogged and
incremental action on the part of all the players - all
of us. The United Nations must continue and, as
necessary, strengthen its mechanisms and actions to
achieve change in the behaviour of the Liberian
authorities. I believe we are agreed that the regional
and subregional organizations can also play their
important part. I agree with Sir Kieran Prendergast's
comment earlier: his call for our support for the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and civil society representation. In that
regard, we have heard from General Diarra regarding
ECOWAS. We understand that this presents grave
difficulties for some neighbours and players and,
indeed, that courage is called for on the part of many in
these circumstances. The new United Nations Office
for West Africa must also make a strong effort to assist,
as it is surely just for this sort of challenge that we
have established it. Wider involvement is called for
too, such as the highly commendable Rabat process.

Earlier, Foreign Minister Koroma covered the
unique hybrid judicial process to address impunity,
justice and reconciliation in Sierra Leone. I believe that
this very balanced approach, which, of course, takes
cultural values and practice also into account, is very
well suited to the case of Sierra Leone. I am also sure
that it could also have relevance elsewhere in the
region and more widely, as developments unfold.

In our workshop, there has been a stress on
staying the course, on tenacity. This clearly applies to
the United Nations, in addition to lead States. In
reality, this relies much less on voluntary contributions
and much more on assessed funds. In reality, including
for peace-building, we must be present on the basis of
assessed funds. The support which has underpinned
UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone and the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) are, I
believe, clear examples ofthis conclusion.

Finally, on human rights, strong defence and
promotion of women's rights is absolutely critical. The
Special Rapporteur's briefing earlier this year and her
report reconfirmed appalling levels of sexual abuse.
Carolyn McAskie spoke with strength on this issue this
morning, and I want to underpin her most important
message and proposals.

