Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to join
others in welcoming Prosecutor Bensouda back to the
Security Council and in thanking her for her briefing
and report.

The conflict in Darfur led to reports of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. It was for that
reason that, in 2005, the Council referred the situation
in Darfur to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Impunity and the lack of accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of international human rights law shall never
be accepted.

Now, 12 years after the Council's referral, further
steps still need to be taken by the Government of the
Sudan to assure justice for all those who suffered the
most horrendous crimes during the conflict in Darfur.
The Security Council has an obligation to follow
through on its decisions, in this case its unanimous
decision to refer the situation in Darfur to the Court.
Sweden fully supports the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor, whose call for the full backing of the
Council and Member States must be heeded. That
includes through the provision of adequate resources.

It is well known that there have been tensions
between the Court and some African States, including
States parties, in recent years, and that the unanimous
referrals by the Security Council of two situations to
the Court may have added to those tensions. Sweden
is encouraged by signs of a more positive relationship
between some African States and the Court and
welcomes the initiatives by the Office of the Prosecutor
to continue its outreach regarding the function and
jurisdiction of the Court. Apart from referrals from
the Security Council, as we know, the Court only has
jurisdiction where States have accepted it.

All suspects in the ICC investigations regarding
Darfur remain at large.

We call on the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate fully with the ICC in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005) and to fulfil its obligations to
arrest the individuals subject to arrest warrants. Like
many other States Parties to the Rome Statute, Sweden
continues to raise the issue of non-cooperation with
the Court with relevant Governments. The Court relies
on States to fulfil its mandate. It is concerning that
President Al-Bashir and others indicted by the Court are
able to continue to travel internationally, including to
States Parties to the Rome Statute. That sends a public
message that the decisions of the Court can be ignored
without any consequence which, in turn, undermines
the authority of the Council.

In the light of that and, as proposed by several
Council members at the briefing last December, Sweden
shares the view that the Council should approach cases
of non-cooperation in a structured manner and, as a
minimum, discuss which tools are available to it, if any,
for an appropriate response.
Turning to the current situation in Darfur, we
welcome the overall reduction in fighting and the
progress made in the peace process. At the same
time, we are concerned by reports of incidents of
renewed fighting and recurring reports of human
rights violations and abuses, in particular, reports of
sexual and gender-based violence. In order to address
remaining challenges and to build a sustainable peace
in Darfur we must address the root causes of instability,
as well as ensure accountability and the rule of law.

