Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (Spoke in French): Today,
the Security Council is considering the Secretary-
General's report on the situation in the Central African
Republic (S/2017/473).

This meeting is taking place at a very important
point in time. It affords us an opportunity to express
the international community's concern regarding the
Central African Republic and ending the political and
security crisis in the country. Armed violence there
continues to impact millions of people. It is therefore
with a heavy heart that I address the Council today,
although there should be no doubt about the strength
and determination of our commitment.

Our hearts are heavy and in pain following
the recent wave of violence, which has once again
caused so much death and destruction by scattering
innumerable civilians into exile and homelessness and
plunging ofmany families into mourning. The intensity
and premeditated nature of the attacks, as well as the
targeting of ethnic and religious minorities, serve to
remind us most horribly of the darkest episodes of
the political and security crisis in the Central African
Republic. However, what is both troubling and revolting
is the systematic and relentless aggression against
peacekeepers. I stand before the Council today, struck
by the indescribable suffering inflicted on civilians,
mainly by reason of their identity, and by the repeated
attacks on peacekeepers.

I want to address all the victims, be they Central
Africans or Blue Helmets, and especially those of the
Kingdoms of Cambodia and Morocco. I once again
extend to them the heartfelt tribute of the Secretary-
General and the Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), as well as my own tribute. These
painful events clearly demonstrate the depth of the
Central African crisis, which reflects the structural
shortcomings of the Central African State.

(Spoke in English)

I would like to give the Council a brief overview
of the main developments since the publication of the
report. The situation in Bangassou remains extremely
precarious. The violence that erupted on 13 May,
which was likely carefully planned, progressed in a
disturbing fashion. Armed groups backed by political
spoilers demonstrated their intention of carrying out
a de facto ethnic cleansing of the town. MINUSCA
is providing protection to some 17,000 internally
displaced persons, 4,000 of whom are Muslims from
the Tokoyo neighbourhood of Bangassou. There is
also disturbing evidence of systematic targeting of
ethnic Fulani. Some among the displaced community
are living in deplorable conditions. Meanwhile, nearly
3,000 persons have sought refuge in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The situations in the southern central prefectures of
Ouaka and Mbomou remain complex, as reinforcements
ofthe coalition ofthe Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique have been moving in support of the
purge of the Unite pour la paix en centrafrique. The
unholy alliance with some anti-balaka elements has
created an extremely volatile situation. There has
been of targeting Muslim civilians in a number of
towns. The end of the African Union Regional Task
Force's operations is also a source of major concern, as
various armed groups are competing to fill the ensuing
vacuum. I also remain deeply concerned about the
evolving situation in Bria, where approximately 80 per
cent of the civilian population - approximately 4,000
people - have been displaced due to the clashes that
began on 16 May. On 25 May, MINUSCA launched
an integrated operation to create an environment that
enables displaced people to return to their homes. Yet,
the situation remains volatile.

Similarly, an outbreak of violence in the north-
western prefectures of Ouham and Ouham Pende,
related to armed groups competing for control of
lucrative transhumance roads, was averted through a
tripartite local mediation initiative at the end of May,
with the facilitation of MINUSCA.

The security situation in Bangui remains relatively
calm, thanks to continuous and integrated political
and military efforts. The joint task force in Bangui has
reinforced its positions and conducted several shows of
force. Coordination mechanisms between MINUSCA
and relevant national defence and internal security
institutions have also proven effective. At the same
time, the Mission has continued to engage community
leaders in support of the Government's efforts to
defuse tensions.

Lately, MINUSCA has been under harsh public
criticism in the Central African Republic. The
accusations are in fact an expression of the frustration
over the State's flagrant lack of capacities. It also
reflects the population's impatience over the persistent
insecurity, which is unfortunately largely self-inflicted.
Sadly, much of this criticism mirrors the deep divisions
that persist in the country, with each side expecting
MINUSCA to fight its perceived enemy. This also
shows the need to move quickly with a strong a national
reconciliation agenda.

Even in the face of those cynics who would disparage
MINUSCA publicly, our resolve remain stronger than
ever before. As a result, the Central African Republic
is on a path towards incremental peace. If we stay the
course, we will come progressively closer to achieving
the Mission's end state, but we must recognize that
this will not be enough. We are now deeply inside a
critical phase of mandate implementation, which is
why MINUSCA must stay the course to consolidate
progress towards peace, even as we must recognize the
magnitude of the adversity we face today.

Within the United Nations, the Secretary-General
has directed a redoubling of efforts in order first
and foremost to help advance the political process,
in combination with enhancing security efforts,
increasing international engagement in response to the
humanitarian crisis, boosting national reconciliation
efforts and ensuring the delivery of peace dividends
and a promotion of economic recovery. In this context,
all constructive peace efforts need to be energized. The
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, whose
last inclusive meeting took place on 8 and 9 June in
Bangui, can provide an essential forum where the
Government and armed groups could not only discuss
the modalities of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme but also broader issues related
to peace and stability in the country.

The African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
remains an essential element for facilitating an
inclusive national dialogue with the support of the
subregion. Recent contact between the Government and
the African Union and other parties are in this regard
encouraging. The subregion should continue to play a
critical role in ensuring that this mediation progresses
and that its outcome contributes to long-term stability in
both the subregion and in the Central African Republic.

The ongoing work ofthe Community of Sant'Egidio
could represent a useful contribution to this effort. All
concerned Central African parties should seize these
opportunities to have discussions in good faith with
the legitimate national authorities on concrete steps
towards achieving sustainable peace in their country.
Meanwhile, violence and the killing of innocent
civilians must cease now.

MINUSCA will continue to project a robust
posture towards armed groups while investing in
structures that build resilience. Nevertheless, we need
to be realistic about the degree to which the State may
quickly achieve a level of autonomy that allows State
institutions to manage by themselves, that is, without
significant support. The State is without infrastructure
and has limited human capital. Innovative approaches
will continue to be needed to ensure stability in the
medium term.
MINUSCA is, for its part, applying a fully
integrated approach to preventing conflict and
sustaining peace, and nowhere is this more visible than
in Bambari. The town has remained calm since robust
measures described in the report were taken to enable
the gradual restoration of State authority, including via
close coordination between the Government and the
United Nations.

The report before the Council mentions other
critical milestones that should not be overlooked,
including the successful convening of the Consultative
Follow-up Committee, in which all 14 armed groups
participated. It is now incumbent upon them to generally
embrace the peace process. I congratulate the Central
African authorities on the timely establishment of six
national institutions, as required by the Constitution,
which helps the country avoid a constitutional crisis.
I am also pleased to note that the National Assembly
has been very productive in terms of legislation while
exhibiting vibrant political activity in its first year.
The Government has sent signals that it is very eager
to see the Special Criminal Court fully operationalized
as soon as possible and the Prosecutor of the Court
arriving in Bangui on 25 May.

The joint human rights mapping report by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and MINUSCA, covering the period from 2003 to 2015,
was launched on 30 May. I am grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour for his visit to the Central
African Republic on this important occasion. The report
is an important piece in support of the fight against
inpunity and makes critical yet realistic proposals with
a view to advancing transitional justice in the Central
African Republic. It should be seen as an important
contribution to long-term stability and sustainable
peace in the country.

(spoke in French)

At this criticaljuncture in the process ofestablishing
a rule oflaw in a peaceful and reconciled with the United
Nations and living in harmony with its neighbours, it
is essential that all national and international actors
working towards this noble objective speak with one
and the same voice. This meeting provides an excellent
example of the remarkable momentum of international
solidarity that the Central African Republic is enjoying.
We already had the illustration last November in
Brussels. The European Union, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the African Development
Bank, the French Agency for Development and even
the International Organization of La Francophonie all
have developed programmes with the Central African
Government. This unprecedented momentum is the
bearer of rich promises. But it will be the responsibility
of the Central Africans alone to ensure that they do
not waste, but instead make this priceless capital
grow, in order to make the legitimate aspirations of the
Central African people for greater stability and shared
prosperity a reality without further delay.

Mr. President, you will agree with me that the
situation is critical and that, if we are not up to the
task, the judgment of history will be uncompromising.
A national awakening is more essential than ever. A
high sense of patriotism and the unity of the Central
Africans around the vital strategic objectives contained
in the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan are
needed. The Framework for Mutual Engagement sets
out the terms of the contract of trust between the Central
African Republic and its strategic partners. Under the
direct authority of President Touadera, the Framework
for Mutual Engagement could be a major instrument
of coordination and strategic direction to accelerate the
implementation of the important reforms desired by
the Government.

(spoke in English)

I am deeply concerned that the already dire
humanitarian situation confronting the country is at
risk of worsening if the Central African authorities
cannot facilitate the return of displaced people and
refugees to their homes. More than half of the Central
African population - or 2.2 million people - need
assistance or are food insecure. This figure represents
the highest per capita caseload in the world and bears
restating with ever more urgency.

It is vital that all international partners honour their
pledges to the Central African Republic and harmonize
that support for consolidating the peace dividends and
maintaining a robust posture, which MINUSCA is of
course prepared to take, with sufficient resources to
enable it to achieve its mandate. Continued engagement
with the international peacebuilding architecture in
support of the country's stabilization and recovery is
also critically important.

To that end, and with the Council's support, I
pledge to continue to lead MINUSCA in expanding the
limits of what peacekeeping can achieve. The Mission
is working closely with United Nations agencies and
investing resources in mechanisms that promote
national resilience. MINUSCA is constantly monitoring
the volatile and unpredictable security situation with
increased anticipation and mobility in positioning its
forces to protect civilians and prevent the outbreak of
widespread violence. Yet, knowing that there will be
no military solution to the current crisis in the Central
African Republic, all efforts must be exerted in support
of a mediated political solution.

I sincerely thank the Council for recognizing
the serious efforts made by MINUSCA to fight
and eventually end sexual exploitation and abuse.
Improvements in tracking, reporting and coordinating
responses to violations are paying off in the form of
better assistance to victims and a dramatic reduction in
the number of new allegations. Zero tolerance works,
but I will not be satisfied until there are zero cases,
as well as an end to impunity for those grave abuses,
including in troop- and police-contributing countries,
or vis-a-vis civilian staff.

(Spoke in French)

I understand the scope of the task we face and, I
must admit that given the relentless evidence of the
forces of destruction, it makes sense to think that the
cynics feel vindicated, but we must recall the trajectory
of the Central African Republic so that we do not get
distracted or discouraged. No person or institution alone
can succeed, but together there is no doubt that we will
so that the Central African Republic can permanently
break the vicious circle ofconflict and finally, with force
and conviction, embrace the greatness commensurate
with its rich heritage and immense potential.

