Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I too would like to begin
by conveying to our Afghan brothers, on behalf of my
Government and the people of Pakistan, our profound
grief and sympathy over the tragic loss of life and the
material devastation caused by the earthquakes in the
northern part of Afghanistan, which have also affected
north-western parts of Pakistan. I want to tell my
brother Ambassador Ravan Farhadi, present here, that
we in Pakistan share his grief and pain, just as we have
always felt the pain and grief of Afghanistan in its
difficult moments. We know that this is a moment of
supreme grief for his people. The Government and the
people of Pakistan would like to do whatever they can
to help their Afghan brothers.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Frechette, who I understand
made a comprehensive presentation earlier this
morning on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/278).

We are delighted to see you in the Chair this
morning, Mr. Minister, presiding over an important
meeting of the Security Council on a subject that has
been haunting us all for decades, and which today
affects us all and must be the focus of the priority
attention of the international community in terms of
chasing away the ghosts of violence and misery that
have been haunting that unfortunate and war-ravaged
country.

We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi, to restore peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We also welcome the continuing efforts and
engagement of the United Nations in facilitating the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement.

In this regard, we support the Secretary-General's
proposal, contained in his report, for a two-pillared
structure for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) - first, to facilitate the
political process in Afghanistan, and secondly to assist
in the humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
reconstruction of that war-ravaged country. We agree
with the concept of what is described by the Secretary-
General as a "light expatriate 'footprint"' (S/2002/278, para. 98) and with its aim to bolster Afghan capacities.
We hope that the United Nations will continue to play
its role in helping the Afghans find home-grown
solutions to their problems and bring their country back
into the comity of nations as a responsible and law-
abiding State.

In trying to assist in Afghanistan's political,
humanitarian and economic recovery, we must draw
lessons from the country's tragic past. Not only is
Afghanistan one of the most difficult challenges the
international community has faced in recent times, it
also represents a case in which a country so much in
need of international support and assistance was
neglected, isolated and left in the lurch, mercilessly
rendering it a wilderness that attracted runaway
dissidents and terrorists from all over the world.

Today, however, is not the time for remorse or for
remaining frozen in the past. We need a new beginning.
Unusual situations always warrant unusual and fresh
responses and approaches. As we seek to rebuild
Afghanistan, we must be guided by the need not only
to rectify the mistakes of the past, but also to avoid
repeating them. History always provides the most
relevant lessons.

Now that the international community has
committed itself to healing Afghanistan, we hope that
it will not walk away from the country again. It must
remain engaged in Afghanistan and in the region. A
country ravaged by war has to be rebuilt; a society torn
by conflicts has to be healed. All this requires
commitment and perseverance. Afghanistan must never
again be allowed to become a breeding ground or
haven for terrorists. The long-term solution of the
problem of terrorism in Afghanistan lies in the
restoration of peace and stability and in the
reconstruction of the country. No amount of financial
resources alone would be sufficient to accomplish
those tasks. The international community must honour
its obligations, not only for the benefit of the people of
Afghanistan, but also for its own greater good.

The time has now come to break the vicious
circle of the past. Humanitarian relief and
reconstruction plans must be aimed at genuinely
addressing the causes and consequences of the
instability and violence which the Afghan people have
endured for decades. Every economic plan, whether for
relief or for reconstruction, must generate job
opportunities and employment for the common Afghan
people - those who are living in the country. Their
attention must be diverted from misery and violence to
peaceful and constructive activities.
Extensive blueprints have been prepared by the
regional organization known as the Economic
Cooperation Organization. My friend Ambassador
Farhadi is well aware of the goals and objectives of
that organization, which I had the privilege to serve as
its Secretary-General for four years. Those blueprints
could be utilized in converting this landlocked county
into a bridgehead connecting Central Asia with the
warm waters of the Arabian Sea.

Afghanistan has the potential to be the shortest
transit route between the Central Asian States and the
rest of the world. In due course, road, rail and gas and
oil pipeline projects - which are already there -
passing through Afghanistan could bring
unprecedented economic well-being to the country.
Perhaps this would require various consortiums to be
constituted by the international community. No politics
should be involved in this effort; it is a genuine need of
the Afghan people, and the world at large would
benefit from such economic development.

Here I must caution that any attempt sponsored or
exploited by external vested interests to pit
Afghanistan against any of its neighbours or to deepen
its ethnic or sectarian divide would only prolong the
agony of its people. We must guard against any such
temptation. It is needless to emphasize that an
Afghanistan at peace with itself and with all of its
neighbours is the surest safeguard of its own future
security, as well as that of the entire region.

Security remains the most pressing issue at this
point in time. It is the very prerequisite for the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement and is
imperative for a stable political and economic future in
Afghanistan. Lack of security has been a major
hindrance to stability in the past and continues to
threaten peace today. The Afghan people have suffered
far too long at the hands of ambitious warlords.
Equally, nature has not been fair to the Afghan people;
the country has suffered frequent calamities.

The international community must therefore
ensure that the old rivalries and hatreds which once
wreaked havoc across Afghanistan are not given a
chance to obstruct the establishment of a stable
political dispensation in that country. Similarly,
humanitarian relief must come forth generously to
alleviate the misery of the Afghans who are either
displaced internally or who have been forced to leave
their country for reasons beyond their control.

Without security, there can be no peace in
Afghanistan, no unity, no stability, no humanitarian
relief, no reconstruction or recovery. I think that this is
a point that everyone appreciates, understands and
agrees with. Even the Secretary-General has made this
point. The Bonn Agreement stipulated the
establishment of a United Nations mandated force for
the maintenance of security in Kabul as well as in other
areas of the country.

While we support the deployment of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Kabul, we feel that its size and scope must now be
expanded and extended to all of the country, especially
its major urban centres. ISAF, in the absence of a
proper Afghan security force, is the only option we
have at the moment, and restricting it only to Kabul
would, in effect, defeat the very purpose for which it
was established.

In addition to the efforts of the international
community to help them, we hope that all Afghan
factions and groups will avail themselves of this unique
opportunity to extricate their country from the abyss in
which it has remained for the last two decades. The
success of the Bonn Agreement will depend on how the
Afghan leaders acquit themselves of rebuilding their
country through a mutual spirit of accommodation.
Tribal and ethnic structures and traditions will, of
course, remain of special relevance in any future set-
up. While the world owes the Afghans a helping hand,
in the larger measure and in the ultimate analysis, it is
they themselves who will make or mar the future of
their country, and they recognize this.

Pakistan, for its part, remains committed to
continuing to play its role in assisting the recovery and
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We have assured the
Afghan Interim Administration, under the leadership of
Chairman Hamid Karzai, of our full support and
cooperation. Over the last two decades, Pakistan has
been providing shelter to millions of Afghan refugees,
without any outside assistance. In addition, we have
recently pledged another $100 million worth of
assistance for Afghanistan's immediate rehabilitation
and reconstruction needs. No country, other than
Afghanistan itself, has suffered more from the conflict
and violence in Afghanistan than Pakistan, and no
country could have a greater stake in the return of
peace and stability to Afghanistan than Pakistan. My
country, like the rest of the international community,
hopes that this new era will bring positive changes to
Afghanistan. We hope that the efforts of the United
Nations in Afghanistan will truly contribute to the
achievement of peace, security and development in that
country, which needs these so badly.
Finally, I need not emphasize again that this time,
the international community must not walk away from
Afghanistan, as it did in the past. It must demonstrate
the political will and the determination to engage and
help the Afghan people in rebuilding peace and the
economy of their country, and this time the United
Nations must be an effective instrument of relief and
development in Afghanistan.

The Secretary-General is correct when he says in
his report that Afghanistan is a shattered society. It will
certainly take a long time to heal the wounds left by 23
years of war. The process of healing has started and
must not be allowed to reverse itself. This requires
from all - from the Afghans themselves as well as
from the international community - a continued
commitment and determination to stay the course.
Afghanistan now has the chance at least to be a country
at peace with its neighbours and with itself.

