Mr. Dacic' (Serbia) (Spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): Allow me to express my
gratitude for the opportunity to address the Security
Council on the occasion of the consideration of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/74) on
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would like to thank all
the members of this organ for their continued attention
they accord to the question of Kosovo and Metohija.
Drawing upon the constructive cooperation achieved
over the 15 years since the establishment of the Interim
Administration in Kosovo and Metohija, I am convinced
that, through consistent efforts and joint endeavours
based on resolution 1244 (1999), we shall arrive at the
goal to which we all aspire - the political settlement of
the question of Kosovo and Metohija.

I would like to reiterate what I have said on a
number of occasions before this body. The presence of
the United Nations Mission is of paramount importance
to stability in the southern Serbian province and to
the creation of conditions leading to a lasting and
sustainable settlement to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija. Serbia highly appreciates the engagement of
UNMIK in creating conditions for peaceful coexistence
among the residents of Kosovo and Metohija, the
security of all local communities, and respect for their
human rights. We also appreciate the contribution
of other international organizations - including
the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission in Kosovo, as well as the specialized
agencies of the United Nations - which, through their
missions under United Nations auspices, are a part
of the international civil and security presences in
the province. In particular, we appreciate the efforts
made by Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in monitoring the implementation
of the UNMIK mandate and coordinating international
civil and security presences.

Following the formation of the Government in
Pristina, as pointed out in the report before the Council
as one of the key political events, Serbia expects that the
political vacuum will be filled, which should contribute
to the continuation of the implementation of the
agreements reached in the Brussels dialogue. We also
expect that the continuation of the dialogue at the high
level in Brussels on 9 February this year will provide
additional impetus to the process of normalization
begun between Belgrade and Pristina.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia is
fully committed to the dialogue with the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government (PISG) in Pristina. The
essence of the process of the normalization of relations
is the finding of right answers to the questions that
burden the life of the residents of Kosovo and Metohija
and prevent them from realizing their basic rights. That
can be achieved only through dialogue, based on a
genuine understanding of the needs and interests of the
other party, and readiness to compromise. I am pleased
to note that, in that context, special mention has been
made in the report of the visit of Serbian Prime Minister
Aleksandar Vueie to Kosovo and Metohija on the
occasion of the celebration of the Orthodox New Year
and of his message of the need for life together and the
building of a stable future for the Serbian community
with its Albanian neighbours. However, a shadow over
the visit was cast by an incident involving a group of
Albanians who assaulted the motorcade of the highest
Government representatives of the Republic of Serbia,
which the report before us makes no mention of.

Serbia approaches the dialogue with Pristina
openly, desirous of finding practical solutions that
will make it possible for all residents of Kosovo and
Metohija to lead normal lives within a broader process
of European integration. The participation of the Serbs
in the political life of Kosovo and Metohija should
contribute in that regard. In that context, I would like
to point to the participation of the representatives of the
Serbian list in the work of the Pristina Government in
ministerial and other positions in its institutions.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has fulfilled
conscientiously, consistently and in a timely manner all
its obligations emanating from the agreements reached
within the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations, signed in Brussels
on 19 April 2013. I express my satisfaction that the
importance of the establishment of the community of
Serbian municipalities is noted in the current report and
defined as the key question in the direct continuation of
the implementation of the Brussels Agreement.

Let me point out that the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), the position of the Serbian
Orthodox Church and property issues remain the key
questions for the Republic of Serbia in the further
dialogue with Pristina.

I take this opportunity to point out that the
Government of the Republic of Serbia abides by the other
agreement reached earlier on regional representation
and cooperation, too. The agreement provides for
the scope and manner of the participation of Pristina
representatives in regional activities, initiatives and
forums. Recently, however, attempts have been made
to include the representatives of Pristina in the work
of international organizations outside the context of
the agreement. Those attempts are unacceptable for
Serbia. These questions should be addressed within our
dialogue with Pristina.

Serbia welcomes the work of UNMIK in the area
of monitoring the status of non-majority communities
in Kosovo and Metohija in cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other missions present in the province.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia attaches
great importance to finding a proper solution for
IDPs from Kosovo and Metohija. The creation of real
conditions for their return is one of the key factors in the
process of reconciliation. Unfortunately, even 15 years
after the end of the conflict, there exist no conditions
for sustainable IDP returns to Kosovo and Metohija,
primarily because of the lack of proper interest in this
question by the Provisional Institutions in Pristina.
This sad fact is noted also in the regular reports of
the Secretary-General on the work of UNMIK and in
the reports of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

Let me remind the Council that Serbia tops the
list of European countries with the largest number of
IDPs. From Kosovo and Metohija, they number almost
230,000. According to UNHCR data, noted also in the
report before us, 17,000 of them, mostly Serbs, are in
the province itself. Return to Kosovo and Metohija
has been realized by fewer than 5 per cent of IDPs.
According to UNHCR data, 12,145 persons returned
to Kosovo and Metohija from the rest of Serbia. Only
1.9 per cent - about 4 000 persons - have realized a
sustainable return. Seventy per cent of the returnees are
not ethnic Serbs. The latest UNHCR data, cited in the
current report on UNMIK, confirm the continuity of
the decreasing trend and confirm that only 149 persons
returned from central Serbia to Kosovo and Metohija in
the last trimester.

I would like to point out that the experience gained
so far from the work of the Kosovo Privatization
Agency shows that the decisions on the right to property
restitution are ineffective - that is, they remain
words rather than deeds - as Albanians continue to
use Serbian property or to re-occupy it upon eviction
without consequences, while Serbs are still unable to
repossess it.

Physical insecurity, as evinced by the continued
attacks on Serbs and their property and helped by the
atmosphere of impunity for crimes committed against
Serbs, is surely accountable for the long delay in IDP
returns. Illustrative examples in that regard are the
numerous security incidents that took place as Serbs
from Dakovica - who numbered 12, 000 prior to
1999 - attempted to visit their homes and the town
cemetery. One incident involved the 6 January stoning
of a bus with about 40 displaced Serbs from Dakovica
inside. The only Minister in the Kosovo Government
who condemned the incident was Aleksandar J ablanovie,
which resulted in his dismissal. The violence against
returnees, the dismissal of Minister Jablanovie and
violent demonstrations in Pristina create an atmosphere
of hatred towards the Serbian people in Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as a feeling of distrust and insecurity.
Instead of using the constructive approach of Serbia
and its call on the Serbian people to take part in the
elections and participate in the Government, Pristina
has whipped up a climate of political instability and an
anti-Serbian campaign, which is contrary to the goals of
the Brussels dialogue. That is borne out also by OSCE
data, available in the report before us, on over 230
security incidents that took place in returnee localities
from August 2012 to 2014.

The presence of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is
therefore necessary given the still unstable situation, and
the number of its troops must not be reduced further. I
expect KFOR to continue its engagement in accordance
with its current mandate and within its competencies
provided for both by the military-technical agreement
and resolution 1244 (1999).

In that context, I would like to draw the Council's
attention as well to the legal insecurity evinced by a
systematic obstruction of the property rights of Serbs,
especially displaced Serbs, and the political obstruction
of the process of integration of the judiciary organs in
northern Kosovo and Metohija, as provided for by the
Brussels Agreement.

Serbia considers it its obligation to seek a solution so
that conditions could be created for a normal life for all
people who did not leave their homes of their own will.
Concerned over the slow progress in voluntary returns
to Kosovo and Metohija and desirous of intensifying
the efforts in this area, the Government of the Republic
of Serbia has initiated the establishment of a new
consultative body, incorporating the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations, as well
as the Kosovo Minister for Communities and Returns.
The creation of conditions for the Serbian and other
non-Albanian populations to enjoy the basic human
rights and the rights belonging to them as non-majority
populations in Kosovo and Metohija would certainly
help improve the general atmosphere for IDP returns.

We condemn each and every desecration of religious
sites, of whichever faith. In that sense, I would like to
point out that the messages related to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant "future Caliphate", to the Kosovo
Liberation Army and to the Albanian National Army in
the graffiti scribbled on the walls of Visoki Decani, the
Serbian Orthodox monastery founded in the fourteenth
century and included in the UNESCO World Heritage
List, continue to be disconcerting. The reason for our
deep concern in that regard is not the mere desecration
of a cultural heritage site of world renown, but that it
is being desecrated by scribbling messages that glorify
terrorists at a time when the international community is
making enormous efforts in combating that evil - the
biggest threat to international peace and security.

It is with concern that I bring to the Council's
attention the continued desecration of Serbian
monasteries. In the night of 4 and 5 December 2014,
"UCK" and "Kosovo" graffiti were scribbled on the
walls in the churchyard of the Saint Kosma and Damian
Church, despite the security provided by the Kosovo
Police forces. Let me point out that those acts are not
only a threat and an insult addressed to the Serbian
Orthodox Church and its clergy, but also a way to
intimidate the remaining Orthodox population in
Kosovo and Metohija, most of it consisting of Serbs. I
take this opportunity to point to the need to introduce
additional measures to protect the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage in Kosovo and Metohija.

The attacks on these sites are, at the same time,
attacks on the identity of Serbs and directly influence
their feeling of security and acceptance. The renewed
scribbling of graffiti on an endangered cultural site on
the UNESCO List of World Heritage Sites brings into
question the commitment of the relevant authorities
in the province to protecting and preserving Serbian
cultural and religious heritage. At the same time, we
have been witness to the unfolding ofa parallel process
of altering historical facts, aimed at marginalizing and
eliminating the presence of Serbs and Serbia from the
history of Kosovo and Metohija.

Moreover, let me point out that the need for
increased security has recently assumed an additional
dimension related to the fight against terrorist
threats originating from the worldwide rise of violent
extremism. As a sponsor of resoltuion 2178 (2014), the
Republic of Serbia has taken all the necessary measures
to suppress the financing and organizing of terrorism
and the increasing phenomenon of recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters who join armed terrorist
organizations in the Middle East, such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Serbia will continue to
act resolutely on the suppression of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We expect the international
missions in Kosovo and Metohija and PISG to make
their own contributions, within their capacities, to this
common fight of ours, which is of global significance.

In the context of the priority that the Government
of the Republic of Serbia attaches to resolving property
issues in Kosovo and Metohija, I would like to draw
the Council's attention to the privatization processes
carried out by the Kosovo Privatization Agency, which
are contrary to international and European human rights
conventions. In addition, UNMIK has determined that
the process was contrary to resolution 1244 (1999), as
the Kosovo Privatization Agency was not established
under the laws in force in Kosovo and Metohija in
accordance with the resolution.

Particularly evident is the tendency to privatize
public and socially owned companies in the Serbian
majority communities. Such companies are being sold
to persons of Albanian nationality. I would like to point
out that the nationality of the persons who come into
possession of the companies is not in dispute; what is
in dispute is that the actions involved are unlawful and
motivated by the destruction of the economic resources
in the Serbian communities. I would like to take this
opportunity to raise the ongoing property issue of the
Trepca combine: any other solution to this question that
differs from the one achieved in the Brussels Agreement
would be unacceptable to the Republic of Serbia.

Of particular concern is the attempt of the Pristina
Government to adopt, without consultations with the
representatives of the Serbian community in Kosovo
and Metohija, the law on the amendments of the law on
public enterprises. In doing so, it is in breach of article
2 of the coalition agreement on the basis of which
the current Government was formed in Pristina. That
article provides for halting further privatization in the
Serbian communities and an agreement that property
issues be discussed in Brussels with the mediation of
the European Council and the European Commission.
I am convinced that we are all aware of the importance
of respect for ownership rights regardless of whether
private or public property is involved. In this sense,
it is necessary to ensure that all activities in Kosovo
and Metohija related to privatization once again
take place in the legally valid framework. That is all
the more relevant since activities in this area in the
southern Serbian province necessarily have an ethnic
connotation, which is inadmissible in a democratic
world.

I cannot emphasize strongly enough the importance
of continued monitoring and assessment of the work
of the judiciary and other PISG organs in Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as an appraisal of their readiness to
take over the executive competencies that the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) now
has responsibility for, as provided by the decision on the
extension of the mandate and reconfiguration of EULEX
taken in June 2014. On a number of occasions, Serbia
has pointed out the need for continued monitoring and
defining of proper criteria for the appraisal of the work
of the Institutions by the relevant missions present in
Kosovo and Metohija under the auspices of the United
Nations. It is with regret that we note that the current
situation in Kosovo and Metohija reflects, in part, the
lack of adequate professional capacities on the part of
the PISG.

In its Kosovo Progress Report 2014, the European
Commission expresses serious concerns regarding the
independence, accountability and impartiality of the
justice system in Kosovo and Metohija. The report also
points to the need for more concrete results in the fight
against organized crime, corruption, money laundering
and terrorist financing. In reporting on the work of
first-instance courts in its Justice Monitor report for the
first half of 2014, OSCE points to shortcomings such
as poor or no translation provided in cases involving
members of non-majority communities, as well as to
the fact that more than half of the decisions have not
been fully reasoned.

The chaotic situation in thejustice system ofKosovo
and Metohija is borne out also by the trial of the former
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army charged with
the commission of war crimes in the detention centre in
the locality of Klecka. Additional suspicion about the

impartiality of the Kosovo and Metohijajustice system
is raised by the case of Oliver Ivanovic', a political
leader of the Serbs who remained in custody for a year
before his trial began.

The current situation in Kosovo and Metohija
bears out our assessment that conditions have not yet
been fulfilled, under resolution 1244 (1999), for a
full transfer of competencies to the PISG. That these
functions have been entrusted to EULEX does not
diminish the powers and responsibility of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I expect that,
within its mandate, EULEX will continue to carry out
its executive competencies in the area of the rule of
law, in view of the real assessment of the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija in that regard.

I take this opportunity to commend the efforts made
in the investigation of the allegations contained in the
report of Senator Dick Marty on the inhuman treatment
of people in the illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo and Metohija. I welcome the reference in the
report before us on the need to urgently establish the
specialist court to try cases arising from the finding of
the European Union Special Investigative Task Force.

Serbia is committed to the process ofreconciliation.
We consider that an important way to confront our own
past and, in that context, to establish the fate of missing
persons. This is important, first and foremost because
of the families of these persons and as a contribution
to the process of inter-ethnic reconciliation in the
province. To that end, our expert teams cooperate with
UNMIK and EULEX, as well as with the competent
bodies in Kosovo and Metohija.

The process of inter-ethnic reconciliation is
incomplete without the trial of the former members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army responsible for the
persecution of Serbs, Roma and other non-Albanians,
as well as their political opponents among Kosovo
and Metohija Albanians. We expect that necessary
conditions will be created to try former members of
the Kosovo Liberation Army who are suspected of war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

In conclusion, let me point out once again that the
quest for a lasting and sustainable peace in Kosovo
and Metohija is the national priority of Serbia. We can
arrive at the solution only through negotiations and
dialogue with the PISG in Pristina, fully respecting
the legitimate interests of the Albanian, Serbian and
other populations in Kosovo and Metohija on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999). The solution to the question
of Kosovo and Metohija must be in the interests of
our citizens, who should be enabled to live in normal
conditions, while a safe life together for all communities
should be made possible. In arriving at a solution, we
must achieve mutual reconciliation.

That will process will certaily be helped by the
adoption of European standards and values as the
entire region moves towards the European Union. We
believe that the commitment to European integration is
the principal driving force behind the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We expect the
European Union to continue its active engagement in,
and facilitate our dialogue, with Pristina.

I would like to address a call from this Chamber
to the political leaders in the province to invest
efforts - now that conditions have been created by
the ending of the stalemate of the political process in
Pristina - to continue the dialogue, primarily in the
interests of the population of Kosovo and Metohija. The
Government of the Republic of Serbia will certainly
maintain its active engagement in the implementation
of the Brussels Agreement in the interests of peace and
economic progress and reconciliation.

