Mr. Lewis-Navarro (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
President of Costa Rica on his initiative of putting
forward this important subject for discussion today.
Panama, a country where people of different races,
religions and cultures live together in peace and
harmony, cannot but seek the strengthening of
multilateral collective security mechanisms and the
rule of law.

At the 2005 World Summit, our leaders adopted a
multidimensional approach to security by linking
security, human rights and development. That requires
us to make greater multilateral efforts to achieve
disarmament and the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction and thereby limit military expenditure to
bring capabilities in line with the legitimate needs for
defence and security.

However, at the present time, the greatest
challenges to international peace and security arise not
from wars between States or territorial invasions, but
from internal conflicts, transnational organized crime
and the failure of States. For that reason, our greater
concern should be the continued trade in small arms
and light weapons, which feed criminality and armed
conflict everywhere. The illicit trafficking of weapons
is one of the main challenges to international peace and
security today. Their illegal trade represents a quarter
of global trade, a large part of which is directed
towards conflict situations.

The Security Council has addressed that situation
many times by imposing arms embargoes, which have
effectively served to reduce the number of victims.
However, another significant effect of that trade has
been to exacerbate serious social problems. Those arms
are more devastating and lethal than weapons of mass
destruction. Their accumulative effect, measured in the
number of dead and wounded and their social cost, are
sufficiently worrying to impel us to act resolutely to
put a stop to this plague, which threatens humankind.

The international community has established a
number of international agreements to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction that have
significantly increased international cooperation.
However, with regard to small arms and weapons, all
we currently have is a non-binding Programme of
Action, in which little more than two thirds of Member
States participate. That initiative will be insufficient
until States that manufacture small arms and light
weapons incorporate its provisions into a binding
instrument allowing greater efficiency and
effectiveness in fighting the illicit traffic in arms. For
our part, in order to contribute to that goal at the local
level, the Government of President Martin Torrijos has
promulgated legislation to impose greater control over
those activities in our country.

However, such initiatives are not enough. Given
the scale of the impact of small arms and light
weapons, the lack of equal efforts with respect to the
production and trafficking of armaments is inexcusable.
Without regulation and international monitoring, it will
not be possible to reduce the global impact of the legal
sale of weapons. Just as there are controls over the
production and transit of nuclear materials, so we
should be able to trace the production of small arms.
We need to consider how to achieve compatible
standards and configure global databases for the
exchange of information among regulatory bodies.

We know that the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes the right of Member States to legitimate
self-defence, but curbing the illegal traffic in weapons
or regulating their legal trade in no way affect that
right. Regulations that could be established or
measures that could be adopted would not interfere
with the right of States to protect themselves for
domestic or international crime.

Lastly, I cannot conclude, Sir, Without
recognizing the efforts that you have been making to
ensure Visibility for this issue at the national and
international levels. We can only hope that they are
successful.

