Ms. Landgren: The report of the Secretary-
General now before the Council (8/2009/221) provides
an overview of developments in Nepal's peace process
and a midterm review of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), as requested by
the Council. It describes long-awaited steps by the
Government of Nepal towards resolving the continued
existence in the country of two armies and also towards
the discharge of some 4,000 disqualified Maoist army
personnel, including minors.

Since January 2009, there have been public
consultations on the new Constitution, and the
Constituent Assembly has continued to develop
concept papers. Several long-dormant Government
bodies have been revived, and in April by-elections
were held in six constituencies in a relatively peaceful
and orderly atmosphere. The progress has been, in the
language of the report, not insignificant, and the tone
of the report is thus guardedly positive.

The report, however, also warns of differences
among political parties, the high level of acrimony and
weak consultation over major decisions and the
atmosphere of mistrust. It notes the persistent tension
between the Ministry of Defence and the Nepal Army,
with the political parties publicly lining up to support
one or the other. And in the fortnight or so since this
report was written, the deeply polarizing political
stand-off between the Nepal Army and the leader of the
governing coalition, the Unified Communist Party of
Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M), has come to a head,
culminating in the resignation yesterday of Prime
Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal "Prachanda".

In the lead-up to that event, considerable gaps
had opened in the interpretation of the powers of the
President and the chiefs of Nepal Army staff, and the
Supreme Court had become increasingly drawn into
adjudicating such conflicts of interpretation. The
Maoists have seen in the position taken by the Army
chiefs and the other main political parties an attempt to
undermine their leadership of the Government, while
their detractors consider the Maoists' actions as proof
of their intention to capture State power.

Those developments have serious implications
for the functioning of government and for the nature of
the State to be shaped by Nepal's next Constitution. In
the short term, there is a risk of paralysis, with possibly
protracted negotiations on forming a new Government
and a stalling of preparations for the discharge of the
09-32451
disqualified and the integration and rehabilitation of
verified Maoist army personnel.

The Prime Minister's resignation followed a
number of developments over the past two weeks. On
20 April, the Cabinet requested General Katawal to
provide clarification of three recent situations. Under
the Army Act, the chief of the Army can be dismissed
by the Government, if it deems it necessary, after being
given the opportunity to provide clarification, and that
request was widely thought to herald the chief's
imminent dismissal.

The first of the three situations was the
recruitment by the Nepal Army of more than 3,000 new
personnel in late 2008, notwithstanding a prohibition in
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of November
2006 and the Agreement on Monitoring the
Management of Arms and Armies on the recruitment of
additional personnel by either the Nepal Army or the
Maoist army. Mr. Ian Martin, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, described that
situation in detail to the Council in his 16 January
briefing (see S/PV.6069), which is a matter of public
record. UNMIN has taken the position since 2007 that
any recruitment by either army would violate those
agreements. The Army was directed by the
Government to stop the recruitment, but it did not.

The second situation concerned the Army's
reinstatement of eight retiring brigadier generals whose
services were not recommended for extension by the
Ministry of Defence, and the third concerned the
withdrawal of Nepal Army participants from several
events at the national games after Maoist army athletes
were allowed at the last minute to take part.

The issue of Nepal army recruitment and that of
the brigadier generals' non-extension have been
brought before the Supreme Court, which is expected
to rule on both issues this month. The broad charge
levelled by the Prime Minister was that the Army chief
had repeatedly defied the authority of the elected
Government. In his response to the Prime Minister's
Office, on 21 April, the Army chief reportedly stated
that he had never challenged legitimate civilian
authority over the Government, while also claiming
that the Prime Minister lacks the constitutional
authority to fire him.

Since the elections in April last year, which
brought the Maoists to power, senior Army officers have
repeatedly asserted that only the Nepal Army stands
09-32451

between the country and totalitarianism. The Maoists
have contributed to feeding such fears through
continued references to capturing State power. On
24 April, some media sources carried a detailed account
of plans for a military coup, sourcing the story to
senior Army officers.

The Prime Minister had said that he intended to
resolve this issue through consensus and had reportedly
secured the agreement of the leaders of the largest
governing coalition partner, the Communist Party of
Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist) (UML), as well as
the major opposition party, the Nepali Congress, to
remove the Army chief. However, in the days after
19 April, the party political dynamics shifted rapidly
and such agreements as there may have been fell apart.
On 3 May, the UML pulled out of the Government,
leaving the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist
(UCPN-M) in a minority.

The active profile of the President, Ram Baran
Yadav, as those events unfolded raised constitutional
questions and eroded relations between his Office and
that of the Prime Minister. On 3 May, the Cabinet,
boycotted by some members of the coalition Government,
formally decided to sack the Army chief, and the Prime
Minister appointed the second-in-command of the
Army, Chief of General Staff Kul Bahadur Khadka, to
act in the top post. The Prime Minister also gave a
letter of dismissal to General Katawal.

Late in the evening of 3 May, the President wrote
to the Army chief, instructing him to continue in his
post. The President noted that the Interim Constitution
designated him as the protector, patron and Supreme
Commander of the Nepal Army and that steps taken by
the Government to dismiss the Army chief and appoint
a new chief had been constitutionally and procedurally
incomplete. In a public statement yesterday, the
President said that his directive did not violate
constitutional provisions, as the UCPN-M. had not
consulted with its coalition partners.

The Prime Minister had previously threatened to
take his party out of the Government, if no satisfactory
compromise were found, and he did so yesterday,
4 May. In his televised address to the nation, Prime
Minister Prachanda urged the nation to respect the
peace process and the letter and spirit of the Interim
Constitution, saying that his resignation was intended
to allow a way out of the ongoing political crisis. He
criticized "foreign and international forces" for
3
interfering in Nepal's politics and for undermining
national integrity and sovereignty.

This is a volatile moment in Nepal's peace
process. The aim of the process in 2005 was to end the
war and hold a Constituent Assembly election towards
building a more democratic Nepal. It was premised on
the recognition that the decade-long conflict could not
be resolved militarily. The Maoists hold 40 per cent of
the seats in the Constituent Assembly - more than
twice the number of any other party - and the
Constitution cannot be completed without their
support. Significant progress has been made, including
the successful conduct of the elections, the ongoing
work of the Constituent Assembly and the declaration
of a Republic, which brought a peaceful end to the
monarchy. However, many challenges remain. The
challenges from the Army chief to control and
oversight by an elected Government, and the
countermanding of a Cabinet order by the President,
have exposed ambiguities in the Interim Constitution
and deepened mistrust among the parties, and they
have also empowered actors who are expected to
remain above politics. The development of multiple
power centres represents a real risk to the peace
process.

In announcing his resignation, the Prime Minister
pledged to continue to fulfil his party's peace process
commitments while in opposition. Many such
commitments remain to be fulfilled - above all, the
drafting of a Constitution and the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel. The Maoist
army has only recently come under the authority of the
State through the Special Committee - formed, in
accordance with article 146 of the Interim Constitution,
to supervise, integrate and rehabilitate Maoist army
combatants - which held its first meeting on
16 January. A Technical Committee, established on
27 March, has spent its first three weeks in dedicated
activity, undertaking consultations, including visits to
Maoist army cantonment sites, and, after a short hiatus,
has now quietly resumed meeting. Senior Maoist army
personnel challenged the Technical Committee to act
independently of party political affiliation, which the
Committee has pledged to do.

Under the peace process agreement of 25 June
2008, the Special Committee was to reach and
implement decisions on integration and rehabilitation
within six months. However, the Army chief has taken
a restrictive stance on the integration into the Nepal
Army of former Maoist army personnel. Even before
the current political developments, both the Special
Committee and the Technical Committee said that they
were unlikely to be able meet that deadline. The
question is whether the situation of the Maoist army
can be satisfactorily resolved if the Maoists remain
outside the Government.

As the Council is aware, UNMIN now has a very
substantially reduced presence in Nepal, with 275
personnel, including 73 arms monitors. UNMIN's
priority is to encourage full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and, to that end, to
conduct its monitoring responsibilities, including the
management of the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee, the dispute-resolution mechanism that
brings together senior officers of the Nepal Army and
the Maoist army. Since late March, UNMIN has led
discussions with the Ministry of Peace and
Reconstruction on the discharge of disqualified Maoist
army personnel, including minors. Together with the
United Nations Development Programme and UNICEF,
we seek a successful discharge and reintegration
exercise that meets international standards, with
adequate access by independent monitors and genuine
removal of the disqualified from military supervision.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Nepal is mandated
to monitor the human rights situation, advise the
Government on human rights matters and provide
technical cooperation to strengthen national human
rights institutions. That mandate will expire on 9 June,
five weeks from today. Its extension, for which Nepal's
main political parties have expressed support, should
not become a victim of the present fluid situation.

Unfulfilled commitments are the Achilles heel of
the peace process, and they threaten the peace
dividends that the people of Nepal expect and so richly
deserve. Last year's elections marked a strong
beginning towards fulfilling the commitment to greater
political inclusiveness. The Government's subsequent
dialogue with agitating ethnic and indigenous groups
has remained fairly perfunctory, with weak follow-
through. Security in the Tarai remains a matter of
serious concern, with many active armed groups and
general impunity for those engaged in violence. There
is a risk that the latest political developments will
divert the already limited attention being paid to these
issues.
09-32451

In the present situation, there is a serious deficit
of trust among the principal political actors. Since
January, issues relating to the Agreement on
Monitoring of the Management of Arms and Armies
and decisions by the Defence Ministry over the army
have been brought to the Supreme Court, as has now
the President's decision to countermand the Cabinet
decision on the Army chief. This frequent recourse to
the Court is a manifestation of weak political
agreement and an absence of other effective
mechanisms. A high-level, multiparty monitoring
mechanism was envisaged in the peace agreements. It
is still needed and should be formed.

The peace process that Nepal has driven forward
since 2005 has been remarkable, and the events of
2008 were of historic magnitude. The parties should
urgently take steps to rebuild trust and work together in
the spirit of compromise and consensus that is needed
to protect these achievements and to ensure further
progress in the coming weeks and months. The next
key steps - addressing the future of the Maoist army
personnel and drafting the new constitution - will be
extremely difficult to achieve without a greater degree
of political cooperation and a common vision. An
inclusive, concerted and well managed consultative
process is vital to ensuring successful and timely
outcomes for both issues.

