Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
want to begin by expressing my high admiration for
Bernard Kouchner and for the extraordinary service he
has performed in Kosovo for the United Nations and
for the world over the last year. I hope you manage to
stay forever, Bernard, because nobody could do better
than you. But I know you do not intend to stay forever,
and I think that it is essential that you give us as much
time as you can, as much time as your personal
circumstances permit and that you see us through this
extraordinarily important election. You have the full
support of the United States. Again, I commend the
Secretary-General for his extremely wise decision in
giving this assignment to Dr. Kouchner.

I had prepared a long speech, but I am not going
to give it for two reasons. First of all, there are 12
speakers after me. Secondly, I would only repeat what
you have just heard. I agree with everything that Dr.
Kouchner has said, and we support everything he is
trying to do. I do, however, have a very serious
problem with the presence in this room today only of
one side to the party. I must say that it is simply a
terrible mistake to leave the impression that we are
only on one side. I do not dispute the fact that Serbs
have been extremely badly treated and have been
driven out of the area. Repeatedly, my Government has
condemned these actions. NATO troops are taking
great risks with their own lives to protect Serbs in such
areas as Mitrovica and elsewhere - and they will
continue to do so. But this is a one-sided approach to
the problem.

Four thousand Albanians, as Bernard Kouchner
mentioned, are missing, either dead or detained. This is
a constant provocation, and the Serb authorities in
Belgrade have simply failed to address it. If any
impression is left in this room today that this Chamber
accepts only one version of an issue on which every
single detail is disputed, we will undermine Dr.
Kouchner's mission. I do not believe that this is the
way to approach our responsibility on the first
anniversary of this historic resolution. Since the
Albanians were invited but were unable to attend -
and will attend in the future - I would ask you, Mr.
President, to make clear to the world today that they
will get equal treatment when they come and that the
presence in this room of only one of the two main
ethnic groups does not in any way, shape or form
presage a change in policy or an acceptance of
statements that are highly contentious.

I have also met with the Serb delegation today, as
I have on all of my trips to Kosovo, going back over
more than two years. That is an appropriate thing for
all of us to do. But I stress again that we do not wish to
leave a false impression. Only one of the two major
parties to the process is here in this room, and I feel
that this was unfortunate; it is nobody's fault; it just
happened. I want the world to understand this point, so
that no one misunderstands who is and who is not in
this room. On every other point, I am in 100 per cent
agreement with my friend, Bernard Kouchner, and with
what he is trying to do. I believe that the elections are
historically important, and I am delighted to say, Mr.
Secretary-General, that since we last met on this
subject the United States Congress has unblocked the
funds for Kosovo. Incidentally, last night the Senate
unblocked the funds on East Timor, as well as Sierra
Leone. Thus, we are making substantial progress.
There are still blocks in the House of Representatives,
and the Congo is still blocked for reasons we have
discussed. This means that a very substantial amount of
funds is now flowing from the United States to the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
across the board. I will submit to you, Mr. Secretary-
General and President Levitte, exact figures later in the
day for you to distribute to the Security Council.

Again, cher Bernard, welcome back to New York.
Go back to Kosovo with our best wishes for your
continued success.

