Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (Spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan, and Mr. Festus Mogae, Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, for their
briefings, which have given us a very complete picture
of the latest events in South Sudan.

The civilian population is suffering the terrible
consequences of the prolonged crisis in South Sudan,
whose own politicians are chiefly responsible for the
situation. We should never lose sight of the horrendous
suffering that the South Sudanese have had to undergo
for far too long. The principal cause of the country's
crisis is the fact that its political leaders have put their
personal ambitions for power above the needs of their
people. To date, 4 million civilians have been driven
from their homes, 1.9 million of them internally
displaced and more than 2 million as refugees, while
6 million - half the population - are facing high
levels of food insecurity, including 1.7 million who are
on the brink of starvation.

What is most alarming is that the situation seems
only to be getting worse. The clashes between groups
in various parts of the country continue, while there
has been no tangible progress on the implementation
of the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. As if that were
not enough, humanitarian workers, who in many cases
are the only lifeline for the people most in need of help,
are operating in an increasingly hostile environment,
with limited access to those in need and under direct
attack by all the parties to the conflict.

Given this difficult situation, Uruguay urges all
parties to fulfil their promise to end the hostilities
immediately and commit in good faith to a dialogue
process on implementing the peace agreement. We
should point out that President Kiir has launched a
national dialogue process and, most recently, announced
a unilateral ceasefire in May. In addition, we urge
the Government of South Sudan to restore political
freedoms which are essential to peace, ensure respect
for human rights and hold the perpetrators of human
rights violations accountable. It will also be crucial to
ensure a secure and respectful environment that will
enable humanitarian staff to carry out the enormous,
difficult and urgent task of assisting those who are most
in need.

Despite the complexity and difficulty of the
situation in South Sudan, the international community
is still working as hard as it can to revitalize the peace
process. For example, in September 2016 the Council
visited the country, and issued a presidential statement
in March (S/PRST/2017/4). And we are also grateful for
the efforts of the United Nations, the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, among other stakeholders. In our view,
and as Mr. Mogae has repeatedly stated, all the parties
seeking a solution to the conflict must speak with one
voice, while sending a firm and unequivocal message
to the groups involved in the conflict. In that regard,
we commend the coordination by the United Nations,
the African Union and IGAD of a number of events that
took place on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly. We also look forward to IGAD's
convening of the high-level revitalization forum on
the August 2015 peace agreement, which will be a
good opportunity to revitalize the political process in
South Sudan and lay the groundwork for the holding of
democratic elections at the end of the transition period.

Finally, we would like to highlight the tireless
efforts of Mr. Shearer and the staff of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan in fulfilling their
appointed tasks. We also look forward to seeing the
full and speedy deployment of the Regional Protection
Force, which will no doubt help to increase stability in
the country.

