Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): I have the honour of
conveying to you, Sir, the sincere appreciation of the
Nigerian Foreign Minister, Ambassador Olu Adeniji,
for the invitation extended to him to participate in this
open debate on children and armed conflict.
Ambassador Adeniji could not make the trip to New
York, but has asked me to convey his best wishes for a
fruitful outcome.

We are indeed grateful to the Republic of Benin
for initiating this debate, which is both timely and
necessary, as it will afford us an opportunity to focus
attention on the urgent steps needed to prevent children
from being used as instruments of war.

We thank the Secretary-General for his in-depth
report and the Under-Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his
continuing efforts to articulate a workable proposal for
a monitoring, reporting and compliance mechanism for
children and armed conflict. His insightful statement to
the Council this morning set an appropriate tone for
addressing the challenges before the international
community on that important subject.

In spite of international conventions and
protocols that guarantee the safety and protection of
children in armed conflict, as well as those that
guarantee the rights of the child, innocent children are
daily being dragged into the quagmire of armed
conflict, with its terrible consequences.

Children are paying heavy tolls for causes they
know nothing about and are made pawns in dangerous
struggles for political power and control of resources
with no regard for their well-being. Although children
do not start wars, they are most vulnerable to its deadly
effects. They suffer loss of their childhood and become
objects of adult manipulation and exploitation.
Children are, in most cases of armed conflict, the first
victims and the ones most likely to suffer loss of loved
ones, abduction, injury, death or sexual exploitation -
girls in particular. Furthermore, children are made
orphans and, at an early and unprepared age, assume
responsibility as heads of families.

Nigeria believes that a fundamental requirement
for ending the involvement of children, as well as
preventing them from being exploited in situations of
armed conflict, is the prevention of conflict. Conflicts
do not occur in a vacuum, but are oftentimes the
product of an inability to redress, by dialogue and other
means, real or perceived injustices, including
economic, social and political exclusion, and
marginalization or discrimination based on racial,
ethnic, religious or political affiliations.

It is important therefore to identify and tackle
head on the root causes of conflict and to deny its
perpetrators access to the instruments of war, such as
small arms and light weapons, which those children are
forced to carry. In that connection, my delegation
reiterates its conviction that conflict prevention and
resolution strategies must be sincere and
comprehensive. They must include a willingness and a
capability to take bold and concrete political actions
that will lead to the removal of real or perceived
injustices.

Nigeria has closely coordinated efforts with like-
minded States to meet the challenges posed by
conflicts in the West African subregion, in particular,
and Africa in general. I wish to mention in that regard
significant initiatives among States members of the
Economic Community of West African States, which
are already yielding positive results. I should also refer
to the efforts towards peace and accommodation in
Darfur that resulted in the Abuja agreement.

President Obasanjo has made conflict resolution
in Africa one of the cardinal foreign policy objectives
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, mindful of the fact
that Africa can neither achieve the Millennium
Development Goals nor attain the lofty social
development targets set by the World Summit for
Social Development in Copenhagen 10 years ago -
and renewed only last week at the forty-third session of
the Commission for Social Development - unless
there is peace, stability and security in our continent.
There is a need for increased international cooperation
in support of those efforts. There is also a need to
strengthen coordination with the African Union in
resolving the diverse conflicts in Africa. Above all, we
also call on the international community to provide
assistance to those countries emerging from conflict to
enable them to rebuild their shattered economies and
infrastructure.

It is equally essential that the efforts of the
international community be geared towards
strengthening the rule of law at the international,
regional and national levels, and, within that context,
towards the protection of children through appropriate
mechanisms for monitoring, reporting and enforcing
compliance, including through constitutional,
legislative, judicial and multisectoral means.

We must put children first - before, during and
after conflict. A stop must be put to the recruitment of
child soldiers. It is also important to strengthen the
protective environment by encouraging countries to
ratify and apply treaties that aim to protect children
from the physical and emotional trauma of war. On its
part, Nigeria has not only ratified and fully
incorporated the Convention on the Rights of the Child
into its domestic legislation, but it has also
strengthened the domestic environment by enacting, in
2003, the Child Rights Act as well as the Trafficking in
Persons Prohibition Law Enforcement and
Administration Act. Those laws should protect our
children and promote their rights.

Urgent action should be taken to totally eradicate,
in all its forms and manifestations, the culture of
impunity, and, as a follow-up, to bring to justice
perpetrators of violence against children, including
those who abduct, recruit or conscript children into
armed forces.

It is also necessary to improve the monitoring and
reporting of child rights violations and to pay greater
attention to demobilization and reintegration
programmes, including those aimed particularly at girls
seriously affected by conflict, and engaging in special
and accelerated educational programmes, such as free
and compulsory education for child victims of war.
There should be continued efforts made to mainstream
child protection into United Nations regional and
national peacekeeping operations.

My delegation is confident that, working together
in an open and transparent manner, in a true spirit of
cooperation, with all stakeholders - including the
United Nations, regional organizations, State and non-
State actors - we can reduce the need for recourse to
conflict and thus prevent children from being made
instruments and victims of armed conflict. Thus we
will have succeeded in creating a world that is truly fit
for children.

