The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Belgium.

Maintaining international peace and security has
been one of the key objectives of the United Nations
since its establishment. Thus, in 1945, the authors of
the Charter decided to confer the main responsibility
for that item to the Security Council, as the Charter
says in Article 24, "in order to ensure prompt and
effective action" on the part of the Organization. As a
result, the credibility of the Security Council is based
largely on that very ability to act in a prompt and
effective manner.

Obviously, that capacity also depends, as others
have emphasized before me, on the political will of its
members. Article 24 of the Charter contains a second
idea that is just as important. In meeting its
responsibilities, the Council acts on behalf of all
Members of the Organization. That provision is
inextricably linked to two other important elements in
any discussion on the Council's working methods: on
the one hand, transparency, and on the other hand,
interaction with Member States that are not members
of the Council, in particular with those who are directly
affected by specific situations. Some 60 years after the
establishment of the United Nations, that transparency
and need for access have become even more essential.
The right balance between effectiveness, transparency
and access remains a major challenge, even if those
three principles are not, in my delegation's opinion,
contradictory, but rather complementary.

So how do we meet that challenge? - first of all,
through a pragmatic approach. The progress made
since 1994, the year that the Council for the first time
discussed its methods of work in a public meeting,
demonstrates that the Council is adapting its working
methods through a pragmatic and gradual approach.
The presidential note in document S/2006/507, the so-
called Japanese note adopted in July 2006, is the best
evidence of that. It called on Council members to take
measures that were sometimes not very spectacular in
themselves but were important overall. The concept
paper distributed by my delegation on 4 August
provides a summary of those measures, so I shall not
go back over that here.

Secondly, above all, it is up to the members
themselves to be responsible for improving their way
of working. The presidency plays an important role in
that area. As President of the Council in June 2007 and
August 2008, Belgium, like other Council members,
implemented the recommendations of note S/2006/507
in a consistent way, for example by inviting
neighbouring States or countries with a particular
contribution to make to participate in public meetings,
or by ensuring that non-members that were directly
interested would be able to take the floor before
Council members. Obviously, not only the President of
the Council plays a key role, but also the chairs of the
subsidiary bodies, namely, by ensuring fair procedures,
also have a particular responsibility, to which a number
of speakers before me have already referred. All those
measures have a direct impact on non-members of the
Council. We hope that from now on they will benefit
from the improvements in our working methods.

Thirdly, as well as safeguarding those gains, it is
important to consider new measures to be taken. If
such measures - concrete, constructive and achievable
in the short term - emerge from this debate, my
delegation would consider today's debate a success.

For my part, I would like to mention three such
items. First, the deliberations of Council members
would, no doubt, be enriched if there were more
interaction with Member States that are associated with
a conflict. While it is true that the provisional rules of
the Council do not explicitly rule it out, it is still not
the practice to invite non-members of the Council to
private consultations. So, why not make better use of
the existing mechanism of private meetings to hear the
Viewpoints of Member States, in the question-and-
answer format, before Council consultations per se are
held?

Secondly, the prospects of the Peacebuilding
Commission are such that they add significant value. It
has become more and more customary to invite the
President of the Commission or chair of the country-
specific configuration to participate in Council
deliberations, as was the case yesterday when we
discussed Burundi. That practice, which was not yet
called for in the note of 2006, should, of course, be
followed up on.
Finally, thirdly, my delegation attaches great
importance to the Council having more in-depth
interaction with regional and subregional
organizations, which, as we know, play an important
role in mediation efforts and in peacekeeping
operations.
This year, we have already seen several examples
of close interaction between the Council and the
African Union. As a member of the European Union,
my delegation would, of course, like to advocate better
interaction with the European Union.

My delegation believes that the participation of
the current presidency of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe last week was, itself, also
very useful. In that context, it might be useful to do
more in-depth thinking on a better implementation of
paragraph 30 of the note of 2006.

I have given you just a few preliminary ideas.
Those ideas, as well as others that are emerging or will
emerge from this debate, could be closely considered
in the days and weeks ahead, for example within the
Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, which is the right
place for such discussions. In the next few weeks, my
delegation is ready to work with other delegations, so
that together we shall be able to make tangible progress
towards our common objective, which is to have a
Security Council that is more transparent, interactive
and effective, and, as a result, more capable of acting
in conformity with Article 24 of the Charter.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I should like to remind all speakers that we have
asked them to limit the length of their statements to a
maximum of five minutes, so that the Council will be
able to conduct its deliberations with all the desired
effectiveness. Those delegations who have a long
statement to make are asked to present a condensed
version in the Chamber, it being understood that the
full version can be issued in print.

I now give the floor to the next speaker on my
list, the representative of Japan.

