Mr. Dehghani (Islamic State of Iran): Let me begin
by expressing my appreciation to the presidency of
Chad for convening this debate on the theme "Threats
to international peace and security: terrorism and
cross-border crime". I also thank the Secretariat and
the observer of the African Union for their briefings.

The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, including
State terrorism. We firmly believe that resort to
indiscriminate violence and acts of terrorism, whether
by terrorist groups or by State military forces, as well
as the killing and injuring of civilians and generating
terror and intimidation among the public, constitute
criminal acts that cannot be justified in any way. My
country has long been a target of terrorism, and we
are fully aware of the grave consequences of acts of
terrorism for the victims, their families and targeted
societies at large.

Terrorism has long adversely affected the daily
lives of many nations, including mine, and continues
to jeopardize the safety, security and general well-
being of increasing numbers of people around the
world. Despite all the efforts made on various fronts,
we are far from uprooting that menace. The threat of
terrorism continues to affect our societies. For decades,
a number of causes and factors has led or contributed to
terrorism under special circumstances. While nothing
can justify terrorist acts against innocent people,
national Governments and the international community
should do their utmost to uproot causes that can create
breeding grounds for terrorists.

Moreover, terrorism has unfortunately occasionally
been manipulated and transformed into a tool used
for political leverage against others. Some have not
hesitated to work with terrorists whenever they see it
benefit their narrowly defined geopolitical interests.
We must indeed reject the functional approach to
terrorism. While it is often repeated that all forms of
terrorism must be condemned by all States, in fact
some States are inconsistent in their approach towards
terrorism. Those States accord preferential treatment
to those terrorist groups that are aligned with their
short-sighted political interests. While we reiterate the
importance and need of concluding a comprehensive
legal instrument to combat international terrorism, the
international community must strengthen its efforts
to develop such a comprehensive instrument, which
has been under consideration for several years. In
that context, we believe that a consensual definition
of terrorism will strengthen international cooperation
against terrorism and end ambiguities concerning that
term that are subject to abuse.

Today, the violent extremism largely embodied
by the Takfiri groups, enshrined in their dangerous
ideologies and manifested in their abhorrent brutality
and shocking savagery is chief among the threats to
peace and security in the Middle East and beyond. We
utterly reject stereotypes that attach the name of Islam
to bloody and violent acts committed by such despicable
groups as Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Jabhat al-Nusra, the Taliban, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and the like. Those groups are nothing more
than terrorist organizations that have emerged from
chaos and the assistance rendered to them over the
past decade. They have now found breeding grounds,
fabricated a new false cause and turned into a monster
that is even threatening their creators.

Unfortunately, terrorism in our region has also
developed into an abhorrent cross-border phenomenon.
Therefore we need the engagement of all regional States
and international actors to deny extremists access to
funds, recruits and other resources they use to spread
terror across the region and beyond. That should include
resolute actions to end moral and financial support for
extremists. The nexus created between terrorists and
drug traffickers is also of great importance in the fight
against terrorism.

During the past few years, my Government has done
everything in its power to fight the extremist groups in
the region. As a first step, it has secured its border to
prevent any movement to or from the areas controlled
by those groups. In many cases, Iranian officials have
stopped and apprehended individuals who have tried
to use Iranian territory to cross over or send material
assistance to terrorists. We continue our fight against
terrorism with resolution and determination. All
members of the international community have the same
responsibility to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

In our fight against terrorism, we cannot and should
not ignore the need to fight State terrorism. The Israeli
regime is one such State that has an unparalleled,
perverse record of employing terrorism as a means
to further its aims. Israel was founded on the basis of
activities conducted by such terrorist organizations as
Haganah, the Irgun, the Stern Gang and similar groups
that aimed at expelling the indigenous people from the
land they sought to occupy.

Since then, that regime has never stopped employing
terrorism to terrify the inhabitants of the lands it
occupies and the peoples ofthe region. The assassination
of innocent individuals has been its favoured tool for
terrorizing peoples through all phases of its existence.
The continued occupation of other peoples' lands by
that regime and its periodic aggressions to support it
lies at the heart of the current situation in the region.
There should be no doubt that such Israeli policies are
the most important factor creating a space for such
terrorists groups as ISIS, Al-Qaida and Jabhat al-Nusra
in the region.

Finally, let me conclude by reiterating that
Hizbullah is part and parcel of Lebanese political life.
It is a political party by itself, and is represented in the
Lebanese Parliament and Cabinet. Malignant rhetoric
has not tarnished and never will tarnish its image
and its contribution to the cause of the people in our
region, namely, to resist the Israeli regime's continued
aggression.

