Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I welcome our
colleagues from Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia.

I should like to thank Council members for their
unanimous support for resolution 2444 (2018). It lifts
sanctions on Eritrea. It sets out the Council's continued
support for efforts to improve peace and security
in Somalia.

The agreement to lift sanctions on Eritrea
recognizes the improvements in regional peace and
security and the positive steps Eritrea has taken to meet
the demands of the Security Council, and it is right
that in the light of such developments we reconsider
the measures. It is also right that we continue to urge
dialogue between Eritrea and Djibouti on the Djiboutian
combatants missing in action and on the resolution of
their border dispute. We look forward to continued
efforts to normalize relations between both countries
and we stand ready to assist.

Turning to Somalia, we condemn in the strongest
terms the horrific attacks in Mogadishu on Friday. It is
clear that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat
to the peace and stability of Somalia and the region.
This resolution underlines our full support for the
Somali authorities in their efforts to combat this threat.
In this context, we welcome the progress made to date
on security reform. Further progress is now essential
to implementing the national security architecture and
make full use of integrated regional Somali forces to
deliver a successful transition to Somali-led security.
Coordinated international engagement will remain key.
We also look forward to further cooperation between
the Somali authorities and the reconstituted Panel of
Experts on the implementation of the arms embargo.

I think that the countries concerned and the region
deserve to be congratulated on the important steps
forward that they have taken, which have made this
resolution possible today. Not only is it a very important
step for the countries of the region, but I think it
also sends a helpful wider signal to the international
community that if the right steps are taken, sanctions
can be lifted. The United Kingdom has the pleasure
to continue to offer its full support to the Somali
authorities, the Djiboutian and Eritrean authorities, the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and the Panel
ofExperts in their efforts to support peace and stability.

