We warmly welcome the initiative of the Niger, as President of the Security Council, to organize this open debate of the Council on an important and topical issue. This timely initiative is being launched by the country where the birth certificate of the francophone movement was signed 50 years ago. Moreover, the former President of the Niger, Hamani Diori, is one of the founding fathers of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). In that context, we also welcome the organization by Tunisia of the next OIF summit, which will undoubtedly contribute to strengthening francophone action throughout the world. There is a long tradition of productive and multidimensional cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF, particularly with regard to early warning, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction. It is essential for all of us to continue to strengthen that cooperation. Romania is the flagship State of the OIF in central and eastern Europe and was among the countries that initiated and promoted resolution 1631 (2005), on cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations. Given that the OIF is an organization with a universal vocation, it is all the more important that cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF becomes an integral part of our efforts to consolidate peace, security and development. We greatly appreciate the participation of the Secretary-General of the OIF in our meeting. Since taking up her new position less than two years ago, Ms. Mushikiwabo has given a strong impetus and new energy to the OIF. Under her leadership, the OIF is becoming more pragmatic, more committed to finding answers to the major global policy issues and more effective. For example, today, she led the work of the Groupe de reflexion sur les orientations et la gouvernance de la Francophonie, which is tasked with proposing a new vision, adapted to the current context, on the objectives and activity of the OIF. In recent years, especially after the adoption, in 2000, of the Bamako Declaration, which established the benchmarks for the organization's political action, the OIF has asserted itself on the international political scene. We all need systematic and close cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF. Most of the peacekeeping missions under the auspices of the United Nations are deployed in the francophone space. At the same time, the francophone space has demonstrated that it has the will, capacity and instruments to effectively support United Nations action in favour of peace and development. With regard to peacekeeping, Romania is strongly committed to qualitative and quantitative progress in French-speaking theatres of operation. Concretely, a significant part of the Romanian uniformed personnel is currently deployed in Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic. The training of future peacekeeping personnel in the field is very important for the success of the missions. In our view, the effective communication of uniformed personnel in the language of the local population is essential, and it contributes to fulfilling fundamental operational tasks. Communicating in French with local actors and civilians promotes increased confidence in the personnel of United Nations missions. A good illustration of the pragmatic cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF is the International Superior Course of the Mihai Viteazul Gendarmerie School of Applications, in Bucharest. For more than 10 years, the course, which is accredited by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and supported by France and the OIF, has been training high-level officers from about 40 countries for United Nations peace missions in French-speaking areas. It is a successful project, which is developing organically and contributes to the achievement of our objectives. In addition, since 2014, the school has been part of the Francophone Expertise and Training Network for Peace Operations of the International Organization of la Francophonie. There are many other areas where the United Nations and the OIF can cooperate more closely, such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the fight against climate change and youth and gender equality. In each of those areas, the OIF has great projects that are well-aligned with our common objectives within the United Nations. We are convinced that this is the right time to relaunch successful cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF in the service of peace, security and development, for a strong and active multilateralism. Robust and effective multilateralism can exist only through respect for multilingualism and through the wise use of the competitive advantages of each organization with universal or regional objectives.
