Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's meeting on
transnational threats. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
commitment to this important issue, and Mr. Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office for
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his efforts and
devoted leadership, which play a central role in
combating illicit drug trafficking and transnational
crime.

Drugs and crime were among the eight priorities
that the United Nations identified in the Secretary-
General's strategic framework for 2010-2011. Indeed,
transnational crime and drug trafficking groups and
networks have never had such influence and global
reach. The nexus between their illicit activities is
increasingly alarming. Those activities are unavoidably
associated with violence and corruption and, in many
cases, are used to finance terrorist groups and acts of
terrorism. Thus, transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking have a long-term negative impact on
peace, security and economic development and should
clearly be fought in a synchronized manner on multiple
fronts.

Transnational crime, drug trafficking and
terrorism profit from the weak capacity of States to
maintain law. They fuel and prolong existing conflicts
and pose threats to peacebuilding efforts in
post-conflict States. In a globalized society,
transnational crime groups and networks are better
equipped with new information and communication
technologies and are becoming more diversified;
hence, the need for a constantly evolving response.

Allow me to highlight the following elements. On
drugs, despite the statistics from the UNODC showing
decreases in the global production of cocaine and
heroin, efforts to fight the drug scourge should be
intensified. That fight requires a comprehensive
international approach based on a strong sense of
shared responsibility. Special attention should be
devoted to efficient modes of collaboration among
countries of origin, transit and destination. States need
to build capacity, share information, provide mutual
legal assistance and carry out joint operations. Crop
control strategies should also include alternative
development and, where appropriate, preventive
alternative development programmes, eradication and
law-enforcement measures. In that regard, we welcome
the Political Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at
the fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, and we commend its recognition of the need for
cooperation between developed and developing
countries.

Due to advances in today's technologies,
transnational organized crime is increasingly operating
through flexible networks rather than rigid structures.
That form of organization provides criminals with
diversity, low visibility and longevity. We believe that
combating organized crime requires comprehensive
efforts in building State capacity in the area of the rule
of law.

Criminals are motivated, inter aIia, by financial
gain. We therefore attach importance to weakening
organized crime by eliminating its ability to launder
money. In that regard, we encourage international and
regional organizations to join their efforts to establish a
robust capacity-building mechanism for rule of law
assistance.

On terrorism, Lebanon condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. We stress the necessity to
criminalize all terrorist practices and forms of support
for them, including financing and instigation. We
consider terrorism to be a global phenomenon that is
not related to any race, religion, colour or country. The
ability to create networks with global reach and
sophisticated capacity provides terrorists with a new
dynamic. There is therefore an imperative need to
address root causes and to strengthen responsible
States, the rule of law and fundamental human rights as
part of a global strategy to fight terrorism.

On international cooperation, the transnational
nature of crime and drug trafficking means that no
country can face them alone. In that regard, my
delegation commends the role played by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Narcotics Control Board, Interpol, the World Health
Organization and other relevant United Nations organs
and agencies in assisting Member States in the fight
against drug trafficking and transnational crime. We
encourage them to continue and strengthen their
cooperation with relevant regional and subregional
organizations. We particularly praise UNODC for
working on a tight budget funded mainly by voluntary
donations, and express our full support for that
important organization. We support the
recommendation that the United Nations consider
mainstreaming drug trafficking and transnational crime
into its wider conflict-prevention, assessment and
peacebuilding activities.

The collective response to organized crime also
depends on consolidating and strengthening the
international treaty framework. National, regional and
international actions and strategies to combat drug
trafficking and organized crime need to be not only
comprehensive but also well coordinated. No less
important is the need to work with civil society
stakeholders.

