Archbishop Auza: I would like to thank the French
presidency for convening today's debate on combating
the financing of terrorism.

At the outset, let me pay homage to the memory of
all victims of terrorism, in particular the victims of the
recent attacks on two mosques in Christchurch, New
Zealand - brothers and sisters of ours who died due to
a senseless act of violence.
Regrettably, in today's world the scourge of
terrorism has become almost commonplace. Our
peoples live under constant fear of violent acts motivated
by extremist ideology. Terrorists cause indiscriminate
harm, often claiming as their victims the most
vulnerable members of the human family. They target
peacekeepers and peacemakers and humanitarian and
development actors. They strike hotels, concert venues,
public squares and places of worship.

Terrorists must be denied access to the means
that facilitate their criminal activities. Indeed, no
one should be permitted to finance or to provide
arms and ammunition to terrorists. Those who abet
violent extremism or who shelter members of terrorist
groups must be held accountable before a court of law.
Similarly, all violations of international humanitarian
law and crimes against humanity committed by terror
groups must be vigorously pursued. As Pope Francis
and the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, Sheikh Ahmad
Al-Tayyeb, jointly declared:

"This is why it is so necessary to stop supporting
terrorist movements fuelled by financing, the
provision of weapons and strategy, and by attempts
to justify these movements even using the media.
All these must be regarded as international crimes
that threaten security and world peace. Such
terrorism must be condemned in all its forms
and expressions."

To that end, all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force, should be carefully
implemented to follow the money and therefore prevent
the profits of money-laundering, human trafficking, the
illicit sale and trafficking in antiquities and the sale of
weapons and ammunition from being used for terrorist
purposes. One must also think ofthe scores of girls and
women used and abused by terrorist groups to spread
their dangerous ideologies.

To effectively prevent the financing of terrorism,
it is therefore indispensable to break its link with
transnational organized crime, which both profits from
it and favours its activities. Breaking those criminal
networks and bringing criminals to justice would of
course require regional and international cooperation.
Vital to combating international organized crime and
terrorism is the disruption of their cybercapabilities,
which they use to recruit new members and raise funds.

When resources are exploited for evil purposes,
they are diverted from legitimate goals. Young people
are deprived of education and learning and the elderly
are deprived of care and medicines. People as a whole
are deprived of their right to develop in peace and
safety. To prevent terrorism, that cycle of misery must
also be broken. Integral human development is key to
preventing terrorism in the long term.

At the same time, it is indispensable to ensure that
measures to prevent and counter terrorism scrupulously
respect human rights, the rule of law and international
humanitarian law. In particular, there should be no
conflict between preventing the financing of terrorism
and providing humanitarian assistance.

On the contrary, legitimate humanitarian activities
by charitable organizations, including by faith-
inspired organizations, contribute positively to the
prevention of terrorism. The Council must therefore
ensure that counter-terrorism measures do not limit
or inhibit the capacity of non-governmental and
charitable organizations to provide humanitarian aid
to vulnerable groups or persons, such as emergency
relief for refugees and displaced persons and medical
services for the wounded.

The Holy See unequivocally condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, as no ideological,
political, philosophical, racial, ethnic or religious
reasons can justify or excuse terrorist acts. It is
indispensable that effective measures be adopted
to prevent terrorism in all its forms, including by
draining and cutting off its financial resources. It is my
delegation's ardent hope that today's debate will be an
added catalyst for the international community to offer
a coordinated response to such a serious threat to peace
and security.

