Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2414 (2018). I
would like to thank the United States penholder for
its efforts on the text. The resolution that we have just
adopted sets out a horizon. It should enable us jointly to
prevent any risk of escalation, to support the essential
work of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and to encourage a
constructive momentum for the political process.

Ten days ago, with a tense situation on the ground,
we met in consultations with Special Representative
Colin Stewart. He encouraged us to send a clear
message to prevent any risk of escalation. The adoption
of the resolution responds to that call by helping the
situation on the ground to return to normal so that real
progress can be made in the political process.

I would like to reiterate our full support
for MINURSO, which is doing outstanding and
indispensable work on the ground in monitoring
respect for the ceasefire and in having ensured the
stability of the area for years. The role of the force is
essential. Its means must be preserved. In that regard,
the renewal for only six months of the Mission's
mandate, which seeks to keep the Security Council
mobilized in support of the political process, must
be an exception. We should ensure that that does not
affect the management and planning of its resources.
Maintaining an annual framework ensures the stability
of peacekeeping operations.
Finally, it is particularly important that the
members of the Council can come together. As we have
seen in recent years, we need a constructive dynamic
to support a new impetus in the political process. That
dynamic, which has been ongoing for several months,
is essential. I would therefore like to reiterate our full
support for the political process under the auspices
of the Secretary-General and the facilitation of his
Personal Envoy, Mr. Horst Kohler, in order to find a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
to the question of Western Sahara.

We hope that the mandate renewal will encourage
the strengthening of that dynamic and serious and
credible efforts to advance the process in accordance
with the parameters set by the Security Council. The
dialogue initiated in recent months thanks to meetings
organized by the Personal Envoy provides opportunities
in that regard. We hope that it will succeed.

