The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.
I will begin by once again thanking the Under-
Secretary-General and the Secretariat for their very
comprehensive and serious briefing. I would also like to
express a real debt of gratitude to the many countries that
have sponsored serious reviews and assessments of
sanctions work in the month preceding this meeting. I
would also, if I could, take the opportunity to acknowledge
with us in the Council chamber today a number of my
colleagues from the Canadian House of Commons who are
here to be part of the United Nations investigation and
whose own work on the question of sanctions in Iraq has
been very seminal in helping to influence our thinking.

I think that as we have had discussions today it has
been quite clear that there is a consensus that sanctions are
a very potent means to promote peace. They are an
effective way to prevent or stop violence against civilians.
They are a method to curb those who systematically violate
the rights of others. They are a means to save human lives
in the face of brutality and destruction. They are, in short,
a very vital tool for this Council to protect and advance the
safety of people.

However, after a decade of unprecedented recourse
to this instrument, the record is decidedly mixed.
Successes are well known. Alas, so are the shortcomings.
Sometimes sanctions have served as an inappropriate
default in the face of an immediate crisis and in the
absence of the political will for stronger measures.

Too often they have suffered from hasty or
ambiguous design, a loose commitment to
implementation, inadequate monitoring and lax
enforcement. Most importantly, as so many have pointed
out today in their statements, the costs in human terms
are sometimes too high. While the harmful impact of
sanctions, particularly comprehensive measures, on
innocent civilians may be unintended, they are no less
real or damaging for those who feel their effects. In these
cases, sanctions can hurt, rather than help, people.

As a result, the risk is real that the legitimacy,
credibility and utility of this important tool of Security
Council action will be increasingly questioned in the eyes
of the international community, and that would be wrong.
But there is little doubt that in some instances this is
already happening.

Our meeting today is a recognition that Security
Council members, indeed the majority of Member States,
understand the need to address this fundamental
challenge: maximizing the effectiveness of sanctions
while minimizing the harm to civilians. Sanctions have
worked where the clear political will and resources
existed to make them work. This in turn depended on
applying the right sanctions with the most appropriate
mixture of punitive and deterrent measures, incentives for
compliance and the highest humanitarian concern.

In our View, there are five considerations to getting
these sanctions right. I concur with many who have
spoken today that we should use this as an opportunity to
help set some framework and reference for the work of
the group that has been established by this Council. First,
there has to be a strategy. Sanctions are likely to succeed
only if they are integrated into a broader Council strategy
of conflict prevention and resolution. This means ensuring
that all the terms of sanctions regimes not only are clear,
but are clearly linked to a process of negotiation.

Secondly, we have to look at our targets. The aim of
sanctions should be to change the behaviour of
wrongdoers, to deprive them of the wherewithal to wage
war and to brutalize the innocent and, in the process, to

 

avoid harming the very people the sanctions are aimed to
help.

In today's conflicts this means more targeted sanctions,
not only against abusive national decision-makers, but also
against terrorists, rebel movements, modern-day warlords
and other non-State actors that perpetuate or profit from
human suffering. It also means improving the use of
"smarter" sanctions against them, such as financial and
other restrictions. The effective use of arms embargoes
demands particular attention by this Council. More
rigorously drafted texts, more closely monitored
implementation and greater Council support for other
efforts, such as the development of a convention on arms
trafficking, would go some way towards better addressing
the very destructive flow of small arms to conflicts.

Targeted sanctions should be combined creatively with
targeted incentives. Foreign assistance, concessionary loans
and credits, debt relief, technology transfers, trade benefits
and security assurances are all carrots that might
complement the stick of sanctions in directly influencing
behaviour or encouraging those most likely to support
change.

Where comprehensive sanctions exist, the need for
extreme vigilance with regard to the humanitarian impact
must be a priority. Humanitarian assessments before such
measures are imposed, along with streamlining
humanitarian exemption requests, ongoing monitoring and
flexibility are all very important.

The Iraq sanctions regime is among the most
comprehensive and complex ever imposed. The objectives
were and remain clear - to coerce the Iraqi leadership to
rid itself of weapons of mass destruction and to desist from
pursuing weapons of mass destruction programmes.
However, the unintended humanitarian impact of these
measures has been borne by Iraqi civilians, rather than by
the Baghdad regime. The utility and credibility of the
sanctions have also been damaged by the impasse in
discussions, attributable to the Iraqi leadership, over
compliance with these measures.

Resolution 1284 (1999) is an attempt to put the
Council's objectives back on track. The Council must
continue to make all further efforts to address the
humanitarian impact. To do so, the Council should consider
establishing a mechanism, such as a humanitarian college
of commissioners in parallel to the college that now works
on disarmament matters, with a limited time mandate, to
lend profile and transparency to humanitarian issues, to
regularly review the humanitarian provisions of resolution
1284 (1999) and to make concrete recommendations on
ways to improve or adjust the humanitarian programmes
as so required.

In the meantime, we all need to do our utmost to
assist the Iraqi people. In that respect, I am pleased to
announce that Canada will provide $1 million in
assistance through non-governmental channels for the
rehabilitation of schools and hospitals and to meet other
basic human needs.

A third area of concern is engagement. If sanctions
depend on the will of the international community to
implement them, then they must well reflect the will of
the international community, not just the interests of the
most powerful members. To that end, when sanctions are
imposed, a more equitable sharing of the burdens of
implementation and enforcement is important. This is
especially the case for third-party countries or regions
close to the conflict, which often suffer most but can least
afford to. When considering the creation of sanctions, the
Council needs to take their views into account, and
members concerned should be able to fully avail
themselves of Article 50. Donor- country conferences to
address the needs of particular Member States adversely
affected by sanctions may be one measure to address this.

We must also address the issue of capacity. The
efficacy of sanctions regimes is determined by the
capacity to implement them. The ability of the United
Nations Secretariat to properly and fully assist the
Council in the implementation of sanctions needs to be
significantly upgraded. Sanctions committees also need
resources to function efficiently. Many Member States
need help to develop enabling legislation. Others,
including Canada, could do more to improve theirs.
The deployment of international monitors and the
establishment of special commissions to examine
adherence to sanctions have proved very useful in the
past, a practice that should continue with greater
institutional capacity and legal authority to investigate
violations, particularly with regard to arms embargoes.

The enforcement of targeted sanctions, especially
financial or arms embargoes, is notoriously complex. But
the know-how exists, and with sufficient commitment, it
can be done.

Without doubt, all of this is expensive, in both time
and resources. Sanctions are far from being enforcement

 

on the cheap. But compared to the costs of other measures,
such as military intervention, or to the long-term costs in
terms of human suffering of inaction, the price may not be
so high. And if we are serious about making sanctions
work, it is a price we can ill afford not to pay.

Finally, we need a framework. Our acquired
experience in the use of sanctions is vast. Yet as some
observers suggest, sanctions have little, or only
controversial, standing in international law. They fall into
a grey zone between humanitarian law and the rules of
warfare.

Many of the dilemmas associated with the use of
sanctions could be addressed through the codification of
legal standards. Perhaps the time has come to consider the
development of an explicit legal regime for that purpose. In
other areas of global activity, legal regimes serve to
establish norms, and, by reflecting international consensus,
increase the prospects that everyone will adhere to them.

Clearly, this idea needs to be examined closely. It
could make sanctions more effective. Like the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction
in disarmament matters or the creation of the International
Criminal Court, it might also serve to strengthen the
growing international legal framework aimed at protecting
civilians. To that end, Canada will convene a conference of
experts to develop such a regime to govern the use of
sanctions, including standardized policy guidelines and
operational principles.

The creation of the working group is a promising step
by the Council to improve the use of sanctions. It will have
Canada's full support, both in seeking concrete ways to
enhance the effectiveness of current regimes and in guiding
future practice. I am especially encouraged to note that it
will seek outside advice in its work. To that end, I was
pleased to join with the Secretary-General this morning to
launch a Canadian-sponsored independent study on
sanctions by the International Peace Academy, authored by
two very distinguished scholars - a study that expands on
many of the points I have made today.

We need to apply the experience of the past decade of
sanctions, good and bad, to ensure that this powerful tool
is used correctly, creatively and coherently so that the result
does not diminish, but rather advances, human security.
Sanctions are economic statecraft in action. When
purposefully used and implemented to prevent or stop
aggression, violence and abuse, this is statecraft clearly in
the service of people.

I now resume my functional as President of the
Security Council.

Before calling on the next speaker, let me express
my regret at not being able to stay for the remainder of
this meeting. I shall ask Ambassador Fowler to take the
Chair.

The next speaker is the representative of Portugal. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Mr. Fowler took the Chair.

