Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia's position on
the situation in Venezuela has always been consistent,
clear and principled, and we have had the opportunity
to express it a number of times. Indonesia regrets that

we cannot achieve unity in the Security Council on how
to address the situation in Venezuela. The fact that two
separate draft resolutions (S/2019/l86 and S/2019/l90)
were submitted is clear evidence of the lack ofa sense of
unity among Council members, which is sad. After my
less than two months on the Council, I must humbly say
that this is a sad day for the international community,
particularly the people of Venezuela. It is undoubtedly
a collective failure - a failure of the 15 of us seated
around this table - because we all came here today
knowing that we would not reach the consensus needed
for the adoption of a draft resolution. I would like to
address that failure to reach a consensus resolution
as follows.

First, neither draft resolution is complete, because
neither is comprehensive enough and both have been
overly politicized. Therefore neither would be useful
or helpful in ensuring the interests of the people of
Venezuela. Neither makes a serious attempt to find a
consensus on this highly sensitive matter. The need for
flexibility in the Council and the priority of reducing
the tensions in Venezuela are of the essence. We would
have liked to see more balanced and all-embracing
drafts. We would also have valued a more thorough
consultation and preparatory process for all parties to
the discussion.

The situation in Venezuela is still worrying and
therefore demands that the Council be united and
take the right actions, comprehensively and without
exacerbating the situation. In that regard, Indonesia
has always taken the principled position that in order to
achieve a durable solution, the following points should
be taken into account.

First, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of non-interference, sovereignty
and territorial integrity should be honoured and should
always be the starting point in discussing any issues
within the framework of the United Nations. Secondly,
any solution should focus on an inclusive political
dialogue involving all parties. We urgently need to
address the large deficit of trust, and we therefore call
on all the parties to accept the good offices offered by
the Secretary-General and refrain from taking action
that could lead to a further deterioration of the already
fragile situation on the ground. Thirdly, we must
urgently address the needs of the people of Venezuela,
who are in dire need of humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations must play an important role in
delivering and organizing support for humanitarian
assistance. Fourthly, the plight of Venezuelan refugees,
which is affecting neighbouring countries, must be
urgently addressed.
Those four points should form the elements of a
good, consensus Security Council resolution. In the
absence of those elements, Indonesia refused to accept
or reject either draft resolution, because both are flawed.
If we really care about the people of Venezuela, we
should present a united front and find a joint solution.
We talk constantly about the importance of a united
front, and we do not have one.

In all honesty, I must admit that my delegation is
starting to believe that dialogue and negotiations are
a luxury here in the Council. I have been wondering
how the Council can promote dialogue for universally
acceptable solutions if its members have difficulty in
sitting together and having a dialogue to find common
ground. We beseech our colleagues to put aside their
differences. Now is not the time to be divided by
political rhetoric. Let us spare no effort in ensuring
that we will be part of the solution and not part of the
problem. Despite the deeply divergent views in the
Council, Indonesia is of the view that it is still possible
for us to arrive at a consensus in the future, as long as
the Council lives up to its mandate and responsibility.

We still have unfinished business, and that is
assisting Venezuela and its people in finding a peaceful
solution to their current challenges.

