Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me first to extend
our welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thank him for his statement. We also
wish to welcome the High Representative and Special
Representative of the European Union (EU), His
Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, and to thank him for
his briefing today, his first in his new role. I wish to
assure him of Croatia's full support in his new position
and wish him every success in fulfilling his mandate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union. Here, I wish to make some additional
comments.

In December 2008, when the Council was
discussing the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the then-High Representative, Miroslav Lajcak
(603 3rd meeting), we warned that despite some important
progress that enabled Bosnia and Herzegovina to sign the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union on 16 June 2008 - which was Bosnia
and Herzegovina's first contractual relationship with the
European Union - the situation in that country had slid
under the radar and that new focus on the part of the
international community was urgently needed.

Today we note that the report (S/2009/246)
informs us that limited progress has been achieved in
the implementation of reforms in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including those necessary for transition
from the Office of the High Representative to the
European office. We are concerned at the High
Representative's assessment of the current situation in
the country, where "anti-Dayton rhetoric challenging
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and constitutional
order has played the dominant role" in this reporting
period, "despite an effort by the three political leaders
to open a process of dialogue and compromise" (ibid., annex, enclosure, summary, firstparagraph).

It has been our long-standing position that the
impasse in Bosnia and Herzegovina can be overcome
only through a comprehensive and inclusive dialogue
that includes all three constituent peoples in the entire
territory of the country. This is closely linked with the
reforms needed to bring Bosnia and Herzegovina closer
to the path of integration with the European Union and
will also facilitate the fulfilment of the country's other
international obligations. It is particularly important
that the dialogue on constitutional reforms intensify
under the reinvigorated and more focused guidance of
the international community and with additional and
firm support assured to the High Representative.

As we can see, Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing
considerable problems. Some are challenging its very
foundations as established by the Dayton Accords,
especially territorial integrity, and can only have a
detrimental effect on its future. However, by the same
token, it should be stressed that any constructive
engagement and any intention to improve the current
situation and remedy the fundamental problems that
support the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be welcomed and encouraged.

On this point we wish to reiterate that the
country's stability depends on respect for the equal
rights of all three constituent peoples: Bosniacs,
Bosnian Serbs and Bosnian Croats. We have stated on
several occasions that there cannot be a Bosnia and
Herzegovina without the Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Their political and cultural survival is
vital for the future and survival of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as these two elements are closely
intertwined.

One needs to keep in mind the particular situation
of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the smallest
and most vulnerable group of the country's three
nations. Their voice must be considered on the basis of
equality, both ethnic and civic, as guaranteed in the
Constitution and as stemming from the history of the
country. All three peoples - Bosniacs, Bosnian Serbs
and Bosnian Croats - must feel that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is their country, and they should feel safe
and protected over its entire territory. Their
fundamental rights and freedoms, as well as their civic
and ethnic rights, should be protected throughout, as
should be their right to return to their pre-war homes.

Another important factor in the normalization of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the fight
against impunity for war crimes committed. We wish to
stress that all fugitives from the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia who are still at
large must be arrested and transferred to The Hague as
soon as possible.

Finally, Croatia has always supported the clear
and unambiguous European perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The future of all countries of Southeast
Europe belongs in the European Union, and we will do
our utmost to help our neighbours exercise this most
beneficial option for their overall development. That is
the biggest guarantee for sustainable peace, security
and prosperity for all the countries and people of
Southeast Europe.

