Mr. Motswagae (Botswana): My delegation is
deeply disturbed by the stalemate in the peace process in
Abkhazia, Georgia, which is due primarily to the
unwillingness of the Abkhaz side to make concessions on
the future status of Abkhazia within the Republic of
Georgia. The United Nations and the Russian Federation,
as facilitator, have proposed various options for the future
status of Abkhazia, but the Abkhaz side has continued to
show intransigence by its insistence on a union of two
equal States. Botswana supports the draft resolution
before us, as it correctly stresses the importance which
the international community attaches to preserving the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia.

We are outraged by the continued use of "ethnic
cleansing" by the leadership in Abkhazia in its attempt to
balkanize the territory of Georgia. A quarter of a million
refugees and displaced persons who were forcibly
removed from their homes four years ago just because
they were of a different ethnic group are still languishing
in refugee camps in Abkhazia, because the Abkhaz side
puts obstacles in the way of their repatriation by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). Furthermore, ethnically motivated
acts of murder, armed robbery, looting, extortion and
intimidation are the order of the day in the Gali region. It
is incredible, to say the least, that people who profess to
be national leaders cannot observe the most basic tenets
of good governance to guarantee the rights of the
multiethnic population in the areas under their control.

I also wish to underline the importance that my
delegation attaches to paragraph 10 of the draft resolution.
Three UNOMIG bases in the Gali sector have had to
suspend their operations because of anti-personnel
landmines which litter the roads used by the Mission
patrol teams in the sector. We find it inexcusable for
UNOMIG to be subjected to this kind of menace by those
it is trying to assist in bringing peace to their country. On
the question of human rights, it is important for the
international community to do all in its power to improve
the observance of human rights in Abkhazia. We strongly
believe that it is necessary to establish a human rights
office in Sukhumi as a matter of urgency.

Once again, the Council has decided to extend the
mandate of UNOMIG. The parties to the conflict in
Abkhazia are being given yet another chance, maybe a

 

last chance, to make peace. We urge them not to misuse
this opportunity. They should realize that the patience of
the international community is not inexhaustible. We urge
them to enter into serious dialogue with a view to achieving
a political settlement within the mandate period established
by the draft resolution. They may never again have the
benefit of an environment conducive to peaceful
negotiations, since the mandates of UNOMIG and the CIS
peace-keeping forces cannot be extended indefinitely.

