I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this important debate today. I would also like to congratulate the Niger on its presidency of the Council. Ireland looks forward to working closely with your country when we join the Council in January. Cooperation on the part of the Security Council with regional organizations is crucial to maintaining international peace and security. Ireland is proud of its role as an observer in the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). Ireland has always attached great importance to the principles of the OIF, namely, the French language; cultural diversity; peace, democracy and human rights; support for education; and cooperation for sustainable development. The OIF plays a key role in bringing together a large number of actors dedicated to promoting peace and in particular to mediating crises and conflicts in the francophone world. The OIF also plays a vital electoral assistance and monitoring role. Over the past two decades, the commendable activities carried out by the OIF have led to a considerable increase in the participation of French-speaking actors in United Nations peacekeeping operations, in terms of both advocating that its member States become involved in peacekeeping operations and facilitating the training of francophone military, civilian and police personnel, either in person or online. Promoting linguistic diversity and multilingualism in peacekeeping operations is an important objective, both in the field and at headquarters, all the more so since a significant proportion of United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed in French-speaking countries. Language skills can create greater cultural sensitivity to local contexts and can contribute to better situational awareness. Those skills can also improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping contingents. The OIF has also contributed to strengthening the capacity of francophone actors in peacekeeping operations through the creation of the Francophone Expertise and Training Network for Peace Operations. This network, which brings together francophone peace operations training centres, has increased the visibility of their actions and strengthened their ties with the United Nations and other international organizations. In Ireland, we have always attached great importance to multilateralism. Membership in the United Nations is an essential element of Irish foreign policy. Ireland has a long history of participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Irish Defence Forces provide training to other troop-contributing countries, and we are pleased that the Niger, Togo and Burkina Faso have recently been able to benefit from such training. In addition, Ireland was pleased to contribute last year to the seminar on peacekeeping operations in the francophone context in Djibouti, organized in collaboration with the OIF. We believe that the activities of the OIF have led to a substantial increase in the participation and capacity of its member States in peacekeeping operations, as well as the use of the French language, all of which represent a valuable contribution to peace and security worldwide. In conclusion, we would like to once again thank you, Sir, for organizing this important debate. The values of multilateralism and multilingualism are closely linked. We continue to take a great interest in supporting United Nations and OIF missions.
