Mr. Gala Lopez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
consider the convening of this open debate to consider
recent events in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, to be very timely. The
situation there has deteriorated even further.

The recent hostile actions of Israel, the occupying
Power, add to its long record of decades of aggression,
violations of the most basic human rights and physical
and emotional damage inflicted on the Palestinian
people. That includes, inter alia, illegal settlements,
house demolitions, arbitrary detentions, State terrorism
and targeted extrajudicial executions, torture, the
building of a separation wall in Palestinian territories
and the suffocation of the Palestinian economy, all of
which continues to increase the economic and social
hardships of the Palestinians.

Despite the appeals of the international
community, the crisis in the Palestinian territories
continues to worsen as the number of dead and injured
rises, the vast majority of them innocent civilians. In
that respect, we reaffirm that Israel must comply with
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.

Approximately one year has passed since the
General Assembly adopted its resolution ES-10/15.
However, the occupying Power has continued the
dangerous and unacceptable construction of the
separation wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, despite the
fact that it is illegal and in violation of the norms and
principles of international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The illegality of the construction of the wall
and its associated regime was clearly confirmed by the
International Court of Justice in its advisory opinion of
9 July 2004. Construction of the wall must cease
immediately, and what has already been built must be
demolished without delay.

Cuba continues to condemn the acts of
annexation, the excessive use of force that does not
discriminate between civilians and combatants, the
humanitarian crisis resulting from limitations on the
circulation of goods and persons, the inhumane
treatment of children, the generalized destruction of
property and the territorial expansion through the
construction of the separation wall.

Violence and the use of force cannot lead to the
solution that the world seeks for a conflict that would
have been settled many years ago if the Security
Council had acted with decision and transparency and
without double standards. In order to advance in
earnest towards a just solution of the Palestinian
problem, the United States should refrain from using
its paralysing and complicit vetoes when this question
is under consideration in the Council. And it should
immediately suspend financial support for military
purposes and the delivery of military equipment to
Israel, including tanks, helicopters, missiles and
aircraft, which today are used against civilians.

Cuba reaffirms its full support for the cause of
the Arab peoples, in particular the Palestinian people,
against the occupation and the aggression of Israel. We
express our deep solidarity with their resistance and
rebellion. At the same time, Cuba denounces the
suicide bomb attacks and other acts against Israeli
civilians, innocent victims in the spiral of violence
caused by their Government's policies, and we are
opposed to the manipulation of those isolated acts to
put in question the Palestinian people's exercise of
legitimate defence and to justify selective, large-scale
measures against the Palestinian people.

We reaffirm that no just and lasting peace can be
achieved in the Middle East until the Israeli occupation
is ended; the Palestinian people can exercise their
legitimate right to establish an independent State, with
its capital in East Jerusalem; all the occupied Arab
territories are returned; Israel withdraws from the Gaza
Strip, the West Bank and the Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967; the Israeli provocations in the
south of Lebanon are halted; the return of Palestinian
refugees is guaranteed; and the illegal Israeli
settlements are removed from all the occupied
territories.

