Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for
his briefing and for his presence here so soon after the
successful conference in Mogadishu. I also thank the
representative of the African Union and the Prime
Minister of Somalia forjoining us in the Council today.

1 1-49644

I will first of all refer to the humanitarian
situation in Somalia, which remains of particular
concern. Famine was declared in the Bay region last
week, bringing to six the number of regions affected by
this scourge. There are now 4 million people affected,
of whom 450,000 are at risk of imminent death. Worse
yet, the famine has almost certainly not yet peaked,
although it could do so in the coming weeks or months.
It is therefore imperative that we support focused and
joint efforts undertaken to help Somalis get through
this severe humanitarian crisis. That is why France has
allocated €30 million in emergency aid to the Horn of
Africa and dispatched 18 tons of child supplements by
air and 381 tons of food rations by ship.

I welcome the efforts of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
provide aid to the Somali people. It is a complex task
within a territory that is controlled in most areas by
Al-Shabaab. In that respect it is necessary for all actors
involved, including NGOs, the United Nations country
team and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), to coordinate among themselves as best
they can.

Secondly, the security situation in Somalia
remains critical. The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab forces
from Mogadishu has shown that things can change in
the country. The capital is now completely under the
control of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG).
AMISOM. has played an important key role, without
which Mogadishu would still be in the hands of
Al-Shabaab. It is important that today we capitalize on
that progress. AMISOM. must secure all of the liberated
territory and the positions acquired, in close
coordination with the armed forces of the TFG and
allied militias. The vacuum left by the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab must not, under any condition, be filled by
new warlords. AMISOM. must also pursue efforts,
together with the TFG forces, to reduce the number of
areas remaining under Al-Shabaab control.

In order to strengthen AMISOM, Council
members raised the troop ceiling from 9,000 to 12,000
troops last year. We would like the African Union to
now do everything possible to ensure that this
authorized increased troop ceiling be achieved as soon
as possible. The strengthening we have also provided
for in the United Nations logistical support package for
AMISOM. should also help to strengthen the force.

Thirdly, it must be remembered that AMISOM's
deployment is not an end in itself, but a way to restore
peace and enable the establishment of a stable State in
Somalia. It is therefore the task of the Transitional
Federal Institutions to lay the foundations for that State
as soon as possible. France therefore welcomes the
adoption of the road map on 6 September in
Mogadishu. We hope that it will facilitate the step-by-
step establishment of a constitutional framework, bring
about national reconciliation and provide basic services
to the population.

The TFG must be aware of the short time in
which it must achieve those goals. In less than one
year, it will have to accomplish what it has not
managed to do in six years. Every deadline set out in
the road map will have to be met from the beginning so
as not to fail to attain those goals. It will fall to the
international community to help the Transitional
Federal Government throughout the process and to
ensure follow-up at each step. The support and
expertise of the United Nations in this matter will be
critical. The presence of the country team agencies and
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
should be strengthened on the ground as much as
possible. To facilitate the efficiency and effectiveness
of that presence on the ground in Mogadishu, we
support the creation of a specific AMISOM. detachment
of 300 soldiers for the protection of international
personnel.

The international community has chosen to lend
its trust and its support for another year to the
transitional institutions in Somalia. Over the coming
months, we expect them to demonstrate equal resolve
and engagement - hitherto unseen - commensurate
with the expectations of the Somali people.

