Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing
and presiding over this open meeting, thus enabling us to
hold a public debate. This clearly demonstrates that you
are interested in holding meetings which are transparent,
as has been advocated by numerous delegations. We are
therefore grateful to you for having made that effort.

My delegation would like to speak about the
humanitarian agencies. We in no way wish to diminish
the importance of the refugees. In fact, what we see is
enhanced interest in the refugees. Given all the tragedies
and tragic situations which we hear about concerning
refugees, we know that the actions of the humanitarian
agencies that are trying to bring humanitarian assistance
to the refugees are no less important than the refugees
themselves.

My country feels that by assuring the security of
these agencies and providing them proper conditions for
work, we are attaching the same level of importance to
them as to the refugees themselves. Indeed, how can
humanitarian assistance be delivered if there is no
conducive environment for delivering it through these
agencies? Numerous kidnappings, killings and incidents
of blackmail have targeted those responsible for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

As we take up these problems today, and with my
delegation's full appreciation for the tireless work she is
doing for the refugees, we would like to ask Mrs. Ogata
whether there are sufficient assurances for the protection
of humanitarian agencies as they deliver humanitarian
assistance to refugees. And if such guarantees exist, have
they been legally codified?

We know that the General Assembly adopted
resolution 52/167 on 16 December 1997 to this end, but
is that sufficient? Moreover, if such safeguards or
assurances are being provided, do they indeed take shape
in reality, in the field where the humanitarian agencies are
functioning in conflict areas? Are security guarantees
provided to these agencies in the field?

Those are my delegation's concerns regarding the
humanitarian agencies that are working to deliver
humanitarian assistance to refugees, and I reiterate that
this issue is no less important than the question of the
refugees themselves.

