Mr. Wetland (Norway): Organized groups and
networks conduct ruthless, illegal activities in search
of the highest possible profit from smuggling narcotic
drugs, arms, minerals, toxic waste, counterfeit products
and even human beings. Such crimes undermine
development, ruin lives and threaten societies. Many
transnational criminals are moving between licit and
illicit markets and taking advantage of safe havens and
using corruption and violence as tools to reach their
goals of maximum profit. The cocaine flow from Latin
America that is reaching West Africa and heading
towards Europe is one example of how criminals
exploit porous borders and weak customs and police
control.

The challenge is to crack down on such criminals
without hampering or reducing the legal trade. We
must ensure that our hunt for criminals does not end up
hurting us all, because that is what will happen if we
impose general, rigid and time-consuming controls at
borders for all goods and all people. It is therefore of
great importance that a border strategy include
measures for detecting illicit flows before they enter
actual border areas. That will require close cooperation
and an international exchange of intelligence among
law enforcement and customs agencies. The Schengen
cooperation of European countries is a tested example
whereby borders are generally open but controls and

arrests can take place at points along transportation
routes. That avoids choke points and delays, which
damage lawful trade and productivity.

The Secretary-General's renewed focus on the
issue of transnational organized crime and the
establishment of the United Nations System Task Force
on Transnational Organized Crime and Drug
Trafficking are steps in the right direction. We expect
that the Task Force will contribute significantly to
strategic responses with regard to United Nations
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development
activities. It has the potential for helping Member
States to develop border management strategies that
are conducive to developing the legal trade while
strengthening their hand in dealing with illicit flows.

The strengthened focus on transnational
organized crime in the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Delivering justice: programme of action to
strengthen the rule of law at the national and
international level" (A/66/749), which will be
discussed at a high-level meeting of the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, is another step
towards highlighting the need for effective law
enforcement cooperation among countries. Close
cooperation with other United Nations bodies, such as
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
Security Council working groups, should serve to
strengthen the United Nations in supporting States.
International cooperation at the regional level - such
as with the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, which are
supported by the United Nations and the international
community - could be models to build on.

The International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) has a key role in helping Member States
to meet the threats stemming from transnational
organized crime. INTERPOL's I-24/7 communications
network and its databases of stolen passports and
documents are core elements of border management.
The World Customs Organization has a high level of
competence in measures related to border control, and
it should be a strong partner for the United Nations in
building effective strategies.

We need stronger political commitments from
Governments in all regions in order to move forward.
Law enforcement cooperation is important, but there
must also be sufficient focus and investment to tackle
organized crime and terrorism.

In conclusion, Norway proposes that the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the Task Force
on Transnational Organized Crime, INTERPOL and the
World Customs Organization come together with the
aim of working out recommendations to improve
measures to strengthen border management.

