Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Ambassador Negroponte and Ambassador
Sir Emyr Jones Parry for the briefings that they have
just given the Council in compliance with paragraph 24
of resolution 1483 (2003). I also thank them for
circulating their briefings in written form so that we
can examine them with the care they deserve.

I, in turn, shall make some comments. Today's
meeting comes following Secretary-General's
publication of the report (S/2004/140) of the fact-
finding mission to Iraq led by his Special Adviser
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. The report's findings at this
stage are encouraging. A consensus seems to be
emerging among Iraqis on two essential points.

First, all Iraqis have affirmed their commitment
to respecting the date of 30 June for the return of
sovereignty, thus confirming their readiness to
reassume control of their destiny as soon as possible.
France has consistently advocated that position.

Secondly, Iraqis consider that elections are the
best way to establish permanent, representative and
legitimate institutions and that those elections should
be held as soon as possible. But there is also broad
agreement on the need to prepare for those elections
carefully so that they will be truly free and credible.
Thus, the elections issue, which had divided Iraqi
society and had threatened to derail the entire political
process, now seems to be a point of agreement among
Iraqis.

These encouraging early results, in which the
mission led by Lakhdar Brahimi played a decisive part,
confirm that a robust involvement of the United
Nations in the political process will be an essential
asset for the success of the political transition in Iraq.
Today, there seems to be agreement both in Iraq and
within the international community on the usefulness
of such robust United Nations involvement. We
welcome that fact.

The progress made also demonstrates the success
of an approach based on dialogue and consensus-
building. That approach is in essence the hallmark of
the United Nations, as shown by the mission led by
Sergio Vieira de Mello until the horrendous attack of 19
August 2003. It was followed scrupulously by the United
Nations team, to whom we pay tribute. We should
continue to rely on that approach to achieve success in
the future stages of Iraq's transition and reconstruction.

The task to be accomplished in the coming weeks
and months is considerable and complex, as is noted in
the report. On the one hand, there are essential issues
that need to be addressed, in particular the design of
the transitional mechanism which must be in place by
30 June, and the creation of the legal and institutional
framework necessary to carry out the electoral process.

Moreover, significant uncertainties have surfaced
with respect to other elements of the 15 November
Agreement: on the question of security arrangements,
which the Iraqis believe fall within the competence of a
sovereign Government, even if no one disputes the fact
that an international security presence will continue to
be necessary beyond the 30 June deadline; and on the
Fundamental Law, which some believe should be
limited to setting out the general principles of the Iraqi
State during the transition period and should not
prejudge the decisions to be taken on certain issues
crucial for the future sovereign institutions of Iraq.

It is necessary to resolve those issues and clear up
those uncertainties in the perspective of 30 June. Even
more than the holding of elections, that date represents
an essential milestone in the transition since it is to
mark the return of Iraqi sovereignty. Of course, Iraq
will continue to face enormous challenges. The lack of
security will not disappear overnight. Reconstruction
will still require sustained efforts. General elections
will have to be organized, and a permanent constitution
will have to be drafted. Thus, 30 June marks a step,
rather than an ending. If we want to prevent the
situation after 30 June from resembling the situation
before that date, we must ensure that the date marks a
genuine break. That leads me to the following
observations and questions.

First, the transitional institutions must be accepted
by the greatest number. The formula - whatever it is to
be - that will be used in their designation and in setting
up their structures must be as inclusive as possible, and
it must allow for the expression of opinions and for the
participation of all segments of the Iraqi population, in
addition to those represented today in the Governing
Council.

Secondly, the deadline of 30 June should not
simply mark, in legal terms, the end of the occupation
regime. It must lead to a genuine restoration of Iraqi
sovereignty and therefore to a genuine handover of
authority and resources to the Iraqis, so that they can
administer their own country. That transfer - as
provided for in resolution 1511 (2003) and which the
Coalition Provisional Authority has begun to implement
- must continue. The acceptance by Iraqis of these new
institutions will be even greater if the institutions'
authority and capacity to manage the country are
genuine. However, the most important decisions -
those involving Iraq's future - should be deferred to
the government resulting from the elections.

Thirdly, the United Nations will most likely be
called on to be resolutely involved along with the
Iraqis, who want to see a robust involvement by the
Organization in all areas. The United Nations is already
playing the role of facilitator, something which we
fully support. If security conditions permit, the United
Nations could tomorrow begin to make available its
expertise to the Iraqis, in particular in preparing for and
in holding the elections, in drafting a permanent
constitution, and, more generally, in promoting the
establishment of the rule of law in Iraq and in assisting
in the political and economic reconstruction of the
country.

As the Secretary-General has repeatedly pointed
out, the United Nations will require a clear and specific
mandate that would guarantee its independence and
take into account its new circumstances.

One might wonder - and this is my last point -
whether existing resolutions will provide, at that point,
an appropriate framework for the work of the United
Nations. Beyond the role of the United Nations, will
those resolutions, which were adopted in the context of
occupation, still be applicable to managing the
situation in a sovereign Iraq? Whatever the results of a
legal analysis of existing resolutions may be, a new
Security Council resolution could prove necessary to
support the restoration of Iraqi sovereignty and to
support or define new arrangements.

That question will have to be considered at the
appropriate time in a spirit of unity, with the sole aim
of contributing to the success of the transition and
reconstruction in Iraq and of promoting the
mobilization of the international community in the
service of the Iraqi people.

