Mr. de Moura (Angola) (interpretation from French): I asked to speak in order to thank the members
of the Security Council, my fellow Ministers and all the
other guests of the Council who have made statements
since this morning, more than 30 in all. Once more, we
thank them all for their contribution to this debate, which
culminated in the adoption of a new resolution on Angola.
On behalf of the Angolan people and its Government, we
thank the Council and Africa for all their efforts to
establish peace and national reconciliation among
Angolans.

After meeting since this morning, the Security
Council has adopted resolution 976 (1995). We assure
members of our commitment to all resolutions of the
Security Council, especially their positive elements. But,

 

while reiterating our thanks for all the efforts of members
of the Council and of the Secretary-General, we are obliged
to note that my Government regrets that the resolution
includes a provision that we View as a violation of the
Lusaka Protocol, agreed upon by the Angolan parties with
the assistance of a number of members of the Security
Council.

This violation, which began with the Lusaka Protocol,
should be a warning, because the Security Council will
recall what happened with the Bicesse accords, when an
element called "triple zero" was introduced, from
31 May 1991 until elections were held; those elections,
under international supervision, resulted in the present
Government. When we see the reintroduction of this
provision in paragraph 12 of the resolution, we are
compelled to conclude that once again new elements have
been introduced, in violation of the Lusaka Protocol,
agreed to by the parties, elements that might harm the
legitimate Government.

But let us be optimistic, while ensuring that the
violence of 1992 does not recur. Once again, we reiterate
our firm and sincere commitment to the positive aspects
of the resolution that has just been adopted and to the
implementation of the compromise reached with the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol.

