Mr. Annabi: Thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Council today. Members of
the Council will recall that last week, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno gave them a briefing on matters relating to
the United Nations peace support operation in the
Sudan: the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS). Today, I will therefore focus on two related
reports of the Secretary-General concerning Darfur:
one on the situation in that region during the month of
April (S/2005/305) and a second on options with
respect to how the United Nations can reinforce the
efforts to foster peace in Darfur through appropriate
assistance to the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(S/2005/285).

The two reports are complementary. The April
report on Darfur - which is the eighth such monthly
report on the subject by the Secretary-General -
makes clear that instability, violence and civilian
suffering in that troubled region continue and that a
lasting solution can be found only through serious
political engagement by the parties, within the Abuja
process.

The April report on Darfur also confirms that
stability in the region will require, in the short term, a
considerable strengthening of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). This issue is addressed
in the second report being considered by the Council
today, which describes steps being taken by the African
Union (AU) to strengthen AMIS, and proposes
assistance which the United Nations could provide in
that regard.

As Council members will have seen from the
April Darfur report, organized violence in the region
continued throughout last month. Attacks on civilians,
rape, kidnapping and banditry actually increased from
the previous month. While there was no evidence of
direct involvement by regular Government forces last
month, there were widespread reports of abuse by
militias.

This militia activity was generally small scale,
with the one exception of an attack on 7 April on the
village of Khor Abeche in Southern Darfur. More than
10,000 civilians - in fact, the entire population of the
village - were displaced during that brazen assault,
and a substantial number of their homes were burned
and looted. Investigations into the attack by the local
administration continue, and those responsible should,
of course, be held accountable. In that regard, the
African Union and the United Nations have identified
the commander of the militia forces that struck the
village and will pass his name and the name of his
collaborators to the panel of experts to be established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1591 (2005).

During the reporting period, the two rebel
movements, the Sudanese Liberation Army and the
Justice and Equality Movement, also attacked militias
and police. In what has become a disturbing trend, they
also seized at gunpoint a number of vehicles being
operated commercially and vehicles belonging to
humanitarian organizations. Humanitarian vehicles also
came under fire during April, and in one case a
humanitarian worker was gravely injured. Staff from
humanitarian organizations were also subjected to
increased harassment by local authorities, particularly
in Darfur. This is a worrying trend in the light of the
role played by the humanitarian community in
sustaining the 2.45 million conflict-affected civilians in
Darfur.

The adoption of Security Council resolutions
1591 (2005) and 1593 (2005), on 29 and 31 March
respectively, also had an impact during the reporting
period. In addition to protests in Khartoum, the two
resolutions resulted in increased tensions in the Darfur
region among those who perceive themselves to be
implicated by the Council's action. We believe that the
Government of the Sudan must give its unequivocal
support to both resolutions so as to minimize any risk
of hostile action by those individuals and their
followers against the United Nations in the Sudan.

While violence in Darfur continued throughout
April, regrettably there was no tangible progress in
Abuja. The most recent round of talks was held, as the
Council will recall, in December 2004; and while the
African Union is working towards reconvening the
Abuja talks next week, it is not yet clear whether the
parties are committed to meaningful negotiations. This
is a matter of very serious concern. Clearly, lasting
peace in Darfur will come only through a negotiated
settlement. The parties must dedicate themselves to
making the Abuja process work, and the international
community should continue to make it clear that it is
the negotiating process which will lead to peace.

In view of the difficulties faced in the negotiating
process, the actions of the African Union Mission in
the Sudan are all the more critical. During the reporting
period, the total uniformed strength of the African
Union Mission was 2,409 troops and 244 police. While
there is a consensus that AMIS is having a very
positive impact where it is able to deploy, the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in its 28 April
decision, decided to expand AMIS, more than doubling
its size to the level of 6,171 military personnel and
1,560 civilian police. The Peace and Security Council
also called for the strengthened Mission to be in place
by the end of September 2005.

The African Union Commission has already taken
steps to implement the decision of the Peace and
Security Council, including preliminary contact with

potential troop contributors. Initial indications are that
additional troops will be identified and made available
for AMIS. We are awaiting the results of a troop
contributors' meeting that the African Union is
expected to convene in the coming days. It was
expected to have been held on 11 May, but it seems to
have been slightly delayed.

Notwithstanding those activities, the
strengthening of AMIS will be a considerable
challenge which will require the concerted support of
all the African Union's partners.

In that regard, Council members have before
them the 3 May report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/285) on options for how the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan can reinforce efforts to foster
peace in Darfur through appropriate assistance to
AMIS. The proposals in the Secretary-General's report
are based on the findings and recommendations of an
AU-led mission to Darfur, which, as the Council
knows, was undertaken last March. That mission,
which included the participation of the United Nations,
the European Union and the United States, assessed the
security situation in Darfur and the current deployment
of AMIS, and made proposals for enhancing peace
support efforts in the region.

The AU-led mission concluded that insecurity in
Darfur remains unacceptable. It also concluded that,
where AMIS was deployed, it was doing an
outstanding job under difficult circumstances. On that
basis, it was recommended that AMIS should be
strengthened, initially in two phases, with a possible
follow-on mission that could be decided on in or
around September 2005. The decision taken by the
African Union Peace and Security Council on 28 April
addresses the first two phases of the proposed
expansion.

The AU-led mission also recommended that
logistical support for the expansion would be best
accomplished by building on existing systems in which
individual donors or contractors provide support to
AMIS. After a slow start, that system is now working
well; to change it at this stage would disrupt
operations, rather than enhance them.

The report before the Council proposes areas
where the United Nations could provide some of the
support that the African Union will require from its
major partners. Those proposals focus on technical
assistance and training support in a number of key
areas, including, first, assisting the African Union to
develop a detailed operational plan for the expansion
of AMIS; secondly, providing technical advice in the
areas of logistics, planning and management; thirdly,
providing support for pre-deployment training of
African Union military and civilian personnel; fourthly,
providing support in developing detailed selection
criteria for police personnel for phase II; and, fifthly,
supporting the convening of troop contributors'
meetings, as well as a pledging conference for
logistical support.

The Secretary-General has been in close and
regular contact with the African Union Commission,
and in particular with its Chairperson, President
Konare, on support required by the African Union, and,
most recently, the Secretary-General asked his Special
Adviser, Mr. Lakdhar Brahimi, to go to Addis Ababa to
meet with Chairperson Konare to discuss in detail ways
in which the United Nations could assist the African
Union in its efforts to expand AMIS.

I am pleased to report that the African Union
Commission has accepted the modalities for United
Nations assistance described in the report before the
Council. United Nations personnel are currently, even
as we speak, working with staff from AMIS and AU
headquarters to develop a detailed concept of
operations for the expanded African Union Mission.
Such a concept of operations will form the basis of a
detailed request for resources which the African Union
intends to present at a 26 May partners' meeting, which
we expect will include the participation of Canada, the
European Union, NATO, the United Kingdom, the
United States and the United Nations - each of which
sent representatives to Addis Ababa last week to
discuss with the African Union the implications of the
decision to expand AMIS.

The African Union has the unequivocal support
of the United Nations as it continues its peacekeeping
role in Darfur, and all possible steps should be taken to
ensure that AMIS receives the donor support required
to expand expeditiously and effectively. At the same
time - and this cannot be overemphasized - we
should not lose sight of the fact that a lasting solution
to the Darfur crisis will come only through a negotiated
settlement and that every effort should be made to
bring the parties together for the next round of talks in
Abuja.

