We welcome the holding of this important meeting and the valuable statements made, especially in the very difficult context created by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, despite which we continue to make progress on an important milestone in the Security Council. This year will mark the fifth anniversary of the introduction of the youth, peace and security agenda. We are also grateful for the first report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/167) on this agenda item, which we are sure will be an essential guide to advancing and deepening this important agenda. The current generation of young women and men is the largest in history, representing some 16 per cent of the world's population. Nearly 90 per cent of young people live in developing regions, where they are the largest segment of society, and a significant proportion live in areas affected by armed conflict. They therefore constitute a demographic dividend that we cannot ignore; rather, we must value and know how to use them for the current and future benefit of our societies, in special recognition of the great and valuable contributions young people can make to peace and security. The current context of the COVID-19 pandemic is showing us that the resilience of young people is essential to making progress in difficult situations. Since our elderly population and adults with underlying conditions are particularly vulnerable and our children - though seemingly immune - are in need of care and attention, young people are called upon to be a key pillar of our pandemic response and to help our economies recover. We must regard young people as relevant actors in overcoming today's challenges. At the same time, we must address the socioeconomic consequences that affect young people in particular and are exacerbated by the pandemic, bearing in mind that deepening inequalities risk fuelling conflicts that threaten peace and security. We welcome the important progress made in the Security Council over the past five years through the adoption of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) - the latter promoted by Sweden and Peru. We also welcome presidential statement S/PRST/2019/15, which encourages "mobilising the Youth towards Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020"; as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the matter before us (S/2020/167). Peru stresses the role that young women and men are called upon to play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, in justice and reconciliation, and in peacebuilding processes. Young people are key to building the inclusive vision of the future required to achieve and consolidate peace and to prevent new conflicts. Unfortunately, despite their enormous potential, the 2018 study entitled "The missing piece: independent progress study on youth, peace and security" (see S/2018/86) indicated that, in many cases, young people are seen as a problem rather than as partners and allies for peace, which leads to their frustration. To enjoy sustainable peace, we must work on the inclusion of young people in the fields of politics, economics and digital information, and in humanitarian responses. We are convinced that this is the right approach to effectively implement and promote this issue on the Council's agenda. We must harness and maximize the potential, commitment and resilience of young people in order to prevent and address conflict. To that end, we believe that it is important to create inclusive and safe spaces that allow young people to participate in and contribute to sustainable peacebuilding in their respective national communities. We welcome the efforts made in that regard and encourage their continuation. This issue is obviously linked to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Sustainable Development Goals commit us, among other actions, to creating decent employment for our youth, to guaranteeing equal opportunities through access to health and education, and to promoting peaceful societies with inclusive institutions. After all, our efforts and decisions today will be reflected in the world of tomorrow, in which the young people of today will become the leaders responsible for guiding us. Humankind today sees new challenges and difficulties arising from globalization, violence, demographic changes, inequality, new technologies, forced displacement, changing labour markets and climate change, all of which impact the lives of young people. Those problems threaten to deteriorate in the future and more seriously affect them as adults. We therefore cannot leave them out of the decisions that may determine their fate. Perpetuating exclusion will inexorably lead to feelings of marginalization, mistrust and despair, and with it the potential of a ruptured peace. We are committed to promoting the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all young people, safeguarding their diversity and fighting discrimination. That means abandoning the stereotypes that stigmatize them as people prone to violence, as well as recognizing and promoting their capacities for participation and leadership in public life. The participation of youth delegates in various United Nations forums and processes is certainly a good practice. It serves to build bridges between Governments, international organizations and youth organizations around agendas that promote the maintenance of international peace and security. Moreover, it is essential to consider the role that women, especially young women, can play. Young people are marginalized, even more so when a gender component is added. Gender equality and women's empowerment are crucial if we are to register significant advances in this and other fields, as recognized in the 2030 Agenda. Finally, we consider it appropriate that the youth, peace and security agenda be addressed in tandem with the children and armed conflict agenda, as they are mutually complementary, with a view to promoting peacebuilding on a continuum from childhood and adolescence to youth. That will lead to lasting and sustainable peacebuilding. In conclusion, Peru reiterates its support for and commitment to promoting this issue as we are convinced of its importance in achieving the purposes of the United Nations.
