Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing. Azerbaijan shares the position
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) on the issue, as
reflected in the letter and the annexes thereto contained
in document S/2012/223.

Azerbaijan shares the common concern of the
international community over the growing nuclear
dangers and risks. Since the very first days of its
independence, my country has attached great
importance to nuclear security. We acknowledge the
international efforts made to ensure the strict global
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

At the same time, we see that the international
mechanism and verification regime are not strong or
effective enough to prevent the illegal proliferation of
nuclear technologies. In that regard, there is a need to
further strengthen the concept of the generally accepted
legally binding commitments concerning the non-use
of nuclear weapons and nuclear technologies for
military purposes.

International cooperation has always been at the
centre of Azerbaijan's efforts in the field of nuclear
security and safety. Our activities have been target-
oriented and conducted in a spirit of mutual respect and
cooperation. Azerbaijan, which recognizes and
commends the central role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in the development of nuclear security
regulations and standards, has engaged in successful
cooperation with the Agency on various aspects of
nuclear security.

Needless to say, nuclear security and
non-proliferation issues are closely interconnected. We
believe that Azerbaijan's proposal on the creation of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Caucasus will
be supported by the neighbouring countries and the
broader international community.

Against the background of emerging proliferation
threats and due to my country's geographic location,
we attach the utmost importance to the prevention of
the use of our territory as a transit route for illicit
nuclear trafficking. In close cooperation with our
international partners and in line with international
standards, we have developed a comprehensive
national export control system with a solid legislative
basis. To date, the system has proved to be a reliable
mechanism in the prevention of illicit nuclear
trafficking.

At the same time, due to the continued
occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan by
neighbouring Armenia, we are unable to ensure proper
control over a considerable part of our State border.

We believe that nuclear security and safety needs
should be directed primarily at the enhanced security
and safety of civilian nuclear facilities, taking into
account geographical peculiarities and transboundary
environmental implications in the light of possible
nuclear incidents.

In that regard, we are seriously concerned about
the nuclear safety situation in our region, which is
affected by the presence of the outdated Metsamor
nuclear power plant in neighbouring Armenia.
According to international monitors, that nuclear
power plant represents a danger to the entire region,
and its reactor belongs to the oldest and least reliable
category of all 66 Soviet reactors built in Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union. Moreover, the
plant in question is situated in a highly seismically
active mountainous terrain and lacks suitable water
resources for cooling its ageing reactor. We believe that
the operation of the Metsamor nuclear power plant
must cease without delay to prevent a tragic accident in
future.

As contribution to international efforts on nuclear
security and as a country committed to combating
nuclear terrorism, Azerbaijan has become a party to
key international instruments in the field of nuclear
security, including the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. I am also pleased to announce that Azerbaijan
recently endorsed the statement of principles for
joining the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism in its capacity as a partner country.

