The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Morocco.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents of
the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Meron and Judge Joensen, as
well as the Prosecutors, Mr. Brammertz and Mr. J allow,
for their very useful and thorough briefings. We would
also like to express our thanks to and appreciation of
the work of Ambassador Rosenthal as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
We were pleased to note the efforts and the progress
made by both Tribunals during the period under review
in the reports (see S/2012/847 and S/2012/836) with
regard to completing their work and to ensuring a
smooth transition towards the International Residual
Mechanism, which is to take over the residual functions
of the Tribunals, as provided for in resolution 1966
(2010).
We also note the steps taken by both Tribunals
to increase the pace of their work, while ensuring
due process and fair trials. We therefore positively
View the steps taken to set up the Arusha branch of
the International Residual Mechanism as of 1 July.
We support the progress to date in the transition of
the functions of the ICTR into that Mechanism. That
outcome would not have been possible without the
preparatory steps undertaken, particularly with regard
to human, logistical and legal resources, to launch the
work of the International Residual Mechanism and for
it to carry out its functions as soon as possible.

We appreciate the fact that the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has been able to meet
the schedule that it itself presented to the Council for
dealing with outstanding issues, including a verdict
on the only remaining case by the end of the year, and
for completing the appeals phase by the end of 2014, to
which it has committed.

The work of that Tribunal is coming to an end.
We commend its commitment to achieving justice,
reconciliation and national capacity-building in Rwanda
and in the region, so that the national jurisdictions can
complete some follow-up matters, in particular with
regard to bringing fugitives to justice.

Regarding the Residual Mechanism branch for
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, we hope that its inauguration in The Hague
will take place at the beginning ofJuly 2013, as planned.
We are aware of the difficulties in completing the trials
of three indictees arrested long after the other accused
persons. It is therefore vital to respect due process and
for the Tribunal to take the necessary steps to speed up
the verdicts and the implementation of the completion
strategy. We hope that such measures by the Tribunal
will help mitigate the unforeseen factors that led to
certain changes in the earlier projections with regard to
the verdicts in the remaining cases.

In conclusion, we are convinced that the ongoing
dialogue among the two Tribunals, the United Nations
Office of Legal Affairs and the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will help to overcome the practical and institutional
difficulties facing the two Tribunals in this sensitive
period of the completion of their work. The dialogue
continues to be important to allow the Council to fully
understand the developments and challenges facing the
two Tribunals so as to enable it to receive more support
for its mandate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar
Vueie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence of Serbia.

