Mr. Gambari: I thank all members of the
Security Council for the opportunity to brief them on
my latest Visit to Myanmar, from 6 to 10 March 2008,
in the implementation of the good offices role
entrusted to the Secretary-General by the General
Assembly. In accordance with the usual practice, I have
already reported to the President of the Assembly and
would like, respectfully, to refer the Council to the
press release issued yesterday by his Office in that
regard.
At the outset, I would like to thank the
Government and the people of Myanmar for the
hospitality extended to my delegation and to me during
our five-day visit. In particular, I wish to place on
record my gratitude for the Government's efforts in
bringing forward my visit from mid-April, as
previously scheduled, to early March and also in
extending my stay by one day.

Since assuming responsibility for the Myanmar
dossier, I have never been under any illusion that the
engagement process will be smooth sailing. Indeed,
over time my engagement with my interlocutors has
been difficult, complex and frustrating at times, but
nevertheless incremental and continuing. That is
invariably the nature of the good-offices role of the
Secretary-General.

But, in terms of the programme of my last visit, I
am grateful to the Myanmar authorities for having
granted most of the meetings I requested, including
two meetings with the Government Authoritative
Spokesperson's Team, representing the State Peace and
Development Council and composed of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs, Culture and Information. I also met
with the Ministers for Planning and Health, the Deputy
Foreign Minister and the Referendum Convening
Commission, as well as the Constitution Drafting
Committee. I also met twice with Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi and with the political parties, including the
National League for Democracy (NLD), the National
Unity Party (NUP) and the PaO National Organization -
which is for the ethnic and nationality groups - as
well as the Union Solidarity and Development
Association (USDA) - not to be confused with the
United States Department of Agriculture, of course. In
addition, I met twice with the United Nations country
team on United Nations premises and with the
diplomatic corps at the beginning and at the end of my
visit, as well as with the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC).

Unlike last time, when I stayed mostly in Nay Pyi
Taw, the new capital, the Government arranged for my
delegation and me to stay in a hotel in Yangon
throughout our visit. I regret, however, that I was not
able to meet with the senior Government leadership or
with other political parties, including the 88 Generation
group and the 1990 MPs-Elect, or with representatives
of ethnic minority groups.
08-27488
Moreover, whereas each of my previous visits
produced some tangible results that could be built
upon, it is a source of disappointment that this latest
visit did not yield any immediate tangible outcome.
Nonetheless, the visit gave me an opportunity to
further discuss some of my earlier recommendations
and, in particular, to exchange views on the current
preparations for the planned constitutional referendum
in May and for "multi-party democratic elections" by
2010. I believe that those discussions helped to foster a
greater understanding of how the Government of
Myanmar could work further with the good offices of
the Secretary-General. In that context, I would like to
brief the Council on the topics of those discussions.

First, with regard to the constitution-making
process and the planned referendum and elections, I am
pleased to have been able to place on record with the
Government Authoritative Spokesperson's Team, the
Referendum Convening Commission and the
Constitution Drafting Committee the views and
concerns of the United Nations, as well as specific
suggestions for enhancing the credibility of the
constitutional and electoral process. These included our
offer of technical assistance, in accordance with the
good offices mandate of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, and our suggestion that the authorities
consider independent monitoring of the process.

In that connection, I left with my interlocutors a
list of countries that have voluntarily requested
technical assistance for their electoral processes. As a
matter of fact, 57 countries did so between 2003 and
2005, and 50 have actually benefited from the
extension of such assistance from the United Nations. I
also left questions and observations prepared by our
experts regarding the conduct of the constitution-
making process, the referendum and the elections,
which I hope they will find useful with a View to
enhancing the credibility and inclusiveness of the
process. My discussion with the Referendum
Convening Commission was published in full in
newspapers the next morning.

I was given repeated assurances on previous
visits, including at the highest level of Myanmar's
leadership, that all political forces in Myanmar will be
allowed to freely participate in the referendum and the
election. The Government further reiterated that the
draft constitution was completed based on the
principles adopted earlier by the broadly inclusive
process of the National Convention and that, based on
08-27488

the precedents of the 1947 and 1974 constitutions, it
has sufficient experience to organize and conduct a
referendum and elections.

In this regard, I was given a first published copy
of the draft constitution - unfortunately for me, it was
in Burmese, but I am sure that we will get an English
version soon - a copy of the referendum law in
English and a sample of the referendum ballot paper. I
encouraged the authorities to take further steps to
ensure that the credibility of the process is enhanced.

Such steps should include early and broad
dissemination of information, including the referendum
rules and regulations, in addition to the text of the
constitution and the referendum law. I felt that the
better the educated voters are and the more public
space there is for open debate on the draft constitution,
the more confidence the process will generate from all
political actors and the public at large, and the more
the process will be perceived as credible, both
internally and to the outside world.

In the socio-economic area, the recommendation
of the United Nations to establish a broad-based
National Economic Forum was discussed with the
Minister of National Planning and Development and
the Minister of Health. In their view, sanctions are the
primary cause of the socio-economic problems in
Myanmar and the central obstacle to the country's
development.

Technically, therefore, they consider the utility of
the proposed forum or similar proposals as limited
since, in their view, such vehicles would only produce
a distorted diagnosis for Myanmar. Nonetheless, in
subsequent discussions, the Government expressed
interest in finding areas of convergence on this issue
with a View to addressing its concerns as well as the
challenges facing the country. To this end, the United
Nations stands ready to continue to work together with
its Myanmar partners to develop existing and new
ideas.

With regard to the dialogue between the
Government and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, I regard the
fact that I was granted a second meeting with her as an
indication that the Government remains interested in
maintaining this channel of communication and as a
sign of willingness on the part of the authorities in
recognizing the value of the role of the United Nations
in helping to facilitate substantive dialogue.
3
It is also important to recognize the steps the
Government has taken in appointing a minister for
liaison with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and in the several
meetings they have held so far. On her part, Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi has already signalled a her willingness to
cooperate with the Government in the interest of the
nation. She continues to expect the United Nations,
through the good offices mission, to help facilitate a
substantive and time-bound dialogue to that end.

The role of the United Nations good offices in
this regard therefore appears relevant, or is considered
relevant to both sides. With a view to advancing the
ongoing discussion between them, I have proposed that
the Government consider raising the level of the
interlocutor on its side, and I have stressed that no
dialogue can be complete unless Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi is released and treated as a partner in dialogue.

In my meetings with her, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
asked me to report that she is in good health and in
good spirits.

On balance, the process of engagement and
dialogue continues between the United Nations and the
Government of Myanmar. In addition to the positive
steps taken in the wake of the September crisis, the
Government's ongoing cooperation with the
International Labour Organization (ILO), which on
26 February resulted in a one-year extension of the
supplementary understanding of between Myanmar and
the ILO to address complaints of forced labour and the
fact that it has agreed to receive delegations from the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
European Union can be seen as further evidence of
Myanmar's readiness to continue the engagement with
the United Nations and the international community.

In this context, and based on my last exchange
with the Authoritative Government Spokesman's Team
and messages conveyed privately, I have reason to
believe that the Government attaches importance to the
mission just concluded and continues to see value in
the good offices of the Secretary-General as offering
the best prospect for further cooperation through
mutual trust and confidence and constructive
suggestions. This position was again reiterated in the
letter dated yesterday from the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar addressed to me.

This was my third visit to Myanmar since my
appointment as Special Advisor - not Special Envoy - to
the Secretary-General less than a year ago. This latest

mission confirms that the principles of engagement that
have guided our efforts so far and that have been
broadly endorsed, including by members of this
Council, remain as relevant as ever.

As a process, the Secretary-General's good
offices are inevitably subject to ups and downs. That is
why, despite the lack of immediate, tangible results,
this latest visit should be assessed within the broader
context of our efforts over the past two years. Only two
years ago, high-level dialogue between the United
Nations and Myanmar was non-existent. Similarly,
only six months ago, there was no mechanism for
promoting dialogue between the Government and Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi.

Furthermore, by the time the Secretary-General's
good offices role resumed in 2006, Myanmar was still
at the first step of its road map. Since then, the
National Convention has laid down the principles to be
enshrined in a new draft constitution. Subsequently, a
Constitution Drafting Committee was established,
which completed the task of drafting the draft
constitution.

On 9 February, for the first time, the Government
announced a timeline for the implementation of its
road map. A nationwide referendum on the draft
constitution will be held in May and will be the fourth
step in the road map, followed upon ratification by
multi-party democratic elections in 2010, the fifth step.
This would be the first general election in twenty
years.

With the Government committed to implementing
its road map, the United Nations has consistently
argued that a credible and inclusive process can and
should offer realistic prospects for advancing the
shared objectives of sustainable peace, national
reconciliation, democracy and respect for human rights
in Myanmar. That is why it is in Myanmar's interest to
ensure that the upcoming referendum and elections are
as credible and inclusive as possible, in accordance
with international norms and standards. And that is
why it is incumbent on all sides to be forward-looking
and make the most of the opportunities before them by
demonstrating maximum flexibility, to make the
process work in the interest of all the people of
Myanmar.

But while a referendum and elections are
milestones in any transition to civilian and democratic
rule, they are not ends in themselves. It is important in
this regard to remember that Myanmar is a country that
has experienced nearly sixty years of armed conflict
between the Government and multiple armed
opponents, that there remain more than two dozen
armed groups in the country and that the Government
and the large majority of armed groups have agreed to
ceasefires in the past fifteen years.

In order to succeed, any formal process requires
political conditions that are conducive to ensuring
broad and free participation in the country's transition,
so that all can become stakeholders in the future of
their country. That is why it is in Myanmar's interest
for the Government and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, as
well as other relevant parties, to be able to engage
without delay in a substantive and time-bound
dialogue, so that the foundations for achieving
inclusive national reconciliation and democracy can be
laid today. That is also why it is in the interest of
Myanmar to develop now the instruments for
sustainable development, without which there can be
no durable peace and stability.

The United Nations recognizes that, ultimately,
the Government and people of Myanmar are
responsible for their country's future. How it chooses
to exercise its sovereignty - either in isolation from or
in partnership with the international community - is
therefore up to Myanmar.

The United Nations, through the good offices role
of the Secretary-General and with the support of the
international community, will continue to seek to work
as partners with the Government and people of
Myanmar. I therefore look forward to our continued
dialogue and engagement with a view to strengthening
our cooperation through tangible results.

Over the past two years, the unique comparative
advantages of the Secretary-General's good offices
have been demonstrated in various ways. The United
Nations remains the only international actor to
maintain face-to-face dialogue with Myanmar's leaders
on the need for further efforts towards national
reconciliation, democracy and human rights. The
United Nations is the only outsider to maintain access
to both the Government and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
and to act as a go-between between the two. The
United Nations is Myanmar's preferred interlocutor for
engaging with the international community and the
region. That is why now is the time for the
international community as a whole to remain united in

support of the Secretary-General's good offices, in
order to ensure that Myanmar's interests and concerns
are addressed in a way that is both credible to its own
people and acceptable to the international community.

In pursuing the good offices role on behalf of the
Secretary-General, I consider it my underlying
responsibility to press the Myanmar authorities on the
critical and very thorny issues. I therefore approach
every encounter with the Myanmar authorities with one
goal in mind, namely, to sustain the process we have
begun: to continue to prod the Myanmar authorities to
constructively engage the domestic political interests,
notably the opposition, with a view to moving the
political process forward; and to encourage them to
respond in a tangible manner and in ways that the
international community will deem meaningful and
progressive towards the realization of the objectives
that we all share. Those are - and it needs to be
repeated - a peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Myanmar with full respect for the human rights of its
people.

Finally, encouraging the Myanmar authorities to
reverse a policy mind-set that has lasted this long can
be challenging, but it is imperative that we continue to
do so with persistence and patience - but with
legitimate expectations of tangible results from the
process of engagement.

