Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): In
taking the floor for the first time at a Council meeting
under your presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate
you and your delegation. I am sure that your abilities
and leadership will ensure the necessary guidance for
the success of our work. I also thank Ambassador
Shalgham, Ambassador Dabbashi and the delegation of
Libya for their commendable work in the Council
presidency for the month of March. I welcome the
presence among us of the Assistant Secretary General
of the Organization of American States, Ambassador
Ramdin, and of Ambassador Merores, the Permanent
Representative of Haiti.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2009/129) and his
Special Representative, our friend He'di Annabi, whom
I thank for his work as Head of MINUASTAH and ask
to convey our gratitude to the whole Mission. I would
also like to thank him for his support during the
Council's visit to Haiti.

My delegation believes that Haiti offers a
significant opportunity for success and a valuable
chance to learn for the United Nations. It is a novel and
complex case on account of the challenges that it poses
and the tasks that it entails. As a result of the growing
number of peacekeeping operations, the limited
economic and human resources available and the
complex multidimensional challenges that we face, the
Assembly, the Secretary-General and this Council have
been discussing peacekeeping operations. In that
context, Haiti emerges as a bridge that should help us
to better understand the role of the international
community in building a world free from want and also
free from fear.

My delegation believes that MINUSTAH is doing
all that is necessary to help Haiti in its struggle for
stability and economic and social development. But, in
our opinion, the Government of Haiti and the
Stabilization Mission do not seem to be combining
actions in such a way as to guarantee the sustainability
of the progress achieved. And the Council knows full
well that actions of the international community that
have not been sustainable in the past have time and
time again forced Haiti to return to battles considered
already won.

How can we not acknowledge the significant
progress in security? Who could deny the importance
of improving control of a territory used by drug
traffickers, a vulnerable border or territorial waters
used for illegal purposes? How can we deny the value
of institutional development in administering justice?
Who could not be aware of the beneficial work to
reduce the risks and to increase the ability to deal with
natural disasters? How can we object to the importance
of legislation and robust electoral institutions that
guarantee the vote, if we aspire to a political
democracy?

I could continue with a long list of questions that
justify everything that is being done in Haiti with the
assistance of MINUSTAH, but we believe that the
fundamental, and most important, questions still have
not been definitively answered. How much of what has
been achieved can be preserved if international
cooperation is reduced? Will the achievements in
security be maintained? Will the Haitian Government
be able to keep a 14,000-strong police force properly
equipped and free from corruption? Who will build the
necessary infrastructure for the justice institutions?
Where will the salaries and equipment necessary for its
operation come from without international assistance?
Could Haiti organize the eight electoral processes that
its laws require in the next thirty-six months?

We believe that the problem of sustaining what
has been achieved and what is being built is the major
challenge that we, the international community and
Haiti, face together. The lack of economic and social
development is still the greatest challenge of the
Haitian society and one where the assistance of the
international community has brought about only very
limited progress. Even though it is true that there have
been positive growth rates in recent years, it is also
true that they were limited. A society as poor as Haiti's
should grow at significantly higher rates.

Costa Rica believes that the ultimate
responsibility for sustainable peace and development
lies with the Haitian people and their political,
economic and cultural leaders. They are at the
vanguard that has the primary obligation to lead the
whole nation to higher levels of progress. The
Government of Haiti, under the leadership of President
Preval and Prime Minister Pierre-Louis, the
parliamentary authorities and the political parties must
comply with their responsibilities in building a
political and institutional environment that fosters
modernization and development. The Haitian political
system cannot continue to be the factor that limits and
delays the country's progress. All political actors,
including civil society, have endorsed their
commitment to the process that Haiti is undergoing
today.
With the support of the international community,
the Haitian State must move forward in providing basic
services, in particular health and education, as well as
environmental rehabilitation. We await swift
institutional reform and the simplification of a costly
electoral calendar that is also a destabilizing factor. We
trust that soon the laws will be reformed to facilitate
the participation of the valuable Haitian diaspora in the
development of their country and to allow for a more
dynamic role for foreign investment in Haiti.

Development in Haiti also depends on economic
actors. With the necessary conditions for investment,
Haitian entrepreneurs - those who live in the country
and those who maintain links with their native land -
must embark on the path to economic modernization.
Agriculture, the basis of the Haitian economy today,
must overcome its stagnation and very low levels of
productivity, moving towards the goal of food security.
A national development strategy for human capital is
needed. The young and abundant work force needs
training and employment before it falls into despair
and fuels instability in the country once again.

Next week's donor conference must be firmly
focused on economic and social development and on
ensuring the sustainability of the progress made. In
Haiti today, there are all the ingredients for success and
learning. For the Haitian people, the international
community's assistance is an opportunity to overcome
old ills that have hampered their development. For the
international community, Haiti is an opportunity to
learn to work on the many aspects of complex
situations, making sustainable peace and development
possible for the many millions of human beings still
living in despair throughout the world.

