Germany thanks the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region for his briefing and for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region (S/2020/272). We share the overall assessment of certain positive political trends in the region as outlined in the report, in particular with regard to regional agreements designed to support cross-border cooperation. It is our hope that these agreements will contribute to decreasing tensions in the region. We also commend the enhanced regional cooperation embodied in efforts aimed at implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including the positive outcomes of the quadripartite summits. We further welcome the strengthening of cooperation on judicial matters within the region. Yet significant challenges remain, especially with regard to the security situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including repeated cross-border security incidents. The fight against armed groups must be continued. Socioeconomic development and integration remain a challenge. We are concerned at present about the potential impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on stability in the Great Lakes region and on the lives of the people there. Given this new threat, concerted efforts and close collaboration among the countries of the region are needed now more than ever. Such regional organizations as the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the African Union play a crucial role in supporting these efforts. This context provides an opportunity for converting positive regional rhetoric and dynamics into concrete and constructive action in the fight against the pandemic. We call on the international community to support these efforts. The United Nations, and the World Health Organization (WHO) in particular, have our full support in their efforts to fight the pandemic. It is crucial that health infrastructure be strengthened in order to quickly and effectively treat COVID-19 patients and mitigate the pandemic's negative impact on the socioeconomic and security situation in the region. In this regard, it is important to promote accuracy and accessibility in the dissemination of information about the pandemic. It is also important to provide guidelines on the effective measures to take to prevent the spread of the virus. We encourage the Special Envoy to use his presence in the region to support such efforts. We should not forget that the fight against Ebola is not yet over. The same is true for the continued outbreaks of measles that cost the lives of more than 6,000 children last year. Massive investments in critical health infrastructure are needed. We remain concerned about violations of human rights and continuing reports of sexual and gender-based violence. The numbers of internally displaced persons and refugees in and around the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to be staggering. The advent of COVID-19 is endangering the most vulnerable even further. We therefore fully support the Secretary-General's call for a stop to all fighting and hostilities to avoid a further surge in humanitarian needs. It is also crucial to underscore that any efforts aimed at fighting and containing the pandemic must not be used to serve as a pretext for limiting or curbing human rights or for allowing for impunity in cases of human rights violations. Let me make a short comment on the situation in Burundi. We take note of the ongoing preparations for the elections in May. However, we remain concerned about the impact the COVID-19 pandemic could have on the elections. All necessary 11/30 12/30 measures must be taken to ensure inclusive, credible and safe elections without health risks for the general public. All actors must cooperate with the WHO and with humanitarian organizations. Last but not least, with regard to the new strategy for the region, Germany supports the development of a new peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes region. We understand from the report of the Secretary-General that various activities in support of peace and security have been undertaken. Germany strongly encourages the Special Envoy to continue in this direction and complete the process by involving all stakeholders in an inclusive and transparent manner.
