Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their thorough briefings. We were
pleased to take note of the efforts undertaken and the
progress made by both Tribunals with regard to the
implementation of their respective completion strategies,
which are aimed at finalizing their work and preparing
for a smooth and harmonious transition towards the
International Residual Mechanism, which is to take over
the residual functions of the criminal Tribunals.

We were also very pleased to learn that despite
the challenges encountered, the Mechanism will begin
operations on the date set out in resolution 1966 (2010).
That will allow us to resolutely continue consideration
of the conditions necessary to enable it to effectively
carry out its mandate.

We welcome the measures adopted by both
Tribunals, which, while ensuring due process, have
made it possible to streamline procedures and introduce
reforms aimed at accelerating the pace of their work.
The Kingdom of Morocco also welcomes the fact that
those measures have enabled the ICTY to begin certain
trials earlier than had been anticipated and to limit the
impact of challenges related to translation and lack of
staffing on the trial schedule.

As concerns the ICTR, the efforts undertaken have
led to the announcement of the completion of trial
proceedings prior to the end of 2012 and to encouraging
predictions indicating that all of the rulings will be
handed down during 2014. That should induce us to
maintain the same level of mobilization in order to
explore together ways and means of dealing with the
various difficulties related to the retention of skilled
personnel.

We hope that the relevant United Nations bodies
will give favourable consideration to additional
measures aimed at overcoming the difficulties related
to the downsizing process and at the completion of
the deliberations of both courts. The ongoing dialogue
between the two Tribunals, the Office of Legal
Affairs and the Council's Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, which is chaired with skill and
competence by Guatemala, will, of course, remain the
best response to the potential practical or institutional
difficulties relating to the upcoming launch of the
Residual Mechanism.

In that context, we deem it necessary to underscore
the importance of cooperation on the part of Member
States and regional and subregional organizations with
both Tribunals, in accordance with their respective
statutes and, subsequently, with the Residual Mechanism.
Such cooperation should involve not only greater efforts
to arrest those fugitives still sought by the ICTR but
also an acceleration in communications and requests
for judiciary assistance from both Tribunals, as well as
support for efforts to relocate persons who have been
acquitted or served their sentences.

The referral of cases to national courts has
considerably facilitated the completion of the work
of both Tribunals and a smooth transition towards
the Residual Mechanism. The transfer to national
jurisdictions of cases involving intermediate or
lower-rank accused by the ICTY and the transfer of five
cases by the ICTR to Rwandan courts will contribute to
the consolidation of the principle of complementarity
and to the strengthening of the national judicial
institutions of the relevant countries.

The activities undertaken to raise the awareness of
younger generations with respect to the lessons to be
learned from the crimes prosecuted by both Tribunals
should continue. The contribution of the International
Criminal Tribunals to international criminal justice
must be recognized and preserved. The protection of
the legacy of the Tribunals has both a legal and a moral
value. In that context, it is important to continue to
ensure the accessibility of information relative to both
Tribunals, their mandates and their contributions to
fighting impunity and to strengthening the international
judicial system.

