Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Later in the debate, the
Netherlands will speak on behalf of the European Union.
Sweden fully supports that statement.

The armed conflict cannot continue in Somalia.
National reconciliation is now necessary and is a
prerequisite for sustainable peace and development.
Without reconciliation the humanitarian suffering will
continue, and Somalia will remain a destabilizing factor
in the region.

The United Nations and the international community
as a whole must help Somalia on its way from chaos and
suffering to normalization and development. The ultimate
responsibility for national reconciliation, however, rests

 

with the Somalis themselves. The Somalis need and deserve
leaders who do not act like warlords but like leaders who
are prepared to overlook narrow individual ambitions and
focus on the national interest.

The ongoing peace efforts, such as the Sodere and
Nairobi initiatives, by regional and other interested States
and organizations, have the full support of my Government.
There is, however, a need for further coordination of the
initiatives, leading in the end to an integrated process with
the participation of all Somali leaders.

The Somali peace and reconciliation process must
ultimately involve all layers of society. While we welcome
the latest progress made to achieve a negotiated settlement
among Somali factions, we must not forget that the results
will not be sustainable unless reconciliation efforts are also
focused on rebuilding the civil society on regional and local
levels. The European Union and non-governmental
organizations such as the Life and Peace Institute make
important contributions in this field.

The leading roles played by the regional States and
organizations in the resolution of the Somali conflict are
commendable. At the same time, Sweden welcomes the
preparedness of the United Nations Secretary-General -
should he consider it helpful - to designate a Special
Envoy for Somalia.
The control of the warlords over the Somali people is
based not least on the possession of arms. The United
Nations and its Member States must ensure that the arms
embargo is adhered to. Violations should be reported and
acted upon. Also, international assistance should facilitate
demilitarization of Somali society. Demobilization of
militias requires that alternative means of subsistence be
created.

The international community must sustain its
commitment to peace-building in Somalia and not scale
down the assistance in a situation which might be less
dramatic, but remains extremely fragile. Peace-building and
the resolution of humanitarian crises should be seen in a
long-term perspective. They must not be reduced to ad hoc
interventions.

In the present Somali situation of semi-peace, semi-
war, international assistance needs to be closely coordinated
within the framework of a shared approach on central
issues. In the recent United Nations Consolidated Inter-
Agency Appeal, important steps were taken towards
developing such a joint strategy. My Government intends
to contribute to this Appeal and encourages others to do
the same.

