Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Grandi and Mr. Jenea for their briefings.

The news reports from Burma have long been
brutal and heartbreaking. Because of the lack of access
granted by the Burmese Government, few reports
get out, but those that do are simply horrifying. The
Associated Press recently told the story of Kadir, a
Rohingya man from the village of Gu Dar Pyin. Kadir
and 14 of his friends were choosing sides for a game of
a traditional Burmese sport when the Burmese military
began shooting. Survivors reported that more than 200
soldiers descended on the village, burning homes and
shooting anyone who could not get away. Kadir got
away, but only he and two friends survived the shooting.
When he returned to the village six days later, Kadir
found his teammates partially buried in mass graves. In
all, there were reportedly five mass graves.

The Burmese Government regularly denies the
existence of massacres and mass graves and claims to
be fighting terrorists. But what Kadir found that day
indicated that the military knew what it was doing
was wrong and did not want the world to know. To
his horror, Kadir saw that not only were his friends
dead, but also their faces had been burned away with
acid. Some had been disfigured by bullet wounds. The
Burmese soldiers had also burned away the hands of the
dead so the bodies could not be identified.

The Associated Press reporters who uncovered
these atrocities deserve our thanks and praise. It is
neither easy nor safe to report from Burma these
days. Two Reuters reporters uncovered evidence of
another massacre and mass grave in a fishing village
last September and they paid for it with their freedom.
They reported that the police ordered villagers to
participate in the killing, dismemberment and burial in
a mass grave of 10 Rohingya men and boys. Witnesses
said that some were still alive when they were thrown
into the grave. The police claim that they were acting
in self-defence, that the Rohingya men attacked them,
but the reporters compiled evidence, including photos,
that contradicted the police. For the crime of reporting
the truth, the Burmese Government arrested and
imprisoned the reporters. They remain incarcerated
in Burma without bail. We strongly call for their
immediate and unconditional release.

Like the soldiers in Gu Dar Pyin, powerful
forces in the Burmese Government have denied the
ethnic cleansing in Rakhine state. To make sure that
no one contradicts their preposterous denials, they
are preventing access to Rakhine to anyone or any
organization that might bear witness to their atrocities,
including the Security Council. The result is that they
are denying access to many organizations that the
displaced and starving in Burma desperately need today.

Even before the violence started, malnutrition
was a serious problem in Rakhine state, but now there
are reports from Rohingya who have found refuge in
Bangladesh that the military's actions are leading
a campaign of purposeful starvation, forcing more
families out of the country. Homes are being looted.
Farmers are being denied the ability to harvest their
crops. Girls and women are being abducted into
sexual slavery.

We have urged Burma to work with the United
Nations and its agencies to allow the Office ofthe United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and other humanitarian organizations immediate
and unhindered access to Rakhine state. We repeat
that call today with even more urgency. The need for
humanitarian aid in Burma is dire and it is immediate.

The leader of Burma has been internationally
celebrated in the past for her commitment to peace and
to her fellow man. If any of that love of humankind
can still be found in the Government of Burma, it must
act now. The least it can do is allow humanitarian
groups access to those who are suffering. It costs the
Government nothing to allow food to the starving,
medical care to the wounded and psychological
services to the sexually abused. The world is watching
and waiting for Burma to act. What we have seen so
far is cruel and barbaric. To top it off, it has the gall to
blame the media. Unhindered media access is vitally
important. Journalists, like the two imprisoned Reuters
reporters, are an indispensable source of information.

I also call on the Secretary-General to quickly
appoint a special envoy for Burma, and I call on the
Burmese Government to allow a United Nations
fact-finding mission and the Special Rapporteur into
the country. Without the media and United Nations
personnel in Burma to shed light on the crimes being
committed, there is no hope for justice for the Victims.

We are grateful to the people and Government
of Bangladesh for hosting hundreds of thousands of
refugees. We understand the burden that it creates,
and we ask Bangladesh to continue to work closely
with UNHCR and other international organizations to
ensure that repatriations of refugees are voluntary. We
ask that it continue to ensure the safety and security
of both those who choose to relocate and those who do
not. But, in the end, real progress depends on an end to
the terror and the killing. We cannot expect nor should
we ask refugees to return to Burma until it is safe to
do so. They must be confident that they will not fall
victim to the same horrors that drove them from their
homes in the first place. Right now, those refugees do
not have that confidence. Many are too scared to return
to their country.

The Government of Burma - and the Government
of Burma alone - has the power and the moral
obligation to correct that. It must create the conditions
to assure refugees that they can safely return to their
villages and their homes. Burma and Bangladesh have
had substantive discussions on repatriation and that
is a good thing. But we can talk forever and not make
progress, as long as the military and the Government
continue to make living in Burma a death sentence for
the Rohingya people.

I am profoundly grateful to my colleagues from
the United Kingdom for arranging this meeting today.
There are powerful forces at work trying to cover up the
unspeakable horror taking place in Burma, but we owe
it to both the victims and the rest of the Burmese people
to demand transparency, access and accountability. We
need to honour the bravery of the Buddhist village elder
who provided Reuters with horrific photographs of the
atrocities at Inn Din because, in his words, "I do not
want it to happen like that in the future." We need to
honour his hope for a better Burma, one in which such
behaviour is not tolerated against any person or group.

Unfortunately, the Security Council has so far
failed in its responsibility to act in response to the
clear threat to international peace and security that has
resulted from recent events in northern Rakhine state.
We cannot look the other way in this situation. What
happened and continues to happen in Burma is not
okay. The Council must hold the military accountable
for its actions and exert pressure on Aung San Suu Kyi
to acknowledge that those horrific acts are taking place
in her country. No more excuses.

I urge my colleagues to seize this opportunity to
end our inaction and live up to our responsibilities as
members ofthe Security Council. I call on all nations to
join the United States to do more than just demanding
an end to the atrocities in Burma, and to actually take
the steps we know are needed to put the crisis on the
path leading towards a solution.

