The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Azerbaijan.

To begin with, I would like to thank Ambassadors
Wittig, Puri and Sangqu for their comprehensive
briefings, and to express our appreciation for their
second year of excellent work and professional
leadership of the three Committees with counter-
terrorism mandates.

Azerbaijan strongly supports close cooperation
and effective coordination among those Committees.
The presidential statement adopted by the Council last
week (S/PRST/2012/17) reiterated the need for
enhancing continued cooperation among the
Committees and their groups of experts. Information
exchange, joint outreach activities and country visits,
coordinated activities with international and regional
organizations, joint meetings and representation are all
important tools for effective cooperation. In that regard,
we are pleased to note the increased cooperation in
some areas among the expert groups, and hope to see
greater collaboration in other areas as well.

Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, I
would like to underline the enormous importance of the
full implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005) and 1963 (2010) by Member States, and to
stress the crucial role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in promoting and facilitating that
implementation.

We welcomed the issuance earlier this year of the
global survey of Member States' implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) (see S/2012/16). We were
pleased with the survey's comprehensive approach,
which included analysing the implementation by
geographical region and by theme, assessing the
evolution of challenges and identifying implementation
gaps that Member States have encountered. We also
commend the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
for new, practical approaches aimed at helping Member
States strengthen their implementation, which in our
opinion constitute the most important part of the
survey and one to which States should give particular
consideration.

Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, we
share the view that Al-Qaida and its affiliates continue
to pose a serious threat to international peace and
security. Azerbaijan welcomes the Committee's
ongoing efforts to counter Al-Qaida-related terrorism.
We agree that the Committee's practical approach to
the Al-Qaida sanctions list, including its regular
updates and review, contributes to universal and
effective implementation of the sanctions. It is
important that the Committee ensure that sanctions are
fully implemented and appropriately adjusted to
address current threats from Al-Qaida and its associates.

We would also like to mention the support
rendered by the Monitoring Team through its outreach
activities, including engaging with Member States and
collaborating with various regional and subregional
organizations and civil society. The Monitoring Team
has played a crucial role in raising awareness and
increasing knowledge of the sanctions regime, and we
highlight in particular its contribution to completing
narrative summaries for all the entries on the Al-Qaida
list.

Azerbaijan is greatly appreciative of the activities
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), in particular its close interaction with
Member States. It is essential that the Committee
continue to solicit national implementation reports
from Member States and, with support from the Group
of Experts, to work constructively with them to
increase the number of such reports.
Meanwhile, we believe that finalizing the
establishment of the group of experts that will assist
the Committee in carrying out its mandate under
resolution 1540 (2004) is crucial. However, in so doing,
we cannot allow any region to be overrepresented in
that small group of experts. In that regard, we reiterate
our firm belief that broad geographical representation
must be one of the major criteria in selecting
appropriate experts to serve in the Group.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Spain.

