President Guelleh (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
2
members of the Security Council for making it possible
to hold this exchange with the Council today.

We are at a crossroads in Africa. Against all
predictions, many of our countries are booming and
making gradual progress and now have genuine
prospects. That is thanks to better macroeconomic
management and growing confidence on the part of
international investors in the potential of the continent.
We are now in a period of unprecedented economic
growth. Although its effects cannot be denied, the
current financial crisis may have a relatively minimal
impact. Nevertheless, as in other parts of the world,
increased food and energy prices are making the
situation on the continent more complicated. In that
regard, I should very much like to acknowledge and
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his efforts
and leadership in raising international awareness of the
harmful and devastating effects of high food and
energy prices, especially on the most vulnerable in the
developing world.

Over the past three decades, my country, which is
a small, peace-loving and progressive, has been able to
survive and preserve its stability in the face of several
ongoing regional wars and violent civil conflicts.
These continue to be tumultuous times characterized
by pain, human sadness and great poverty.
Unfortunately, the Horn of Africa continues to
experience more than its fair share of unhappiness,
tragedy, dislocation and destruction. That is untenable
in human, social, economic and political terms. In that
regard, as it did in the past in connection with the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Council may wish to take an in-depth look at that
hotbed of regional tension.

Somalia in particular is in ruins. It has been
involved in a bloody conflict that is distinct from the
long self-destructive war that has been waged by
warlords. It is no longer an exclusively a Somali
affair - not that it ever was. It therefore requires full,
transparent, honest and neutral regional and
international involvement to determine once and for all
the destiny of a people whose future as a nation is at
stake. The increased international attention to the
piracy along the Somali coast is understandable and
legitimate, but let us not lose sight of the crucial fact
that the piracy is part of the growing chaos in Somalia.
It is a symptom of the power vacuum in that country,
Whose current political structure is too fragile, weak
and coming apart; it does not enjoy the respect, interest
08-56550
or trust of the Somali people. In addition, it appears to
be its own worst enemy. Unfortunately, Somalia is a
country that continues to be hostage to divergent
political, strategic and economic interests. Half of its
population requires emergency humanitarian
assistance. The people of Somalia suffer from one of
the highest levels of displacement, drought,
unemployment and inflation.

The region, the United Nations, the African
Union and other regional organizations are deeply
committed to the re-establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia. To that end, a crucial meeting is
planned for the end of this month at Nairobi. We have a
collective moral and legal responsibility to pay much
more attention to that forgotten conflict and the crisis
in Somalia. In the context of international peace and
security, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for saving that country from its
unavoidable descent into a nightmare of national
destruction. The Council bears the weighty
responsibility of resolutely deciding that it is time to
protect the people living in that chaotic situation. Our
failure to act will have serious consequences. I
therefore call on the Council to act now and to act
responsibly.

Following the abrupt, inexplicable and ill-
considered forceful occupation of part of Djibouti's
territory by Eritrean forces earlier this year, my country
has adopted a policy of calm and caution that has
provided sufficient time for bilateral contacts at all
levels to resolve our differences amicably and
peacefully. All of our efforts have been in vain,
however, for Eritrea's military construction on the
ground continues. Given that brazen and illegal
situation, the lack of cooperation on the part of the
Eritrean authorities and their failure to respond to our
initiatives, we have been left with no choice but to
mass our troops along the border to protect our
territorial integrity.

Despite the military confrontation imposed on us,
we have also sought out the good offices of the African
Union, the League of Arab States, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, the United Nations and
friendly States. While we have been tireless in the
search for a peaceful and diplomatic solution, Eritrea
has continued to reinforce its troops and has carried out
further incursions into our territory. Intensive and
sustained regional and international efforts to find a
solution to the crisis have been met only with disdain
08-56550

and outright rejection by the Eritrean authorities.
Eritrea's response, which continues to be misguided,
arrogant and fallacious, illustrates its contempt for our
efforts and those of regional organizations and the
United Nations.

Immediately following the armed conflict of
10 June 2008, which resulted in dozens of victims and
the taking of prisoners on both sides, the Security
Council condemned the Eritrean authorities. That
condemnation was supported by many countries and
regional organizations. Thereafter, the Security Council
deployed a fact-finding mission to Djibouti to assess
the situation in the region of Doumeira and the
growing tensions between the two countries. The
results of the mission are before the Council today. The
conclusions are serious, clear and unquestionable. They
reflect the erratic and irresponsible behaviour of the
Eritrean regime, as well as its deliberate and dishonest
misrepresentation of the facts.

The various calls of the international community
have been met with deafening silence and a blatant
denial that any crisis or conflict exists in the region.
When they have deigned to reply, the Eritrean
authorities have made mind-boggling and baseless
allegations of foreign interference. Allow me to remind
the Council that the high point of the United Nations
fact-finding mission was a visit to the Doumeira
region, where its members were able to observe the
deployment of the two forces.

Given that Eritrea remains blind to the
seriousness of the situation and continues to reject all
attempts by regional and international organizations to
convene talks, including the efforts of the United
Nations to defuse tensions, it is becoming increasingly
clear that Eritrea does not want to respect international
norms and obligations. It is therefore utopian to believe
that we can make even a modicum of progress towards
dialogue or the normalization of relations in the face of
a silent and unreasonable aggressor. It takes two parties
to hold a discussion.

I would like to reiterate here the determination of
my country to recover all its territory now illegally
occupied by Eritrea - Ras Doumeira and the
Doumeira islands. Our forces have withdrawn a few
kilometres from the contested area, in conformity with
the presidential statement of 12 June 2008
(S/PRST/2008/20), which stipulated that the two
parties must show the greatest restraint possible and
3
Withdraw their forces in order to return to the status
quo ante.

The impasse imposed on us by Eritrea is
intolerable and unacceptable. The provocation and
inexplicable invasion of our territory are totally
unacceptable. It is imperative that the Council address
the conflict between Eritrea and my country in a timely
and comprehensive manner. We have waited long
enough and have given the Eritrean authorities more
opportunities than they deserve to accept dialogue and
negotiation instead of confrontation.

However, their decision has been taken. Their
choice is very clear, because they continue to ignore
the urgent appeals of the Security Council and regional
bodies, which are simply trying to solve the conflict -
which will have a much broader effect on the region
and even on the international community - in a
peaceful manner. Without a doubt, the last thing that
the Horn of Africa needs today is another conflict in
the heart of the region. Given the never-ending wars
that have dominated and devastated the region for too
long, the consequences of another war are obvious and
dangerous.

We know that the Eritrean people in no way wish
to have an armed conflict with the Republic of
Djibouti. They are aware of our long-standing
friendship and of the fact that the Djiboutian nation has
been a peace-loving nation ever since its independence.
The Eritrean people are the victims of bad governance
and of the irresponsible, pernicious and unreasonable
behaviour of their leaders. To put those people, who
have suffered far too much from the belligerent
attitudes of their leaders, on the warpath with a
neighbouring and brotherly country once again is a
deplorable and morally reprehensible act.

I would ask the members of the Security Council
to remain very vigilant. I would also alert them to the
danger posed by drawing comparisons between the
current conflict and that between Eritrea and Ethiopia.
Indeed, if there is any similarity between those two
conflicts, it is only because they share the same
destabilizing and destructive element: Eritrea, which is
directly or indirectly mixed up in every conflict in the
Horn of Africa. It is therefore not only imprudent but
dangerous to suggest such a link, which would only
encourage Eritrea to indefinitely occupy our territory,
lead its people into other useless, fratricidal conflicts,
and continue its unbridled adventurism in the region.
I would invite the Council to consider in its
discussion, and with a view to taking a decision, the
following key points, which are broadly illustrated in
the mission's report (S/2008/602).

First, Eritrea, as a State Member of the United
Nations, must be called upon in earnest to honour its
international obligations and to cooperate with this
Organization with a view to accepting its good offices
to resolve the crisis.

Secondly, the immediate priority for my country
is the demilitarization of the conflict area and the
withdrawal of the forces of the two countries to their
pre-February 2008 positions.

Thirdly, the two countries must show themselves
fully willing to re-establish mutual trust, particularly
by activating the existing bilateral mechanisms and
submitting to a legal process or arbitration leading to
an agreed demarcation of the border. We invite the
Council to implement those ideas in order to convince
Eritrea to withdraw from the zones that it has occupied
since March 2008.

In conclusion, given the seriousness and urgency
of the situation, I call on the Council to require both
countries, within a period of approximately three
weeks at the latest, to devote themselves fundamentally
to resolving the crisis. Any failure to implement such a
decision should give rise to the implementation of
sanctions by the Council. The aggression against my
country must not be ignored, remain unpunished or,
even worse, be taken lightly by this Council.

Continued inaction in whatever form will not only
encourage but reward Eritrea's attitude. That would
leave my country with but one option: the option of
war. We would like the Council to take urgent and
effective action on this issue. The conflict represents a
financial black hole, an enormous burden on our limited
resources and a distraction from our development
objectives. My people expect understanding and
support from this Council.

