Ms. Tan (Singapore): I thank Azerbaijan for
convening this meeting and for its concept paper on
today's open debate (S/2013/613, annex). I also thank
Argentina for its work as the Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

Improvements in the working methods of the
Security Council, especially in its transparency
towards the General Assembly, are important to small
States like Singapore. The reality is that small States
are unlikely to obtain a permanent seat in whatever new
configuration that might emerge from an overall reform
of the Council in the future.

In the current situation, it is also increasingly
challenging for small States to be elected as
non-permanent Council members. Campaigns for
contested and uncontested seats on the Council are
becoming financially exorbitant and resource-intensive.
Of the 70 States Members of the United Nations that
have never been elected as members of the Security
Council, 50 are members of the Forum of Small States.
The small States that are elected to the Council also
face constraints. Most small States can be elected to
the Council only once every several decades, given
resource constraints. By the time they have mastered
Security Council processes, their terms are over and
the next generation has to start from scratch when they
are elected.

Nevertheless, many small States continue to
experience first hand the consequences of the failure
to maintain international peace and security. The work
of the Council remains of profound importance to us.
Accordingly, reforms that increase the transparency of
the work and deliberations of the Council are critical to
small States.

We welcome the Council's efforts to improve its
practices as outlined in the series of presidential notes
adopted since 2010, including convening more open

debates, more Arria Formula meetings, consultations
with troop-contributing countries and monthly briefings
on the Security Council's programme of work. Those
initiatives have helped to improve the transparency of
the Council with regard to the General Assembly.

However, the implementation of the recommendations
and proposals contained in the five presidential notes
(S/2010/507, S/2012/402, S/2012/922, S/2012/937 and S/2013/515) has been limited, slow and vary from
presidency to presidency of the Council. For example,
notwithstanding their substantive briefings, which we
support, we also believe that non-members should have
more opportunities to provide input to the work of the
Council's subsidiary bodies. Furthermore, some of
those initiatives have been implemented with an eye to
the letter rather than the spirit of the proposals. Many
of the briefings and reports are largely descriptive
of the Council's work. While we thank the various
presidencies for convening wrap-up meetings, we also
note that such meetings have not been consistently held
and tend to comprise set statements by Security Council
members with general descriptions of meetings held
and resolutions adopted. In our view, the Council could
do more to increase interactivity, deepen the level of
analysis and foster greater critical reflection in its
engagement with the General Assembly.

A good place to start would be the forthcoming
annual report of the Council. Instead of simply being
a descriptive and voluminous compilation of data and
information on the work of the Council, we hope that
this year's report will be more concise and analytical.
For example, it could include an evaluation of the
effectiveness of the Council's decisions as well as
lessons learned.

Last month, we welcomed the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of
chemical weapons in Syria. But let us not forget the
deep unhappiness in the United Nations membership
and the wider world at the impotency of the Council
prior to that adoption in the face of the violence and
atrocities in the crisis in Syria.

The use of the veto is the crux of the problem.
Singapore therefore reiterates its request for the
permanent members of the Council to consider
refraining from using their vetoes to block Council
action aimed at preventing or ending genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In that regard, we
would be interested to hear the reactions of the other
permanent members to the proposals by the French

President on a code of conduct on the use of the veto.
Furthermore, we urge the permanent members to explain
to the General Assembly their reasons for using the veto
or their intention to do so, in particular with regard to
its consistency with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and international law. That is
particularly pertinent at times when the veto is used to
block action intended to maintain international peace
and security.

The Security Council has been given the primary
responsibility by the Members of the United Nations for
maintaining international peace and security, and special
privileges have been given to the permanent members
to enable them to carry out that mandate. However, the
Council does not discharge its responsibility in isolation,
and it needs the support of the States Members of the
United Nations, notably for funding and providing
troops for the Council's mandated operations. Given
that relationship between the Council and the wider
United Nations membership, it is incumbent upon the
Council to increase the transparency of its engagement
with the General Assembly.

