Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I welcome
the opportunity that you have granted me, Madam
President, to brief the Security Council as it considers
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Burundi (S/2019/837). I would first like to congratulate
you, Madam, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and to convey greetings to the other members
of the Council.

Today's briefing is on the document entitled "Report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi",
which was published on 24 October and has already
been submitted for the Council's consideration. The
first part of my briefing concerns some observations
drawn from the report. The second part provides an
update of my work on the inter-Burundian dialogue. In
the third part, I will make some recommendations on
the need for the United Nations to maintain its presence
in Burundi.

With regard to observations from the report, I
would like to note that, in many respects, the situation
in Burundi remains tense. During the reporting period,
an increase in the level of political intolerance and a
growing threat to civil and political freedoms were
observed. Fortunately, the Government responded
by establishing a framework for political dialogue,
bringing together political parties, local administrators
and representatives of the security forces. That
initiative should be encouraged and supported, as
should the life sentences given to four perpetrators
of the 18 August murder in Muyinga of a member of
the Congres national pour la liberte', as well as the
ongoing discussions between the National Council for
Respect for the Arusha Agreement and the Rule of Law
(CNARED) and the Government with regard to the
return of political leaders in exile.

The second observation is about the electoral
process, which, as Council members know, is managed
by the Independent National Electoral Commission.
It is hoped that process will be transparent. Poorly
organized and contested elections, as we all know, are
always a source of conflict.

The third observation pertains to the socioeconomic
situation. There is no need for an in-depth analysis: the
situation continues to deteriorate.

The fourth observation focuses on the security
situation, which, it must be admitted, has improved
throughout the country, although abuses and other
human rights violations continue to be reported here
and there. In any case, it is appropriate to encourage the
Government to meet its obligations to guarantee at all
costs the safety of all of its citizens and to put an end
to impunity.

The fifth, and last, observation is related to the
humanitarian situation, which also remains a matter of
concern. We must nevertheless welcome the voluntary
return of thousands of refugees to the country, while
ensuring that their return and reintegration are carried
out with dignity.

The inter-Burundian dialogue under the auspices of
the East African Community has still not taken place
four years after it was launched, undoubtedly due to a
lack of political will on the part of the parties as well
as, it must be said, firm commitment by States of the
subregion. However, the dialogue would have allowed
for an inclusive new Burundi in the future, thereby
avoiding the doubts and continual stumbling blocks
that we have seen in the past.
However, the twentieth Ordinary Summit of
Heads of State of the East African Community, held in
Arusha on 1 February, decided that the mediator would
undertake further consultations in order to convene
and conclude the dialogue. Unfortunately, nothing
has changed.

In the context of that uncertainty, I have once again
undertaken consultations with leaders of the region,
starting with President Yoweri Museveni, the mediator,
who met with me at his residence in Uganda on
23 August. During our talks, he unequivocally affirmed
to me his willingness to continue the mediation together
with President Kagame, Chair of the East African
Community, as well as the other Heads of State of the
region, but also with the support of the United Nations,
whose continuing critical support he requests.

Having completed those recent steps, it is the right
time for me to conclude my mandate as Special Envoy
for Burundi. In fact, last June I notified the Secretary-
General of my intention to leave. But my meeting with
the mediator, scheduled by him originally for 19 July
but which in the end took place in August, discouraged
me from officially announcing my decision. Today, I
confirm it.

I can say that, while we did not manage to conclude
the dialogue process in Burundi, the role of the United
Nations is far from having been insignificant. We
have indisputably helped to raise awareness among
the leaders of the region that stability in Burundi is
a crucial requirement for comprehensive peace in the
region as a whole.

With that important point that I have just made,
namely, the United Nations ongoing commitment to
Burundi, allow me to briefly describe, if only by way
of accountability, the main activities undertaken under
the mandate entrusted to me.

Since my appointment by the Secretary-General
on 5 May 2017 as Special Envoy for Burundi, I have
spared no effort to assist the facilitation and the region
in completing the inter-Burundian dialogue process. In
that regard, on several occasions, I made visits to the
region and consulted key leaders, including the mediator
and facilitator, as well as the Burundian stakeholders.

On many occasions, I also met with the authorities
of the African Union to raise their awareness and
request their commitment to finding a consensus-
based solution in Burundi. I also have approached some
African Heads of State, always for the same purpose.

In the two and a half years of my work, I was
received once by President Pierre Nkurunziza. More
exactly, it was the day after my appointment, on 27 June
2017. The hopes raised by that first meeting with the
Head of State of Burundi, particularly on issues
related to dialogue and cooperation with the United
Nations, including the signing of the status-of-mission
agreement, have unfortunately still not been fulfilled.

During my periodic visits to Burundi, I had
working sessions with the main political actors and
leaders, both from the opposition and the ruling party. I
also had meetings with representatives of civil society,
of religious denominations and of women's and youth
organizations and of course with accredited diplomats
in the country. I met with members of CNARED
in Brussels to persuade them to participate in the
dialogue, which was the only way for them was to work
on the renewal and reconstruction of their country.
My Office in Bujumbura has established cooperative
relationships with all parties concerned, particularly
with representatives of the Government and of the
international community and the main political actors.

Within the joint technical working group set up
to support the facilitator's efforts, my Office has
provided significant technical, logistical and financial
support, thereby contributing to the convening of
several consultations, including plenary sessions of the
dialogue, in Arusha and Entebbe.

The multifaceted support of my Office and my
personal engagement with the facilitator and the
mediator have often helped to remove certain political
and technical obstacles and made it possible to continue
the peace process in Burundi.

Since taking up office, I have had the opportunity to
report regularly to the Council on developments in the
situation in Burundi. I appreciated members' comments,
advice and encouragement. As I conclude my mandate,
I would like to thank them in that regard and for their
assistance and constant and comprehensive support. I
thank the Secretary-General for the trust he has placed
in me throughout my term. I thank Ambassador Jurg
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to thank all
my colleagues, in particular the staff of the Office of
the Special Envoy in Bujumbura and of the Department

of Political Affairs and Peacebuilding here in New
York. I thank the authorities and the people of Burundi.
In a word, I express my sincere gratitude to all those
who have facilitated my work over the past two years.

