Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the report on Liberia
submitted by the Secretary-General in document S/ 1995/279
pursuant to paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
972 (1995). Having read the report, my delegation can only
deplore the serious situation prevailing in the country as a
result of the intransigence of the factions now fighting for
power and their failure to meet the commitments
undertaken in the Accra and Akosombo Agreements.

The Secretary-General' s report allows us to understand
the gravity of the situation, which can be summed up as
follows. The parties have failed to reach an agreement to
install a Council of State, a fundamental step towards the
implementation of the Accra Agreement. Hostilities
between the parties to the conflict have intensified, leading
in turn to an increase in the number of refugees and
displaced persons. There have been reports of massacres,
which are currently under investigation. Tanzania and
Uganda have decided to withdraw their contingents from
the peace force in Liberia, the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG). The humanitarian situation has deteriorated
dramatically, to the extent that the supply of food to the
camps for refugees and displaced persons is in serious
danger. This and other negative factors must be overcome
if peace is to prevail in Liberia.

The Secretary-General, in paragraph 22 of his report,
states that the peace process remains at an impasse. Military
activities have intensified and the parties have failed to
implement one of the basic steps of the Accra Agreement.
Nevertheless, one positive element - which my delegation
considers to be very important - is the summit that is soon
to be hosted by Nigeria for States members of the
Economic Community of West African States. For its part,
my delegation appreciates Nigeria's efforts to promote
peace in Liberia.

The draft resolution before us today marks another
effort on the part of the Council to secure a just solution
and lasting peace in Liberia. This will be possible only if

 
the factions in conflict decide to cooperate to achieve it.
The draft resolution also establishes a committee to
monitor the arms embargo imposed under resolution
788 (1992), and my delegation hopes that this will
contribute decisively to the peace process in Liberia.

Lastly, we believe that if the factions in Liberia do
not wake up to this opportunity and seize it, the Council
should seriously reconsider its role in that country, since
resources and efforts are being exhausted with no results
to justify the United Nations presence in Liberia.

My delegation supports the draft resolution in all
respects.

