The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

The Secretary-General describes the current phase of
the Angolan peace process as the most difficult since the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol. UNITA is clearly not doing
what it agreed to do in 1994 - namely, to transform itself
from a military organization into a legitimate opposition

party.

UNITA has already come a long way, and we
welcome its participation in the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, the unified Angolan Armed Forces
and the National Assembly. We have no illusions about the
difficulty of those steps. Indeed, we pay tribute to those
members of UNITA who have had the courage to work
with their former opponents. But UNITA as such has been
unwilling to take the final steps. Two months have elapsed
since the Security Council demanded that UNITA provide
credible information on its troops, enable the extension of
State administration, and transform Radio VORGAN into
a non-partisan radio station. Yet UNITA headquarters have
delayed, or provided only incomplete or implausible
information. Repeated reminders have fallen on deaf ears.

UNITA should now be in no doubt about the resolve
of the Security Council. We will do everything we can to
keep the peace process from slipping. We agree that,
regrettably, the time has come for additional measures
against UNITA. They are carefully drafted to send a
message to the leaders of UNITA that they must fully meet
their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Indeed, we
hope that these measures will not have to come into
effect; there is more than enough time for UNITA to
respond. It is not only in their interests but those of all
the Angolan people.

We are very concerned at recent military tensions in
Angola. Both UNITA and the Government have
contributed to these. We are not about to apportion blame,
but we do think both parties should make every effort not
to resort to military measures. A return to military
confrontation only sets back the international
community's heavy investment in trying to make Angola
a success story. It would be a tragedy if, after all the
progress achieved since the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol, the Angolan leaders were to allow this to
happen.

In this respect, we believe that a meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in Angola could
help to lower the political temperature and make a
positive contribution to the peace process. We urge both
of them to meet so that they may resolve the remaining
differences.

In closing, I pay tribute to the men and women of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA), to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and to the representatives of the three
observer States in Luanda, who have done so much to
bring the peace process to its present stage. Let us hope
their efforts are not in vain.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1997/669, as orally revised in its

provisional form.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
 

In favour:
Chile. China, Costa Rica. Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution, as orally revised in its provisional form,
has been adopted unanimously as resolution 1127 (1997).

There are no further speakers on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.

