Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
expressing my delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We hope that our deliberations today will help in
creating a better comprehension of the gravity and
complexity of the problem and renewed determination
on the part of the international community to address
these problems.

We are grateful also to the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
his comprehensive briefing. We have listened to his
review of various conflict situations as well as the
prescriptions with great interest.

The two important documents developed by his
Office, the road map and the aide-memoire, together
present us with a blueprint and a strategy for the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. The
challenges that he has highlighted and the ten action
points that he has identified in the road map are
important. We presume that the Council will pronounce
itself in a presidential statement on these issues.
Pakistan also looks forward to participating in the
consultative process that was mentioned by the Under-
Secretary-General.

The Security Council and the United Nations can,
we believe, take a number of practical actions to
implement the strategy for the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. First, it would be useful to understand
and to adjust to the new nature of warfare and conflict
in the present-day world. While humanitarian law was
devised mostly to regulate the conduct of disciplined
and organized armies, present-day conflicts are mostly
asymmetric in nature with strong organized forces
confronting non-State actors and guerrilla forces.

The protection of civilians is more difficult in
these circumstances. Nevertheless, a greater effort is
necessary to secure from the contending forces
commitments of adherence to the Geneva Conventions
and Protocols and other principles of humanitarian law.
The onus is, of course, on the organized forces, but
even the non-State parties should be called upon by the
international community to respect the norms of the
Geneva Conventions and Protocols.

One issue that affects civilians in this context is
the treatment of prisoners. Often in irregular warfare,
especially in the war on terrorism, there is difficulty in
distinguishing between civilians and combatants. Yet,
there are minimum standards that must be observed in
the treatment of suspected combatants.

Secondly, the rules of engagement in asymmetric
conflicts need to be improved. There are well-known
rules, for example, regarding the use of civilians as
shields, the non-targeting of civilian structures, and
caution in the use of force in populated areas, all of
which need to be more scrupulously observed. But
there may be need to examine the use of asymmetric or
massive force against individual targets. There is a
need for greater examination of the principle of
proportionality in the use of force. There is also the
need to examine the use of so-called smart weapons,
which, all too often, are not so smart. There is a need
for certain standards of certainty with regard to
intelligence relating to the use of small weapons, heavy
weapons or smart weapons so that tragic accidents can
be averted.

We feel there is a greater need to resort to
ceasefires and truces, even if these are temporary. In
this context, I must mention that Pakistan is happy that
the proposal of our Prime Minister for a ceasefire along
the Line of Control in Kashmir has been accepted and
reciprocated, and the ceasefire continues to hold. This
will save hundreds of lives in the coming months.

Thirdly, the international community must deal
more effectively with the consequences of conflict. The
so-called duty to protect cannot be reduced to merely a
duty to intervene militarily in situations of gross
violations of human rights. This duty arises well ahead
of the need for such physical intervention. The United
Nations and the international community can do some
practical things to promote such protection.

First, as has been rightly emphasized by
Mr. Egeland, we must secure agreement of all parties
for access to conflict areas and to civilian victims.

Secondly, war not only causes civilian casualties,
it also creates widows and orphans. The international
community must respond to this phenomenon in a more
targeted manner. We should consider the creation of an
international fund or facility to help those whom I
would call the widows and the orphans of war.

Thirdly, armed conflicts also create refugees and
displaced persons. There are estimated to be over 20
million refugees today. While the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
seek to address their plight, it is also evident to all of
us that assistance in most cases for refugees and
displaced persons is inadequate. The refugees who
appear on global television get most of the help. Others
have to mostly fend for themselves. The United
Nations should therefore establish some rule or criteria
to publicize where the refugees and displaced persons
are, how many they are and what their assistance
requirements are. The Security Council, for its part,
can create binding obligations for States through a
resolution or resolutions to provide assistance to all
refugees and displaced persons in need. The UNHCR
should be required, also, to periodically publish and
circulate statistics on refugees and displaced persons
for this purpose.

The fourth area I wish to mention is the issue of
impunity - the redress of wrongs committed during
conflicts against civilians, especially against women,
who are so often the victims of rape in such situations,
the maltreatment of children and the resort to genocide.
It is essential to punish these crimes, both as a
deterrent against future violations and to create the
basis of political reconciliation and sustainable peace
in and among countries and societies that have
experienced conflict.

It may well be difficult to establish specific
tribunals for each conflict, but the use of the
international criminal tribunal, or even of the
International Court of Justice, to enable individuals and
groups to seek redress should become an international
norm. For instance, redress for the massacre of
Srebrenica should be a right accorded to the families of

the victims, and no conflict should be a forgotten
emergency.

The fifth area I wish to mention is the resort to
naming and shaming, which has been upheld as an
effective instrument to secure good behaviour, such as
in the protection and promotion of human rights. In the
context of protecting civilians in armed conflicts, the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross should be authorized to publish a
compendium each year of the numbers of civilians
affected or estimated to be affected by armed conflicts,
the nature of the violations against them and, if
possible, those responsible for such violations. This
would appear as an appendix to the annually updated
aide-memoire prepared by the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

A sixth area is the need for a conscious effort to
ensure the protection of international humanitarian and
United Nations personnel in conflict situations. In this
context, Pakistan has strongly condemned the attacks
on humanitarian and United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan, in Iraq and elsewhere. We believe that the
Security Council took a laudable step earlier this year
when it adopted resolution 1502 (2003) on the
protection of humanitarian and United Nations
personnel in conflict zones.

But more is required. We believe that a publicity
campaign or campaigns need to be launched in conflict
situations to impress upon all parties that the United
Nations and international personnel are impartial and
their mission is to ease the pain of war and help to
promote peace with justice. It is therefore also vital
that the United Nations and international agencies must
not become identified with any one party to a particular
dispute, that their composition in nationality and
expertise should be balanced and that they should be
perceived to be neutral. At the same time, violence
against international personnel, from whatever quarter,
needs to be effectively penalized. There should be no
exceptions or exemptions in this regard.

Finally, it must be acknowledged that the best
protection of civilians in conflicts is to prevent
conflicts and to end them if they break out. This is the
primary function and responsibility of the Security
Council. The Council possesses a panoply of
modalities and means for conflict prevention and
conflict resolution. We must explore all possible means
to achieve this objective. The debate on the use of the
Charter's Chapter VI modalities during the Pakistan
presidency of the Council last May was most useful.
The Council should consider other ways of resolving
disputes and responding to conflicts, for example
through the creation of composite committees to
address complex crises where social and economic
factors are predominant. The reform of the United
Nations should focus, in our view, on promoting this
central goal of saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war.

