Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his comprehensive briefing.

Japan strongly condemns the attacks carried out
against the Myanmar security forces and civilians
in northern areas of Rakhine state since 25 August.
We express our sincere condolences to the bereaved
families.

At the same time, Japan is deeply concerned by
the human rights and humanitarian conditions on the
ground, the allegations of the killing of civilians, and
the fact that approximately 500,000 people have been
displaced to Bangladesh since August, according
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We call for the restoration of
security in a manner that is consistent with the rule
of law and with full respect for human rights, while
ensuring transparency throughout their efforts. We also
stress the importance of continuous efforts to secure
humanitarian access for all affected communities.
Against that backdrop, Japan sent Mr. Iwao Horii,
Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, to
Myanmar last week and conveyed our deep concerns
and position directly to the leaders of the Myanmar
Government, including the military. He also visited
Bangladesh yesterday and exchanged views on this
issue with the people and Government of Bangladesh.

Japan commends the dedicated efforts of
Bangladesh in responding to the humanitarian aspects
of the current situation. Japan has been providing
humanitarian assistance for displaced persons in
Rakhine state and Bangladesh. Furthermore, as Foreign
Minister Kono pledged last week, Japan has decided to
provide up to $4 million in emergency assistance for
those affected by recent incidents in Myanmar and the
people who have fled to Bangladesh.

Japan was encouraged by the commitment,
expressed by State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi on
19 September, to the early implementation of the final
recommendations by the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State to achieve lasting peace and prosperity.
Japan also welcomes her commitment to taking action
against all people, regardless of their religion, race and
political position, who go against the law of the land
and violate human rights.

What is important is prompt action. We take
note of the announcement of the establishment of the
Implementation Committee on the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State. Japan will
support the efforts of the Government of Myanmar to
address the human rights and humanitarian conditions
on the ground.

