Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Miranda,
Minister for External Relations of Angola, who is
present with us today. We would like to thank the
Ambassador ofIreland for his introductory statement in
his capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee.
The Chinese delegation would also like to thank the
Monitoring Mechanism for its outstanding work under
the leadership of Ambassador Larrain.

The question of Angola has been on our agenda
for a long time. The security and humanitarian
situation remains grave, and it is seriously affecting
peace and stability in the region. UNITA, headed by
Savimbi, must bear the primary responsibility for this.
China supports the Council in taking effective
measures to enhance sanctions against UNITA so as to
compel it to return to the peace process as soon as
possible.

The Council's sanctions against UNITA have
effectively contained the growth of its military
strength, weakened its capacity to wage war and
achieved other notable results. At the same time, it
should be noted that UNITA, through transnational
criminal networks, is still engaged in the illegal trade
in diamonds and weapons and in related financial
activities, such as money-laundering. Furthermore,
UNITA is taking advantage of the loopholes in the
regulation mechanisms of certain countries and
regions, and it is continuing its activities in violation of
the sanctions. In view of this, the Security Council
should step up its work, formulate policies and further
enhance the effectiveness of the sanctions against
UNITA.

The final report of the Monitoring Mechanism
provides a very detailed account of its investigation
into, and an analysis of, the implementation of the
sanctions in the areas of oil, weapons, travel, financial
activities and diamonds. It proposes enhanced
measures and targeted recommendations. China
believes that the Council should seriously study and
implement the recommendations contained in the
report and thereby enhance the effectiveness of the
sanctions against UNITA.

In conclusion, we call on all countries to truly
implement the relevant resolutions of the Council and
actively cooperate with the Monitoring Mechanism.

