Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to welcome
Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan to the Council and
to thank Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for
his brutally truthful assessment of the situation.

We stand by the people of Afghanistan and its
National Unity Government. The deteriorating situation
in the Hindu Kush calls for renewed engagement on the
part of the international community. But we also expect
more from the Government and the regional Powers.
The hopes of the transformation decade must not be
lost.

The conflict has already exacted a heavy toll on
Afghans. The Taliban campaign shows no signs of
abating. Fanatics affiliated with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant add fuel to the conflict. Suicide
attacks and improvised explosive devices maim
and kill hundreds of innocents daily. Human rights
defenders, women's rights activists, workers from
non-governmental organizations, journalists and staff
members of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) are being targeted, as happened
recently in Kunduz. Kidnappings and beheadings of
Hazaras are inflaming inter-ethnic violence. We call
on everyone in the region to support the Afghan-led
peace process in good faith. President Ghani's efforts
to restart direct peace talks with the Taliban represent
the only way forward. Any future accord must retain
all the major achievements of the past decade, including
increased protection of Afghan women's rights.

We call on the National Unity Government to
continue its reforms. A broad consensus is required in
order to improve the rule of law, the protection of human
rights, the fight against corruption and reform of the
electoral process. The economy's weak performance
does not augur well. We are worried that the public
discontent around the country is also an expression of
public uncertainty about its future.

Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan decreased
this year but, given the nexus that exists between drug
production and trafficking and the insurgency, it is
imperative that the new National Drug Action Plan
does not become just another paper. The addiction rate
among the people of Afghanistan is staggering and
could have a very bad effect on the country's future.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General noted, young and capable Afghans are leaving
their homeland, and the National Unity Government
should focus on efforts aimed at creating jobs and
improving the country's business climate. While there
is clear evidence of gains in women's rights, violence
against women and girls remains widespread. The
stoning of a 21-year-old woman in Ghor province
was despicable, and it must be investigated and those
responsible brought to justice. We commend the
Government's efforts to promote its national action
plan based on resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. Women must be able to participate
fully in every aspect of Afghanistan's public processes.

Enhancing regional cooperation remains an
important element in building a prosperous and
peaceful Afghanistan. All of its neighbours have a
stake in Afghanistan's stability, and we commend
their continued engagement in efforts towards regional
security and economic advancement during the latest
meetings of the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan and the Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process.

Lithuania's diplomatic ties with Afghanistan date
back to the 1930s. We remain a partner, supporter and
contributor in its efforts to achieve prosperity. We will
continue our political, military and civilian support and
promotion of regional initiatives. Lithuania remains
engaged in the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission
and continues to participate in the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan. Given the recent spike in
violence, we urgently need to discuss the international
community's further engagement in Afghanistan after
2016. Lithuania stands ready to increase its military
training and assistance mission within the Resolute
Support Mission format.

The presence of UNAMA remains critical to the
advancement of human rights, democratic processes
and development in Afghanistan. We hope that during
next year's Security Council negotiations on UNAMA's
mandate, its presence in the field in remote regions of
the country will be seen as vital to achieving peace,
self-reliance and growth in Afghanistan.

