I congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the Security Council for this month, and I thank you for having convened this meaningful discussion on peacekeeping with a particular focus on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. As a top troop- and police-contributing country, Rwanda considers this topic to be of critical importance in our collective effort to lend support in the implementation of the Security Council mandates on the protection of civilians. I join others in assuring the Council of my delegation's full support in this endeavour. This debate comes at a time when Member States are facing an unprecedented global health crisis in the form of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Host nations of peacekeeping operations have not been spared either, which may affect the implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates and the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the needy. Even amid COVID-19, our troops and police have maintained the tempo of operation while implementing protection- of-civilians mandates. Saving the lives of innocent civilians needs to be a primary responsibility of peacekeeping missions with protection-of-civilians mandates. The peace process is for the people, mainly civilians, in particular women and children, who are the most vulnerable to violence during armed conflicts. The failure to protect civilians from armed violence and atrocities, including sexual exploitation and abuse, during conflict defeats the purpose of peace undertakings. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366) notes that following the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and subsequent protection-specific resolutions, the Security Council enhanced the protection framework for civilians in armed conflict, which has saved the lives of many innocent people. However, the report also points to the fact that a lot remains to be done to strengthen the protection of civilians, including humanitarian personnel. We must acknowledge that the Geneva Convention and related Protocols have not been observed, hence the lack of ability to provide the desired protection to civilians in armed conflict, as armed groups have consistently violated their protection-of-civilians obligations. In addition, protection of civilians mandates have not done enough to prevent killings, sexual and gender-based abuse or restrictions in the flow of humanitarian aid. In that vein, we wish to emphasize the following points. States Members of the United Nations and the Secretariat, in partnership with host nations, the African Union and other regional organizations, need to collectively strengthen compliance with international law as an essential legal instrument for the protection of civilians. Most civilian deaths, suffering and displacement could be avoided if parties to conflict consistently respected and diligently upheld the Geneva Convention and its Protocols. Peacekeeping operations are being impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including through restrictions on movement and peacekeeper rotations. Six of 13 current United Nations peace operations have the protection of civilians at the core of their mandates. Emerging challenges to international peace and security, as well as the COVID-19 pandemic, necessitate a more robust and comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians. The safety and health of peacekeepers and other United Nations personnel are equally important. There are growing concerns over the rising trend of COVID-19 cases in host countries that make United Nations personnel susceptible to this pandemic. The situation calls for appropriate assistance. Our peacekeepers will be safer from contracting COVID-19 so long as host countries' communities are safe. A recent report on COVID-19 cases in protection-of-civilians sites in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is an urgent reminder that something needs to be done as soon as possible. We urge the Secretariat to come up with a concrete plan to contain the situation. The intercommunity spread of COVID-19 can be avoided if action is taken fast and as per World Health Organization guidelines. There is an urgent need for the Secretariat to mobilize resources and capabilities to contain and prevent the spread of COVID-19 in camps for internally displaced persons and refugees under the protection of United Nations peacekeepers in a context where social distancing is challenging. In that regard, Rwanda recently partnered with the Central African Republic, a country that hosts a United Nations peacekeeping mission, to build COVID-19 testing capabilities through the training of laboratory technicians and the provision of testing equipment. This practical example of South-South bilateral cooperation shows that with modest, targeted and rapid interventions we can realize significant benefits in the protection of host communities and United Nations peacekeepers against COVID-19. We welcome previous mandates that explicitly respond to recurring issues of the protection of civilians and sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict. We appreciate that there is increased attention to context-specific pre-deployment training, which is key to improving the operational capacity and performance of peacekeepers. Conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence continues to inflict physical and psychological suffering on women and girls in armed conflict. The COVID-19 pandemic poses extreme risks for women and girls in fragile and conflict-affected situations, mainly because the pandemic makes it more difficult for protection and humanitarian workers to reach vulnerable populations. Women should be at the centre of the response to the pandemic, and socioeconomic plans should be designed with the lives and future of women and girls in mind. We cannot emphasize enough the importance of women at all levels of peacekeeping. Reports show that deploying women in meaningful roles increases the effectiveness of peacekeeping and enhances missions' ability to protect civilians. Rwanda is happy to be among the top contributors of female police in peacekeeping missions. There is ample evidence that employing women in peacekeeping significantly reduces the potential for conflict and confrontation between communities. It provides a broader sense of security to local populations, including women and children. In that regard, we are supporting in practice the United Nations ambition to increase the percentage of female peacekeepers deployed. The Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians are a non-binding set of pledges to implement best practices in peacekeeping. It is the best instrument that addresses the most relevant aspects of peacekeeping, including assessment and planning, force generation, training and equipping personnel, performance and accountability. The Principles address much broader challenges that undermine the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations conducted in conflict situations. So far 50 Member States, including top troop- and police-contributing countries as well as financial- contributing countries, have endorsed them. We call upon other Member States to come on board. We also appreciate the role of United Nations police in assisting with the protection of civilians, strengthening and extending law and order, building confidence and working towards proper and coordinated peace transitions. As peacekeeping missions turn into peacebuilding ones, enhancing policing and law enforcement becomes necessary. On the political front, Member States and non-State actors should support all efforts by the United Nations and regional organizations, particularly the African Union, in attempts to respond to and mediate conflicts. Peace agreements reached in the Sudan and South Sudan are clear evidence that the primacy of politics in the framework of United Nations partnership with regional organizations makes a collective approach to conflict resolution and conflict de-escalation work. Finally, we fully appreciate the central role and value of peacekeeping missions with protection-of-civilians mandates; we know what is at stake when we fall short of our expectations and responsibilities and what it will take to make peacekeeping effective now and in future. Let me reiterate the importance of having a common understanding of the scope and intensity of implementing protection-of-civilians mandates even amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Partnership and cooperation among the United Nations and regional organizations are essential. At the same time, training and properly equipping troops and police should, as such, conform to the realities in the mission field.
