Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Austrian
delegation for its remarkable presidency of the Security
Council in November and also to convey to you,
Mr. President, our best wishes for your presidency.

In addition to this statement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has aligned itself with the joint statement
of the European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its profound
gratitude to the Presidents of both Tribunals, Judge
Robinson of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Judge Byron of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and the Prosecutors Mr. Brammertz and Mr. J allow, for
their tireless work and determination in seeking justice,
and for their efforts in making their reports
comprehensive and detailed. The work of both
Tribunals has been crucial since they were established
and remains such in combating impunity. We also note
the importance of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on international tribunals and
commend the work of its Chair, Ambassador Mayr-
Harding of Austria, as well as the efforts of the United
Nations Office of the Legal Counsel.

We especially welcome the positive assessments,
presented in the briefings of both the President and the
Prosecutor of the ICTY, of the level of cooperation
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the ICTY, which
confirms once again our strong determination and
long-standing commitment to the Tribunal's values,
goals and legacy. This high level of cooperation is also
reflected in the number of accused being transferred to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Of the 13 accused who have
been transferred to the national jurisdictions of
countries of the former Yugoslavia, 10 have been
transferred to Bosnia and Herzegovina alone. The
proceedings against nine of them have been concluded,
and the manner in which these cases were conducted
by the War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was in full compliance with
the highest standards of international law. In that
context, we also strongly support the efforts that the
ICTY has made through its outreach programme and
the continuous support and assistance provided to
national jurisdictions in the region.

The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
responded to the Tribunal's requests for assistance on
documents and access to Government archives. The

authorities are also continuing to assist in facilitating
the appearance of witnesses before the Tribunal. In that
context, we want to underline the importance of the
role of the international community, which has been
essential in assisting with witness protection
programmes and, when necessary, in providing support
for witness relocation.

My country recognizes the efforts of Prosecutor
Brammertz to secure justice for victims and their
families.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully aware of the
conditions set out in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004) for the accomplishment of the completion
strategy, but notes with concern that, with two fugitives
remaining at large, the full completion of the Tribunal's
work cannot be expected.

There is no doubt that the Tribunals have served
as an inspiration to the international community by
refusing to let perpetrators of the most heinous and
grave crimes to escape justice. Therefore, the
international community itself must stand firm when it
comes to its decision that Ratko Mladic and Goran
Hadzie must be tried before the ICTY. Under no
circumstances can they count on impunity due to the
fact that the mandate of the Tribunal is coming to an
end. It is justice, and not deadlines, that the Tribunal
needs to deliver.

The implementation of the completion strategy
remains of great concern to us. We welcome the
ongoing discussion on an adequate residual mechanism
and understand the importance and complexity of the
issue. The mechanism requires consideration and needs
to be set up in such a manner as to deal adequately
with the issue of prosecuting those subject to
outstanding warrants and arrests and ensure that
impunity is not an option.

