Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, I would like to extend my
sincere congratulations on your country's assumption
of the Security Council presidency for this month and

for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East.

I would like also to express my country's support for
the statements made, or to be made, by the speakers on
behalf ofthe League ofArab States, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.
I would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
comprehensive briefing on the topic.

Israel continues to violate international law and
the rights of the Palestinian people through acts that
include, inter alia, displacement, expulsion, arbitrary
detention and ill-treatment of prisoners. It also continues
its settlement policy in a quest to change the situation
on the ground. That includes, but is not limited to, the
confiscation and destruction of Palestinian homes, the
expansion of settlements, arrests, the use of excessive
violence against demonstrators and the continued
blockade on the Gaza Strip. In addition to all of that,
the latest evidence ofIsrael's arrogance and its defiance
of the will of the international community came last
week, when it declared its intention to approve the
construction of a thousand new housing units in a
number of settlements.

Not only does Israel continue to ignore international
efforts to revive the peace process, but Israeli officials
make statements that threaten the success of the peace
process and the two-State solution. That merits broad
international condemnation. On the other hand, we have
closely monitored the statements and reports on the
possible resumption of the peace process between the
Palestinians and Israel. Consequently, my delegation
stresses the importance of not relying on hopes without
the international community continuing to pressure
Israel in order to make it understand that there is no
choice but peace and that this issue is not limited to
routine reviews in the Security Council's deliberations.

Meanwhile, my delegation commends the latest
decisions of the European Union (EU) that emphasize
the illegitimacy of settlements built on the territories
of the West Bank and Jerusalem, and the inclusion
of a clause in any future agreements between the EU
and Israel emphasizing that those settlements are not
under Israel's authority. Moreover, we commend the
decisions of the EU not to cooperate with Government
agencies, especially the ones in Israeli settlements
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We call on the
countries of the world to follow suit and take similar
steps to condemn the criminal Israeli actions against
Palestinian citizens.

The situation in Syria is deteriorating day by day.

To date, more that 100,000 people have been killed,
including more than 6,500 children under the age of
10. All of that occurs as the international community
remains silent and refrains from forcing the Syrian
regime to respond to the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people. The Syrian humanitarian crisis is a
source of shame for the conscience of the international
community, which stands paralysed on this issue. As
a result, the Syrian refugee crisis has attained historic
proportions, becoming the worst crisis since the
genocide in Rwanda, according to testimony in the
United Nations.

Through the resolutions of the General Assembly,
especially resolution 67/262 of 15 May 2013, the
majority of States Members of the United Nations has
condemned the Syrian regime, which has massacred
tens of thousands of Syrian people. Moreover, the
Human Rights Council last June condemned the Syrian
regime for its violations ofthe human rights ofthe Syrian
people. My delegation therefore stresses the importance
of implementing these decisions through international
measures to support the Syrian people and stop the
genocidal massacre being committed by the Syrian
regime, as well to prevent a spillover of the crisis in the
region, which would have serious consequences with
the intervention by third parties, such as the flagrant
interference of Hizbullah in Al-Qusayr.

Any delay by the international community in taking
action means more suffering for the helpless Syrian
people. History too will hold the Council accountable
for any such delay.

