Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Special Representative Kubis
for his presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/535), and Ambassador Tanin for his
valuable contribution.

The Secretary-General's report provides us with
a complete picture of the circumstances surrounding
the transition in Afghanistan, the progress made and
the difficulties that still have to be dealt with. With the
leadership of its Government, the determination and
drive of its people and the support of the international
community, Afghanistan has come a long way and is
preparing to enter into a new stage of independence
and sovereignty. In that regard, the success of the
2014 elections is crucial to strengthening peace and
reconstruction in Afghanistan and completing the
political and security transition.

For that reason we would like to highlight the
progress made in preparing for the elections and
in passing legislation establishing the electoral
framework, with independent electoral institutions.
At the same time, we believe it is important that the
elections be carried out in an adequate security climate
that will enable the Afghan people to freely exercise
their rights. In particular, we urge the Government and
the international community to ensure the presence
of female police and security agents so as to enable
Afghan women to exercise their right to elect their
representatives. We hope that this aspect will be taken
into consideration as part of the upcoming renewal of
the mandate of the International Security Assistance
Force.

With respect to the security situation, we are deeply
concerned at the increase in civilian casualties caused by
terrorist attacks, among them a high number of women
and children who have either been killed or injured. A
particularly disturbing development in that regard is the
regrettable increase in the attacks on women in public
office or the security forces. All parties must respect
international humanitarian law, and those responsible
for these attacks must be prosecuted for their deeds.

While recognizing the significant progress that
has been made over the past decade in terms of gender
equality in Afghanistan and the empowerment of
Afghan women, thanks to the priority that the Afghan
Government has given to the issue, and as was also
recognized by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women in June 2013 when the
first national report on the matter was being presented,
we nevertheless feel that it is possible to continue
building on those successes. We understand the
challenges that persist but we feel that it is essential that
women participate fully in the peace and reconciliation
processes. As we have said on other occasions, we
feel that this should also be a strategic priority for
the transition. In other words, the full participation
of women at all levels and in all sectors of economic
activity is essential to building strong economies and
to consolidating stable and just societies.

With regard to the process of reconciliation, as is
the case for other members of the Security Council and
in other situations, we understand that the stability of
the country cannot be achieved exclusively through
military means. In that respect, we believe that the
reconciliation of process as well as the process of
strengthening the institutions of the country should
be led by the Afghans themselves so that peace and
development will be sustainable. The challenges facing
Afghanistan are interrelated, That is why sustained
progress in the area of strengthening the rule of law
and institutions, national reconciliation and social and
economic development are mutually reinforcing. In that
respect, we believe that the international community
will continue to support the people and Government
of Afghanistan in its efforts in the area of economic
development and social inclusion.

Under the leadership of its Government, the
determination and drive of its people and the support of
the international community, Afghanistan has come a
long way and is preparing to embark on a new stage of
its independence and sovereignty. Due to its presence
and its ability to interact with all sectors of Afghan
political and social life, the presence of the United
Nations through the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan has been fundamental and will be even
more so as the transition progresses. That is why I
would like to reiterate the commitment of Argentina to
the Afghan people, to democracy, to human rights and
to the development of the country.

