Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing on the
current situation in Darfur. We pay tribute to the men
and women of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for their
dedicated work in a difficult environment.

We acknowledge that the large-scale battles have
been contained. But the security situation in Darfur
remains fragile and demands our vigilance. Incidents
of violence are continuing, and UNAMID personnel,
humanitarian workers and civilians are falling victim.
We should make every effort to improve the situation.
For ensuring security in Darfur, improved
relations between the Sudan and Chad are important.
Aerial bombing in the border area gives cause for
concern about security in the area. It is incumbent upon
all parties to bring a halt to these hostile and
belligerent activities. I urge the Contact Group on the
implementation of the Dakar Agreement to resume its
negotiations by inviting both the Sudan and Chad to
accelerate the reconciliation process.

With regard to the earlier humanitarian situation,
we are relieved that the joint collaborative efforts by the
Government, the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) worked reasonably well to fill the
gaps in delivering humanitarian assistance after the
expulsion of the international NGOs. However, there
still remain major challenges in many parts of Darfur
where the local population does not have sufficient
access to assistance. I urge the Government of the
Sudan to make further efforts in providing necessary
assistance. For its part, the international community
needs to strengthen its support.

UNAMID is expected to play an indispensable
role in stabilizing and improving the fragile security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur. UNAMID has
dedicated its efforts to the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of humanitarian assistance as the first
priority. Japan endorses and supports a greater focus by
UNAMID on civilian protection. There is a significant
number of members of the local population and
internally displaced persons spread throughout Darfur
who are in serious need of humanitarian assistance and
are waiting for a helping hand from UNAMID.

Yet the current deployment remains at less than
70 per cent of authorized strength 18 months after
inception. This makes it difficult for the mission to
implement fully its mandate and to meet high
expectations. To expedite deployment, cooperation
with the Government of the Sudan is essential. There
has been marked progress in deployment lately thanks
to the good efforts undertaken through the Tripartite
Committee comprising the Government, the African
Union and the United Nations. We hope that further
efforts will be made towards fuller deployment before
the end of the year.

In this regard, I would like to reiterate the need
for further improvement on the part of the Government
of the Sudan of measures for facilitating assistance,
such as the issuance of visas to UNAMID personnel,
expedited customs clearance for necessary equipment
and enhanced freedom of movement for UNAMID
staff.

As the continued presence of UNAMID is
essential, we support the extension of its mandate for
another 12 months. We are grateful to the United
Kingdom for preparing the draft resolution on that
subject.

A political and negotiated solution is the only
way of resolving the Darfur problem. In that light, I
commend the Doha process under the active leadership
of Qatar as well as the mediation efforts of Joint Chief
Mediator Bassole and the regional initiatives
undertaken by Libya and Egypt. We also commend the
valuable contributions made through the international
efforts made by many countries in sending special
envoys.

We thank Mr. Margelov for sharing his insights
with the Council today.

It is our hope that all Sudanese parties concerned,
including rebel groups, will participate in and actively
engage with those initiatives, which in turn will be
strongly supported by us. In parallel with those
international initiatives, we should underline the
importance of the local and national dialogue for peace
and coexistence. Coexistence and reconciliation can be
sought most effectively through comprehensive
dialogue involving the Government, anti-government
forces, traditional leaders, local communities and civil
society. We support the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and
Consultation. We urge the African Union and the
United Nations, in collaboration with the Government,
to ensure that the voices of the many actors be fully
reflected in the process.

Lastly, the political process based on the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) will have a direct bearing on the
Darfur problem. We are encouraged that both parties
have accepted the ruling of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration on the Abyei border dispute and have
respected the framework of the CPA. It is our strong
wish that the positive momentum demonstrated in the
spirit of Abyei will be further maintained and will
contribute to the implementation of the remaining parts
of the CPA and to the resolution of the Darfur problem.

