Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Mr. Minister, in
our midst here in New York as you preside over this
meeting. The delegation of Egypt appreciates your
timely initiative to convene this meeting, which will
help strengthen constructive dialogue on the proposals
for enhancing the United Nations role in peacebuilding
and in addressing institutional gaps in the multilateral
mechanisms that are needed following a peace
agreement and during the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.

It is our view that the Secretary-General's proposal
in the context of United Nations reform to establish an
intergovernmental Peacebuilding Commission reflects the
realities and results of and changes in armed conflict,
especially in Africa. In that respect, I should like to offer
certain thoughts as our contribution to this discussion on
the dimensions and framework of the peacebuilding issue,
particularly in its institutional manifestations.

First, the United Nations has had notable
successes in conflict situations, such as in Angola,
Mozambique and Guatemala, not to mention its ever
greater success in addressing such delicate and
complex situations as those in Sierra Leone, Kosovo
and Timor-Leste. That reflects the need for common
political will among all parties to a conflict, the
international community and regional Powers to
overcome crises and meet the challenges of
establishing peace and stability.

Secondly, a peacebuilding contract is based on the
fact that security and political cooperation in the
post-conflict phase cannot be successful without a
comprehensive framework for addressing the social and
economic dimensions of the conflict. The establishment
of such a comprehensive framework must begin at an
early stage of a peacekeeping mission so as to allow the
implementation of all its components and elements in a
timely manner, as soon as relative security has been
ensured, and with continuity and sustainability when the
mission has fulfilled its mandate. It is therefore necessary
to identify the coordinating role of the United Nations
agencies and regional Powers concerned and to agree on a
schedule for drawing down a peacekeeping mission and
moving on to the phase of social and economic
development.

Thirdly, experience has exposed the limitations of
the Security Council's vital role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Those limitations have
become apparent in situations in which conflict has
resumed, most notably in Liberia and Haiti. Although
the Council invested much time and effort in those
conflicts, it was unable to provide sustained
international attention and support for the work of
rebuilding the State and addressing the social and
economic root causes of the crises. Indeed, we cannot
imagine how the Security Council could find the time,
energy or even the capacity to coordinate the roles of
all the relevant United Nations political and
development bodies, mechanisms and agencies, nor can
we conceive its assuming the functions of the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and other bodies endowed with special mandates under
the Charter.

Most of the United Nations inability to deal with
post-conflict situations is due to the blurring of the
lines between peacebuilding and peacekeeping and
between the mandates of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, not to mention the roles of the international
financial institutions and donor countries. The proposal
to establish the intergovernmental Peacebuilding
Commission is important in that respect, as it would be
a focal point for coordinating the roles of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council pursuant to their respective mandates
and the Charter, as well as the roles of the specialized
agencies and the international donor community. In
that context, I would stress the importance of the
proposal to developing countries in particular, given
that Africa, inter alia, is looking to the United Nations
to play a central role in peacebuilding. In that context,
I would emphasize the following criteria.

First, the Commission should act at the official
request of the concerned State or interim authorities for
its assistance. Second, the nature, timing and scope of
assistance should be determined in accordance with the
specific needs of any given State. Third, the
Commission's mandate should be limited to post-
conflict situations, and especially to meeting direct and
urgent needs in the areas of rehabilitation,
reintegration, reconstruction, national reconciliation,
and in particular the strengthening of institutional and
human capacities. Fourth, the Commission should
make every effort to avoid duplication and to distribute
its resources equitably. Fifth, criteria and conditions
should be identified for determining the end of a
Commission mission in any given State. Sixth, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council should be entrusted with
monitoring the Commission's work, pursuant to their
respective mandates. Seventh, representatives of the
Secretariat, the United Nations agencies and
programmes, international and regional financial
institutions, national and interim State authorities, and
regional and subregional organizations should be
invited to attend the Commission's meetings in order to
coordinate their roles and avoid duplication.

The delegation of Egypt has distributed integrated
proposals to all Members of the Organization in relation
to the implementation of the idea of establishing the
Commission, based on the United Nations peacebuilding
activities. The Egyptian delegation is motivated by its
dedication to the idea of genuine reform of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Security
Council and the Secretariat. The High-level Meeting in
September will adopt many institutional reforms, and that
endeavour should be accompanied by the extensive
reform of all agencies and organizations whose work is
linked to that of the United Nations in addressing
multilateral challenges in all fields and in meeting
collective security requirements in their broadest possible
definition and in all their political, security, economic and
social dimensions, taking into consideration existing
mandates and the need for complementarity in their
implementation.

