Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2018/1059) pursuant to
resolution 2410 (2018). We are grateful to Special
Representative Ms. Helen La Lime for her briefing on
the latest situation in Haiti and the activities related to
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

We note the socioeconomic difficulties that Haiti
continues to face, and we agree with the Secretary-
General that there is a need to find a consensual
solution to some ofthese difficult challenges, within the
framework of the existing constitutional dispensation.
We believe that strengthening the rule of law and
democratic institutions, ensuring political stability
and improving socioeconomic conditions are the key
elements needed to achieve greater security, stability
and future prosperity in Haiti. It is essential that actors
from across the political spectrum and from all branches
of Government work together for the common good.

We welcome the commitment of the Haitian
Government to hold the 2019 elections on schedule.
The provision of electoral assistance by the United
Nations remains significant, as the elections will be a
crucial milestone for the stability of the country. The
swift adoption of the electoral law will pave the way
for credible, timely and inclusive elections. All political
actors should be encouraged to engage in a constructive
dialogue towards peaceful elections. We would also
like to commend the Haitian National Police for their
professionalism and the manner in which they have
carried out their activities in a challenging environment.

Ethiopia recognizes the important contribution
of MINUJUSTH and we concur with the Secretary-
General's assessment that much remains to be done to
ensure a smooth and effective transition of the Mission.
Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment
to and solidarity with the people and the Government
of Haiti as they continue striving to consolidate the
progress made in recent years, and our confidence in the
Haitian people's determination to persist and succeed
in their quest for stability, democracy and prosperity.

