Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me to welcome
you, Mr. Minister, to the Security Council and to
congratulate you most warme on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of February. We are fully
confident that you and your capable Permanent
Representative will conduct the work of the Council in an
effective and efficient manner.

I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Ambassador Cerdenas of Argentina and members of his
delegation for their excellent work last month.

It also gives me great honour and pleasure to welcome
the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). Their presence in our midst today is indicative of
the importance of the issue before the Council. We deeply
appreciate their contributions to this debate and express the
hope that such a'e'marehes will be repeated in the future, in
other serious and more complicated conflicts in Africa, in
the interest of furthering the cause of peace and security in
Africa as a whole.

The signing of the Lusaka Protocol between the
Government of Angola and UNITA on 20 November 1994
and the cease-fire agreement between the two parties mark
the beginning of a new era in the history of the Angolan
conflict. I should like, through you, Mr. President, and
through the Foreign Minister of Angola, who is with us
today, to congratulate the Government and the people of
Angola, as well as UNITA, on this historic event. By
signing this important document the two parties have said
"Enough" to the destructive war which raged in their
countries for two decades and which claimed thousands
of lives and caused widespread destruction of their
infrastructure, State property.

In the past we have had the opportunity to welcome
this positive development, and today we should like to
welcome the fact that, two months after the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol, the cease-fire is still holding, without
major violations, and that the Joint Commission
established at Lusaka is continuing its work aimed at
creating an atmosphere of mutual trust and confidence
between the parties. We sincerely hope that the
anticipated meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi will soon take place with a view to building the
necessary political momentum for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

Although the status quo in Angola is a cause for
optimism that peace will be restored to that country, it is
vital that the two parties continue to demonstrate the
political will and the commitment necessary for the
achievement of peace and national reconciliation through
strict and timely compliance with the "Acordos de Paz",
the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in the interests of durable peace, security and
economic and social development in their country.

The resolution that we have just adopted, which has
authorized the establishment of the third United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) to assist the
parties in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
demonstrates the resolve of the international community
to continue its support for the Angolan peace process.
But, in the meantime, this resolution must send to all the
parties the clear message that the international community
will not entertain any delay in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. We deemed it appropriate that the draft
resolution should contain such a provision. We therefore
hope that all parties in Angola will take today's Security
Council message seriously and in the spirit of national
reconciliation, peace, brotherhood, coexistence and
harmony, in the interests of building a new democratic
Angola.

In conclusion, I should like to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to his Special Representative in

 

Angola, to the three observer States of the Angolan peace
process and to all the States of the Organization of African
Unity - in particular, Zambia, which hosted the peace
negotiations - for their invaluable and effective
contribution to finding a just, durable and lasting solution
to the conflict in Angola. We are pleased to note that their
concerted efforts have borne fruit.

