Mr. Bakayoko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the
welcome initiative to convene this high-level debate
on collective action to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
I wish to convey the gratitude of the President of the
Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, His Excellence Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, to the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, His
Excellency Mr. Mark Rutte, for his kind invitation to
participate in this high-level debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing, and I wish to assure
him of C6te d'Ivoire's full support for the initiatives
to make United Nations peacekeeping operations a
tool to respond to present-day challenges to conflict
prevention and consolidation of peace in the world.

I speak to this gathering in my capacity as Minister
of State and Minister of Defence of the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire, but also as an Ivoirian citizen, bearing witness
to the effectiveness of a United Nations peacekeeping
operations in protecting and saving human lives. Indeed,
I personally benefited from the protection provided by
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, which,
as was the case for thousands of fellow compatriots,
saved my life. My delegation also includes Ambassador
Alcide Djedje, a member of the opposing camp at the
time of the Ivoirian crisis, who also benefited from the
same protection. Together we are here, together we are
engaged in a national reconstruction process that has
enabled our country to be elected as non-permanent
member ofthe Security Council and to be ready to send
troops to theatres of operations to save other lives.

United Nations peacekeeping operations
are taking place in increasingly challenging
environments, characterized by asymmetrical attacks
against peacekeepers and civilians. United Nations
peacekeeping missions need to shoulder, in addition
to the protection of civilians, their support role
for the political processes of crises resolution and
peacebuilding. Here, I would like to commend the
initiatives of nearly 110,000 men and women deployed
in those missions, who are working to avoid tragedies,
and I wish to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets who, every
day, sacrifice their lives for peace in the world.

We are debating improvements to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In that context, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council, on the basis of rigorous
analyses of environmental and operational constraints,
to provide peacekeeping operations with robust
mandates, setting clear and achievable goals. For it is
clear that peacekeeping missions sometimes experience
difficulties in agreeing on the precise meaning of the
restrictions imposed by the mandates and in translating
overall concepts and strategies into action.

Furthermore, these mandates must be flexible
and sequenced so that mission priorities can be
progressively adapted to developments in the
sociopolitical and security context in the host country.
In addition, prior to deployment, it is the duty of troop-
contributing countries to ensure adequate training
for their contingents, in accordance with the United
Nations Standards of Conduct and to make available
equipment that has been adapted to the needs on the
ground. Within that framework, and in support of
the troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat, the
Security Council and donors need to further combine
their efforts to reinforce the capabilities of the troops,
particularly with regard to intelligence, thus enabling
them to anticipate attacks on civilians and United
Nations contingents.

My country welcomes the opportunity afforded to
us once again to share its experience on this important
matter. C6te d'Ivoire, at the cost of many sacrifices and
with the help of the international community, managed
to emerge from more than a decade of instability. While
it is true that the success ofdisarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and the ongoing security sector
reform received the greatest media coverage in the
emergence from the crisis, other important aspects have
also contributed. They include support for the electoral
process, securing the territory and help in rebuilding
governing bodies.

This experience of my country allows me to
recall before the Security Council that United
Nations peacekeeping operations, such as the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, have a number of
stages, all equally important, and they are organized
methodologically to achieve the goals set. In cote
d'Ivoire one can cite as examples the most important
stages: a political agreement prior to the deployment
of the United Nations operation; a sanctions regime,
including an embargo against arms and diamonds and
individual sanctions; the authorization to use force to
destroy heavy weapons; and respect for the political
agreement and for the result of United Nations-certified
elections. The latter - the certification ofthe results by
the United Nations - was decisive for the credibility to
the electoral process.

However, not all operations always align with that
successful scheme, and some even face serious failures
or drag on and on. That prompts us today to seriously
reconsider their mode ofoperation through a courageous
reform initiative. To that end, my delegation would like
to draw attention to three conditions essential to the
success of such missions. First is prevention, which
must be dealt with as a genuine priority, one likely
to lower tensions. Next, clarity of the mandate and
the appropriate means for its implementation should
ensure better protection of civilians. That protection
of civilians is the essence of peacekeeping operations
and requires consideration of the rules of engagement
of forces. The third condition is the need for exemplary
cooperation between the United Nation system and the
Government in power.

As this high-level debate is being held, my country
remains concerned by the crises that persist on our
continent - in Mali, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in the Central African Republic, in South
Sudan, in Darfur - or elsewhere in the world, and that
despite the presence of Blue Helmets. The persistence
of those crises challenges us and calls on us to join
our efforts to return to peace and stability in those
hard-hit countries. That is why our collective action
in support of peacekeeping operations must get away
from the partitioning of duties and build on coherence
and coordination among the Secretariat, the Security
Council, troop-contributing countries and multilateral
partners. We must also bear in mind that collective
action will be effective only if it is based on full
awareness and acceptance, on the part of each party
involved, of their individual responsibility and their
duty to cooperate with other peacekeeping actors.

Finally, although it is important to ensure
the viability of peacekeeping operations through
sustainable funding mechanisms, we believe that it is
also vital to include the gender dimension in strategic
management of forces.

Today's Council meeting is surely the start of
a series of initiatives put forward by the Secretary-
General, based on the concept of collective
responsibility, that seeks to infuse a new dynamic into
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Because ofits
experience, Cote d'Ivoire is aware of the importance
of a peacekeeping mission and would like, through
my voice, to reiterate its support and readiness to help
the Secretary-General in the implementation of this
ambitious endeavour.

I cannot conclude without conveying my
Government's gratitude to Member States who
contribute to peacekeeping operations. I would like to
echo the Secretary-General's call for a revitalization
of the framework for cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and for the Security
Council to strengthen is support for financing African
Union forces deployed on the continent.

