Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our thanks for the convening of
this meeting and for the important briefings by Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Mr. Pierre Buyoya
and Mr. Pedro Serrano.

Peru is following with concern the delicate
humanitarian situation and the continuing deterioration
of security in the Sahel subregion, despite the valuable
action of the countries that make up the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We regret
the spread of violent extremism and condemn the
persistence of terrorist attacks. We wish to emphasize
the need to redouble our efforts in three areas that we
consider fundamental to stabilize the subregion and
build sustainable peace.

First, with regard to security, the Joint Force is
called on to play an essential role in the fight against
terrorism and transnational organized crime, which
are mutually reinforcing phenomena. To do that it must
have appropriate equipment and enhance its operational
capacity through the full deployment of its military
and police components. That, in turn, presupposes the
availability of predictable and sustainable financing, as
well as the technical cooperation of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). To that end, we stress the need
for the G-5 Sahel countries to continue to implement
the Joint Force's strategic concept of operations and
the human rights compliance framework, with a
view to bolstering the confidence and support of the
international community.

Secondly, in the political sphere, we believe that the
peaceful holding of elections in Mali and Mauritania
should make it possible to strengthen institutions and
governance in those countries, which, in turn, should
be reflected through more legitimate and effective
action for the stability and progress of the subregion.
In that connection, we hope that the recent signing of
the Pact for Peace in Mali, in line with the provisions
of resolution 2423 (2018), will enable the revitalization
and accelerated implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation.

Thirdly, on the issue of sustainable development,
as several speakers have pointed out this morning,
achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel goes beyond
military considerations. We need a multidimensional
approach that addresses the root causes of the conflict.
That means, among other measures, building and
strengthening the necessary capacities and institutions
to promote and protect human rights, countering
the negative effects of climate change, providing
basic services and fostering sustained economic
growth in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We stress the importance of promoting
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
of increasing employment opportunities, particularly
for young people. Women and young people are called
upon to play a central role in building a better future for
their societies.

Finally, the various efforts, initiatives and
mechanisms deployed in the field to maintain political
and operational coherence must reflect and address
the needs and priorities of the member countries of
the G-5 Sahel, as well as the provisions of the relevant
Council resolutions. The G-5 Sahel is a clear example
of the potential and commitment of African countries
to promote peace and security on their continent.
They deserve the strong support of the international
community and, in particular, of the Council. In that
connection, we stress that the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, together with its Support Plan,
provide a comprehensive framework for working to
strengthen governance, security and development in
the region. Consequently, all initiatives should operate
within that framework.

Peru will continue to support the efforts of the
G-5 Sahel countries, MINUSMA, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the European Union and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, among other agencies of
the United Nations system, as well as actors committed
to achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel.

