The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Malaysia.

My delegation would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General Miyet
for the informative update and for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on Ethiopia and Eritrea.
My delegation would also like to commend President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika of Algeria and the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) high-level delegation for their
tireless efforts, which led to the signing of the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities between
Ethiopia and Eritrea on 18 June 2000. We hope that
this will be the all-important first step towards the
restoration of peace between the two neighbouring
countries. We also commend the support provided by
the United States and the European Union for the
mediation efforts.

The Council now has the responsibility to assist
the two countries in creating conditions for lasting
peace and stability between them. We have to act
quickly and decisively, and we should not allow the
momentum to flag. In this regard, the adoption of
resolution 1312 (2000) of 31 July, which authorized the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), was the first critical
step.

We note that the Secretary-General in his latest
report has furnished the Council with the findings of
the reconnaissance mission and has provided a concept
of operations and recommendations for the expansion
of UNMEE. We support the three-phase approach
outlined for UNMEE. We welcome the early dispatch
of liaison officers to both capitals.

My delegation will participate constructively in
Council consideration of the proposed expansion of
UNMEE's mandate, as well as of its personnel, as
described in paragraph 15 of the Secretary-General's
report. In so doing, we will continue to stress the
importance of matching the number of personnel with
the tasks assigned to them, in order to ensure a
successful implementation of the mandate. We should
draw lessons from our peacekeeping experiences in
other parts of Africa and ensure that UNMEE will have
efficient and effective communications and well-
trained and well-equipped personnel to ensure its
success.

We also look forward to the appointment of a
special representative to head UNMEE. Equally
important is the need to maintain close contacts and
cooperation between the United Nations and the OAU
and the political and military leadership of both
countries.

My delegation is concerned that the continued
presence of landmines and unexploded ordnance may
affect UNMEE's early and safe deployment as well as
the return of displaced persons. We therefore support
the Secretary-General's proposal that, with assistance
from military personnel from both Ethiopia and Eritrea
in the mine-clearing exercise, the mine action
coordination centre undertake an early and rapid survey
of the area of the temporary security zone. We expect
the full cooperation and assistance of the two countries
in this important and urgent task.

My delegation also hopes that together with the
early deployment of an expanded UNMEE, the dire
humanitarian situation will improve. The populations
of both countries, which have been devastated by the
two-year war, should be spared further hardship,
especially from the effects of the severe food shortages
resulting from earlier prolonged droughts. The
international community must urgently assist the two
countries with much-needed humanitarian assistance as
well in meeting their rehabilitation and reconstruction
needs.

Malaysia commends the parties' continued
commitment to the implementation of the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities. We urge them to continue
the proximity talks, with the goal of reaching an early
agreement on the modalities to pave the way for the
rapid delimitation and demarcation of their common
border. They should realize that the United Nations
presence on the ground will not be there indefinitely,
nor will it resolve the conflict between them. They will
have to abide by the ceasefire Agreement, scrupulously
observe the arms embargo imposed on them by Council
resolution 1298 (2000), manifest the necessary political
will to find a lasting political settlement to their
territorial dispute and repair their ruptured bilateral
relations. They must help the United Nations and the
OAU to help them find the peace that has eluded them.
The future of their countries lies in their own hands.
Finally, in my other capacity, as Chairman of the
Sanctions Committee established by resolution 1298
(2000), I associate myself with the question posed by
the representative of the Netherlands as to whether
UNMEE is also expected to report about possible
violations of resolution 1298 (2000).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

