Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. I wish also to commend
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya,
for his able stewardship last month.

The convening of this meeting is most timely in the
wake of the decision of the Israeli Government to press
ahead with its policy of expanding Jewish settlements in
East Jerusalem. The decision to build yet another new
illegal Jewish settlement, in Jabal Abu Ghneim, is a highly
provocative -- indeed, a highly irresponsible -- act which
could have serious negative repercussions on the current
Arab-Israeli peace process.

Malaysia has followed the peace process with cautious
optimism and was encouraged by the progress that had
been made recently with the signing of the Hebron
protocol. The signing of the protocol, which has led to the
redeployment of Israeli forces from most parts of Hebron,

has been widely regarded as a positive step towards the
full realization of the long-awaited comprehensive and
just settlement in the region based on relevant Security
Council resolutions. It was the hope of the international
community that the parties concerned would honour their
commitments, show good faith and refrain from taking
any measure which could undermine the process which
had been so assiduously put together.

Regrettably, instead of building confidence and
understanding, the Israeli Government has chosen to build
new settlements in defiance of the Palestinian sentiments
which have been clearly expressed on this issue. This
controversial decision cannot but be seen as a brazenly
provocative act. It is a flagrant violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. It is a blatant contravention of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, including the ones adopted during the
fifty-first session of the General Assembly. It is also a
departure from the principle of land for peace as agreed
to by the parties involved in the peace process, including
Israel. Instead of strengthening the peace process and
taking it forward, the Israeli decision can only undermine
it and take it backward.

This is not the first time that the Israeli Government
has resorted to such actions and tactics in pursuance of its
own narrow political and strategic objectives. My
delegation strongly condemns this latest Israeli measure
and calls on the Israeli Government to rescind its decision
and to desist in the future from taking any such unilateral
actions which could undermine the still fragile peace
process. My delegation would therefore urge the Council
to pronounce itself in clear and unambiguous language on
this important issue and to denounce the Israeli decision
forcefully through a strongly worded resolution. Anything
less than this would send the wrong message to the Israeli
Government, which would be unfortunate indeed. In the
view of my delegation, a strong resolution from the
Council would not amount to interfering in the peace
process; rather it would help ensure that the process is not
derailed as a result of the irresponsible act of one of the
parties.

My delegation cannot accept the policies and illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
aimed at judaizing the city and changing its legal status
and demographic composition to advance Israel's own
political agenda. Jerusalem is of great spiritual importance
not only to the Jews but also to the entire Islamic
community throughout the world, and to Christians
everywhere.
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty~second year 6 March 1997

 

Clearly, by embarking on the expansion of Jewish
settlements on Arab lands, the Israeli Government is
pursuing a well calculated political outcome, oblivious to
the views, sentiments and aspirations of the other, equally
important, party to the negotiations, the Palestinians. By
relentlessly pursuing its settlements policy, Israel intends to
create a fait accompli and in doing so shows its arrogant
take-it-or-leave-it attitude towards the peace process. The
recent statement of Prime Minister Netanyahu reiterating
Israel's absolute sovereignty over all of Jerusalem as the
"eternal capital of the Jewish people which will never again
be divided" typifies the uncompromising and brazen attitude
of the present Israeli leadership, not the statesmanship that
would have been more appropriate, and that is expected of
it in the current delicate situation. This is a transparent and
unambiguous attempt by Israel to preempt the outcome of
the negotiations on the final status of Jerusalem by
changing the legal status and demographic characteristics of
that city. Clearly, this is against the letter and the spirit of
the peace accords concluded between the two sides. Peace-
building is an enterprise based on mutual trust, cooperation
and partnership between the parties concerned. A
partnership is not healthy and will not endure if one of the
parties acts irresponsibly and tramples underfoot those
things that are held dear by the other party. Unilateral acts
of the kind pursued by Israel will not promote or sustain
the peace process. Indeed, they raise questions about
Israel's real commitment to peace.

In the face of this latest provocation by Israel, the
Palestinian Authority should be commended for its exercise
of self-restraint in avoiding untoward incidents, which could
have easily broken out, and which still could. The Council
should encourage this great exercise of self-restraint on the
part of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian people
by coming out with a clear resolution condemning, not
condoning, the decision of the Israeli Government. At the
same time, my delegation would urge the influential
countries that brokered the peace agreement to exert every
effort to ensure that the peace process stays on course.

