Ms. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): First I
wish to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his briefing on
recent developments and new prospects in Kosovo. The
representative of Belgium will speak on behalf of the
European Union at this meeting. France, of course,
associates itself unreservedly with that statement; I will
limit myself to some specific comments.

The elections of 17 November in Kosovo were a
success. They were a success for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and KFOR, whose joint
action made it possible for the election to take place in
exemplary circumstances. Security was ensured. The
organization was remarkable. Evidence of this was the
voting of displaced persons in Serbia and Montenegro,
which was able to be prepared in less than two weeks,
thanks to the effective contribution of the OSCE.
Moreover, the painstaking efforts of UNMIK since last
spring were able to convince the Kosovars of the
importance of the stakes associated with these
elections.

But this success belongs primarily to the
Kosovars themselves, regardless of ethnic origin. They
went together to vote in numbers, peacefully and
responsibly, to choose the representatives of the
Kosovo Assembly, in accordance with the provisions of
the Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government. In so doing, they made it possible for an
important step to be taken in implementing resolution
1244 (1999).

Now we must bring all of this to fruition.
Through the institutions that will be put in place
following the elections, all segments of the population
will have to work to construct a democratic, pluralistic
and prosperous Kosovo.

In the coming weeks, the Kosovo Assembly will
get down to work. A President of Kosovo will be
elected, and a Government will be installed. The
Kosovo authorities who were elected will be
responsible for bringing to life the institutions of
provisional self-government in compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework. The powers conferred on them are very
broad, particularly with regard to the daily
administration of Kosovo. They must get down to the
task of management, with the aim of improving the
daily life of all Kosovars. We would like to
congratulate them on their election and to wish them
success in discharging their mandate. Under the aegis
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the elected officials must exercise scrupulously the
powers vested in them and abide by the provisions of
the Constitutional Framework.

The wide participation of the population on
election day must be followed by active participation
of all segments of Kosovar society in the life of the
institutions established by UNMIK. I am thinking
particularly of members of the Serb community. In
response to the appeals of the Yugoslav authorities and
the international community, they went in large
numbers to participate in the election and to take their
proper place in the Kosovar Assembly. This outcome
should encourage the support of all Serb political
authorities for the institutions of Kosovo, particularly
at the municipal level.

Dialogue and reconciliation must be the key
words in the Kosovo of tomorrow. This means that the
Government, the Assembly and the Kosovar political
authorities all must abide by the customary rules of
democratic debate between the majority and the
minority. In more general terms, it means that the
members of the institutions of self-government,
through their statements and their actions, must ensure
that all of Kosovo's inhabitants feel at home there.
Particular attention should be given to security and the
question of the return of members of the Serb
community. It would be good if the newly elected
authorities expressed themselves clearly and without
delay in support of the process of return and actively
supported the efforts of the Special Representative to
ensure that it is a success.

Moreover, we must deepen dialogue with the
Yugoslav authorities. This has been stipulated in
resolution 1244 (1999) and the common document
signed on 5 November by Mr. Haekkerup and Mr.
Covie. The development of dialogue and, beyond that,
pragmatic cooperation between UNMIK, the newly
elected authorities and the Yugoslav authorities on
matters of common concern also serve the well-
understood interests of all Kosovars.

