Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate and giving us an
opportunity to speak. I also thank Mr. Feltman for his
briefing this morning.
The Palestinian question is the central question in
the Middle East and will remain a source of concern
for the region and the international community until
the just solution that is desired by all is found. To that
end, the State of Qatar has expressed support for and
welcomed the international initiatives to relaunch the
peace process on the basis of the well-known terms of
reference, which were confirmed by the Arab Peace
Initiative and expressed at the recent summit in Doha.
Arab countries have taken practical steps to achieve
those goals.

We reaffirm today, as we have in the past, that the
success of any initiative will be based on the sincere
willingness of both parties to achieve the goals. We
would refer to the unilateral settlement activities of the
State of Israel, its efforts to change the demographic
nature of the Palestinian territories, the Judaization
of East Jerusalem and the blockade imposed on the
Gaza Strip. Those actions do not create the conditions
necessary for the desired development and progress.

We urge the international community to find
a solution that establishes an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the
basis of the 1967 borders and a full withdrawal from
all occupied territories, including the occupied Syrian
Golan and the remaining occupied territories in
Lebanon. The status quo jeopardizes any prospects for
peace. Any decisions taken by the State ofIsrael are null
and void under international law. Israel is responsible
for the escalation of the crisis in the entire region.

We call upon the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities to preserve the city of Jerusalem and
the sacred Islamic and Christian monuments and sites
there, to stop the aggression that religious people are
subjected to in that sacred city and to take action to
deter Israel in accordance with international law and
the relevant Geneva Conventions.

The situation in Syria has reached catastrophic levels
because of the violations by the Syrian regime, which
even include the use of weapons of mass destruction
against its own people. We recall the resolution issued
by the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. The Security Council reached
an agreement on adopting a resolution on the use of
chemical weapons. But the Council is also called on
to take rapid and immediate action to protect civilians
on the basis of its own mandate and the Charter of the
United Nations.

On the humanitarian front, the Security Council, in
its presidential statement (S/PRST/20l3/15), has taken
the step of calling on the international community to
take actions urgently, in a decisive manner, and to use
all relevant mechanisms available to it. The human
crisis faced by millions of Syrians and their children
who are starving every day cannot be tolerated. The
Council must adopt a resolution to put an end to their
suffering.

