Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Mr. President, I would also
like to associate myself fully with the warm words of
welcome you extended to the representative of France to
the Council, Mr. Jean-David Levitte, with whom I look
forward to renewing warm personal and professional
relations, both within the Council as well as outside of it.

I would also like to thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing
on the situation in East Timor. We are pleased to see that
following the smooth transfer of peacekeeping duties from
the International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) to the
command of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) last month, the
security situation has generally continued to improve
throughout East Timor.

We are concerned, however, at the recent increase in
the number of cross-border incidents along the border
with West Timor. This problem should be addressed in
the most effective way so as to ensure that it does not
deteriorate into a prolonged or recurring security issue
between East Timor and Indonesia which might
complicate the efforts being made at forging a diplomatic
relationship between the two.

Needless to say, East Timor needs to be free from
security problems so that it can concentrate on the process
of nation-building. The people of East Timor have high
expectations from the United Nations presence there,
hence the importance for the international community to
assist UNTAET in its efforts at rebuilding East Timorese
society and rehabilitating the economy and administration,
which will require enormous amounts of financial
resources.

As a close and concerned neighbour, Malaysia is
prepared to assist East Timor in various fields, within its
capacity to do so, and is in the process of following up
on the understandings reached during the recent
successful visit to Malaysia by Mr. Xanana Gusmao.

We continue to be concerned about the presence of
refugees in camps, whose dire plight must be addressed
as soon as possible so that they can return to their homes
and rebuild their shattered lives.

There should be an early reintegration of ex-
combatants into society so as to facilitate their
contribution to the reconstruction of East Timor. In this
regard, the sensitive issue of Falintil will have to be
handled with great care. Equally important is the need to
intensify efforts at reconciliation among the people of
East Timor, which alone can guarantee the peace and
stability of East Timor in the long term. East Timor
cannot afford to be saddled with security problems
indefinitely into the future.

We note that the issue of the timetable for
independence is beginning to be addressed by UNTAET,
in full consultation with East Timorese leaders. It is
important that this issue be handled carefully so as to
ensure that independence, when it comes, will come
neither too late nor too early, when the people of East

 

Timor and their leadership are not quite ready to assume
the burdens and responsibilities of independence. Learning
from the lessons of the decolonization experiences of the
past, the important thing for us is to fully and adequately
prepare the people and leadership of East Timor for that
final stage in the process. In this regard, we wish to stress
the paramount importance of building strong democratic
structures for the future independent nation of East Timor.

Finally, like others, we would like to commend
UNTAET and its head, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for the
outstanding work they have done thus far.

