The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my national capacity.

Months after the declaration of independence of
Southern Sudan, which will mark the end of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), an escalation
of violence in Abyei and Southern Kordofan has been a
matter of grave concern. The violence has led to the
death of a number of civilians and massive
displacements of people.

The conclusion of the temporary agreement on
Abyei and the briefings provided by President Mbeki
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Menkerios, have made us more
optimistic. I should like to thank President Mbeki and
Mr. Menkerios and congratulate them on the
agreement. We welcome the commitment of Ethiopia
and Prime Minister Zenawi, including the provision of
Ethiopian troops. We support the proposal of the
United States to submit a draft resolution to the
Council in the near future. We also welcome the
commitment just expressed by Ambassador Osman and
Mr. Gatkuoth regarding the will of both parties to
continue to seek a peaceful resolution to the situation
in the Sudan.

We call on the two parties to show restraint and
to cease hostilities. They must demonstrate their
political determination to overcome the crisis
prevailing in Abyei and Southern Kordofan by
engaging in dialogue. We ask them to facilitate the
channelling of humanitarian aid to help the thousands
of displaced persons who have had to flee the violence.
We invite the parties to implement the conclusions they
agreed upon in Addis Ababa. Gabon remains convinced
that the deployment of Ethiopian battalions to Abyei,
along the borders, will help to ease tensions between
the parties and, at the same time, enforce the security
arrangements.
We encourage the parties to take advantage of the
window of opportunity opened by the Addis process to
restore mutual trust. Preserving the framework of the
comprehensive political agreement is essential, and it
is important to pursue implementation of that
agreement in full. In that regard, the support of the
Panel headed by President Mbeki and the enhanced
support of the United Nations are essential.

Finally, we wish to once again encourage the two
parties to show political determination and a spirit of
compromise.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

Do President Mbeki and Mr. Menkerios wish
make any additional comments following the
statements delivered by Council members? I give the
floor to President Mbeki.

