Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for
his presence here with us, for his report and for the
briefing he has just given us. His extensive report
includes a number of ideas and proposals, which, if
taken into account, will represent an effective means of
ending the present stalemate in the Middle East
political process and resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
problem.

On behalf of the Palestinian people, its leadership
and of our President, I wish to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General and to thank him most warmly for
all of his efforts aimed at arriving at a just and lasting
solution to the conflict in the Middle East, in particular

his support for the Palestinian cause. The Secretary-
General has always been a great friend to Palestine and
to peace in the Middle East. We wish him much
happiness and success in his new life, after 31
December.

Allow me at the outset, Sir, to extend to you our
warm congratulations on your country's accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We are fully confident that under your presidency,
thanks to your skills and your wisdom, the work of the
Council will be carried out successfully. I wish also to
pay tribute to the Ambassador of Peru, who showed
great wisdom in conducting the work of the Council
last month.

I should like also to express our warmest thanks
to the delegation of Qatar for its excellent initiative to
convene this important ministerial-level meeting on the
question of sustainable peace in the Middle East. This
meeting is an extension of the ministerial meeting of
the Security Council held on 21 September 2006 on the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East. We have great faith in the Council's role of
promoting international relations, safeguarding peace
and security and promoting international law.

The components of peace in the Middle East are
quite clear and precise and are reflected in the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
adopted by the Arab Summit at Beirut in 2002, the
Road Map set out by the Quartet and endorsed by this
body, and the principle of land for peace. Yet the main
problem remains the lack of political will on the part of
the international community and the absence of any
serious and tangible measures and actions, which are
essential for the effective implementation of those
resolutions and initiatives through practical and
specific mechanisms.

Given the longstanding paralysis of the peace
process, the Arab Foreign Ministers met in the Security
Council last September in an attempt to break the
impasse and to revitalize the peace process. In the
wake of the war in Gaza and in Lebanon last summer,
and following the deterioration of the situation in more
than one area of the Middle East, which further
endangered international peace and security, we
insisted that action be taken in tandem with the Arab
response, in particular by Europe. We therefore
welcome the European efforts aimed at breaking the
7

impasse and relaunching the peace process through
practical and specific mechanisms.

We would also underscore the promising nature
of the Baker-Hamilton report. The report contains
recommendations that can be used as a prelude to
resuming the political and peace processes. We would
also stress the importance of statements made by the
Israeli authorities expressing their readiness seriously
to consider the Arab Peace Initiative as an appropriate
platform for negotiations between the Palestinians and
the Israelis on the one hand and, on the other, other
Arab parties whose territory has been occupied by
Israel since 1967.

We have repeatedly stated that the absence of a
solution to the question of Palestine and the continuing
occupation of Arab territories by Israel are explosive
factors that have continued to fuel the conflict and
have led the way to violence of all kinds, terrorism,
regional confrontation and international crises.

The Executive Committee of the Palestine
Liberation Organization met last Saturday, 9 December
2006, under the presidency of Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. It
welcomed all international efforts and initiatives aimed
at resuming the peace process, in particular as concerns
the Palestinian-Israeli track, which will be the
cornerstone of any solution to the other crises in the
region. The Executive Committee believes that there
are very promising opportunities on the horizon that
must be seized in order that the peace process may be
resumed and practical and specific mechanisms set up
to resolve the situation.

More than one party has proposed that an
international conference be held to resolve the Israeli-
Arab question in all its aspects. That would be a sound
and appropriate decision and should be given greater
thought so as to ensure the success of such a
conference. There is no doubt that, under the
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas, that
initiative, which was also welcomed by Israel, will lead
to a resumption of serious negotiations if appropriate
mechanisms are found in response to that call for calm.

We underscore the importance of the proposal to
send an international monitoring force to the region to
consolidate the general calm and the ceasefire so that a
general and mutual ceasefire can be observed. That
international force could be placed between the Israeli
and Palestinian parties.

At its last meeting, the PLO Executive
Committee reaffirmed that the PLO is the sole address
and legal representative of the Palestinian people. It is
the sole forum responsible for negotiations. In fact,
negotiations will always be undertaken by the PLO.
Any national Palestinian crisis or issues that arise in
the occupied Palestinian territories are an internal
matter, and thus the PLO, under the leadership of
President Mahmoud Abbas, has always been, and will
remain, ready and capable of undertaking negotiations
on the final status, without any preconditions, at the
earliest time possible.

With regard to our Israeli counterparts, Israel
should abstain from using pretexts and false excuses
for not meeting deadlines on negotiations and
achieving peace. Israel should acknowledge the
difficulties that have arisen and that have undermined
any serious peace talks in the past. Israel, the
occupying Power, has continued to carry out its
unbridled campaigns of illegal colonial settlement,
including in East Jerusalem. It has continued to
confiscate Palestinian land and to build the illegal,
racist separation wall. It is also continuing a policy of
extrajudicial killing, and arbitrary arrests and has
destroyed Palestinian infrastructure and property. In
addition to other collective punishment measures that it
has taken, Israel has detained more than 10,000
Palestinians in its prisons. Israel has closed roads and
crossing points; it has set up hundreds of barricades
and checkpoints. All this has dismembered Palestinian
territory and isolated East Jerusalem from the rest of
Palestine.

Israel must honour its commitments in
accordance with international law and international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, by respecting the applicability of
this Convention in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. The imperative for peace in
the Middle East requires the occupying Power, Israel,
to renounce its tactical manoeuvres by which it claims
that is desires peace while at the same time it carries
out practices that shake the very foundation of the
peace process and destroy opportunities for peace.

We reaffirm that there are a number of
opportunities for achieving peace in the Middle East
through serious negotiation and through the adoption
of mechanisms to create a positive climate for
resumption of negotiations so that the objective we are
all seeking can be achieved - namely, the restoration
of peace.

The Security Council, as the body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
therefore, must shoulder its tasks, take the necessary
measures to set up an appropriate environment and
assist the parties to reach a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli problem, at
the very heart of which is the Palestinian question.
These measures include the complete withdrawal of
Israel from all Arab territory occupied in 1967,
including East Jerusalem, in order to guarantee the
establishment of two States, Israel, which already
exists, and a Palestine to be established on the
Palestinian territory that was occupied in 1967,
including East Jerusalem. A just and negotiated
solution must be found to the question of Palestinian
refugees, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

I repeat here that the proposals made by President
Abbas during the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, 29 November 2006 - namely,
that a Palestinian State will be a peaceful State, living
in security and peace, in good neighbourliness with its
neighbours, including Israel - will be a fundamental
pillar for regional and international security. If that
objective can be achieved, the Middle East region will
enjoy peace, security, coexistence and prosperity. Is
this not the ultimate objective that we all are
seeking - one that we have been seeking for a number
of years?

