Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is an honour to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Haris Siladeic', Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I thank
him for his statement. I also thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his informative briefing.

As we mark the eighteenth anniversary of the
admission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations, there are many more reasons for celebration.
A safe and secure environment in the country
continues. Progress has been made on many other
fronts, such as the efforts towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, the accession to the NATO Membership
Action Plan, and important developments in the
economic situation, despite enormous challenges. Also
encouraging is the fact that the regional situation has
improved and that Bosnia and Herzegovina's relations
with its neighbours are developing constructively. The

positive role the country is playing in the international
community, as illustrated by its active membership in
the Security Council, is also commendable. These
developments show that unity and a sense of common
purpose among leaders can bear fruit not only in key
strategic spheres, but also in the form of benefits of
direct and immediate interest to ordinary citizens.

We join others in expressing concern at
statements and decisions made by political leaders in
the entities, especially Republika Srpska, that are
inconsistent with the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Challenges to the authority of the Security Council, the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board and the
High Representative must cease. Protecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is indispensable. The Security Council
must continue to closely monitor the situation on the
ground.

As the country prepares for the next general
elections in October, nationalist and divisive rhetoric is
particularly worrisome. We urge all parties to exercise
maximum restraint in this regard. At the same time,
efforts to strengthen the State at the national level
should preserve the rights and prerogatives of all
communal entities. This is an important issue that has
to be addressed carefully. We therefore support
initiatives, such as the Butmir process, that seek to
engage the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
this discussion. We hope that efforts in this regard can
be sustained so that they bear fruit soon.

The strong message of unity, cooperation and
peaceful coexistence that we all send today to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's leaders is also valid for the Western
Balkans as a whole. We congratulate the Serbian
Parliament on the resolution adopted in March
regarding the Srebrenica massacre of 1995. Although
some might have preferred a different wording for it,
the historic apology made by the Serbs represents a
significant step towards reconciliation in the subregion.
Also encouraging was the address delivered in
Sarajevo by President Josipovie on Croatia's policies
during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The international community should continue to
help Bosnia and Herzegovina find ways to overcome
political difficulties and strike the appropriate balance
between centralization and decentralization. We are
certain that the country, with our continued support,
will succeed in consolidating a fully functional and
self-sustaining State. This is the only way to the future
of peace and prosperity that all in Bosnia and
Herzegovina wish for and rightfully deserve.

