Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): On behalf of
the delegation of Azerbaijan, I would like to offer
our deepest condolences to the families, people and
Governments of the victims of recent terrorist attacks.

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Ensuring peace, security and development is a
common aspiration that was set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations, to which we solemnly recommitted
ourselves on 23 October. It is also an integral part of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and should remain a core
priority for international cooperation. The United
Nations system, in particular the Security Council,
is now required to focus as never before on the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In this statement, we would like to focus on
unresolved protracted conflicts, their implications for
peace and sustainable development, and the role of the
Council in their resolution.

Today, many armed conflicts around the world
are enduring due to multicausal factors, actors and
root causes. Situations of illegal occupation are often
the most difficult conflicts to resolve. The persistence
of such conflicts perpetuates cycle of violence and
undermines regional stability. They have already
resulted in the destruction of lives and property, the
mass displacement of people, a region-wide refugee
crisis, the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
and organized crime.

Such situations require the serious attention and
urgent action of the Security Council. In this context,
primary focus should be placed on the implementation
of the Council's resolutions and on greater use of
enforcement measures, including diplomatic, financial
and economic sanctions to prevent and combat the status
quo. The implementation of the Council's resolutions
is key to strengthening the role and legitimacy of the
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security and to strengthening confidence in the capacity
of the United Nations to advance peace.

All efforts aimed at preventing and resolving
conflicts must be based on the principle of respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States. Resolute and targeted measures
are required to end impunity for the most serious
crimes within international community and to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

The Nagorno Karabakh conflict between Armenia
and Azerbaijan is a notorious example of a protracted
conflict situation. Instead of genuinely engaging in
efforts to promote peace and regional stability, Armenia
pursues its military aggression against Azerbaijan. Yet
in 1993, the Security Council adopted resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), which
reaffirm the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the Republic of Azerbaijan, including the Nagorno
Karabakh region, recognize and condemn the fact of
invasion, and demand the immediate, complete and
unconditional withdrawal of the occupying Armenian
forces.

Unfortunately, these resolutions are yet to
be implemented. In the meantime, the occupying
Power consolidates the status quo and carries on
with its illegal practices. These include but are not
limited to indiscriminate attacks against the civilian
population along the front line, systematic violations
of the ceasefire regime, forced demographic changes
to prevent the displaced Azerbaijani population from
exercising its right to return, illegal settlements on
the occupied territories, and illegal exploitation of
natural resources. Azerbaijan is interested in finding
the quickest possible resolution to the conflict, but it
can be resolved only on the basis of full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan
within its internationally recognized borders. The
sooner Armenia withdraws its troops from the
territories, the sooner we will be able to fully mobilize
to work to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.

Maintaining international peace and security is
central to the Organization, especially the Security
Council. The Council's primary duty is to resolve
existing conflicts and prevent potential ones, and that
is the only way it should contribute to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals.

In conclusion, on behalf of the delegation of
Azerbaijan, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for convening this open debate.

