Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I would like to take
this opportunity to thank you, Sir, and your delegation
for organizing this important discussion. We thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for his informative briefing on the report of the
assessment mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (see S/2012/45). We also thank Mr. Musah and Mrs. Ukonga
for their statements on behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, respectively.

At a time of global financial and economic
hardship, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has severe
financial and security implications for the States
concerned and diverts important financial resources
from key national development and socio-economic
priorities to maritime security. The economic loss to
the region of West Africa that results from the scourge
of piracy is estimated to be $2 billion per annum.

South Africa welcomes the comprehensive report
of the assessment mission on piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. The report highlights the cost and economic
impact of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as the
numerous strategies implemented at the country,
bilateral and various subregional levels to fight the
scourge. We welcome these concrete actions as a
demonstration of political will by the leaders of the
region to combat piracy.

We share the concern and observation of the
assessment mission that the growing evidence of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea constitutes yet another major
threat to the peace, security and the economic interests
of the countries of the region. The region has seen an
increase in the number of attacks in recent months, and
the violent nature of these attacks has brought greater
attention to the growing problem of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of West Africa.

The Secretary-General's report correctly draws
attention to the fact that no country in the region
appears to have the capacity to tackle maritime

insecurity alone. We therefore commend the efforts
already made by the affected countries, including the
joint patrols by Nigeria and Benin in the region.
However, these patrols in themselves are not
sustainable and more needs to be done. The ongoing
efforts of the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission to address the threat of piracy are also
commendable.

It is clear that numerous gaps exist at the national
and regional levels, and we welcome the very practical
and useful recommendations to address the scourge of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. They include, among
others, the strengthening of national legal frameworks
and of the capacities of States' criminal justice
systems, integrated and coordinated regional responses
to maritime security challenges, and international
support to the States of the region. South Africa
reiterates its View that piracy cannot be tackled in
isolation and underscores the importance of addressing
the phenomenon of piracy in a comprehensive manner
that includes combating transnational crime and
responding to the root causes of the challenge, such as
youth unemployment.

It is clear from the report that the countries of the
region lack adequate resources and capacity to alone
address the issue of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
We therefore welcome the intention of ECOWAS,
ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission to
convene a summit of Gulf of Guinea heads of State and
Government in order to develop a comprehensive
anti-piracy strategy that will assist the countries in the
region to develop their capacities to combat piracy and
armed robbery at sea. In that regard, we encourage the
countries in the region to assert their ownership of the
problem and take a leadership role in combating piracy.
We look forward to their recommendations in that
regard.

We call on the international community and the
relevant United Nations agencies to provide the
necessary support for that regional initiative and
related efforts, including through the provision of
financial and technical assistance. For its part, South
Africa stands ready to assist the countries affected by
the scourge of piracy in the West Africa region to the
best of its abilities.

