Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the two Tribunals and of the Residual
Mechanism for presenting their reports (see S/2012/592 and S/2012/594).

The first conclusion we can draw from the reports
is that the two Tribunals are complying with the
procedures and timetables for the completion strategy
under resolution 1503 (2003), except in cases where
practical demands prevent them from doing so. Indeed,
the reality of those positive results for the two Tribunals
can be measured, on the one hand, by the extent of their
activity since the reports of May 2012 (see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349) to fulfil their mandates and, on
the other hand, by the significant progress made in
implementing the completion strategy per se.

It should be noted that the two Tribunals have
enjoyed varying degrees of success towards completing
their mandates. The ICTY has no more fugitives, but
some ofits appeals proceedings will continue longer than
foreseen. Various measures are being taken, however,
to accelerate those proceedings in order to mitigate the
effects of possible delays. With regard to the ICTR,
Togo welcomes the fact that, of the three cases whose
verdicts were announced in the May report, two have
been completed and the verdicts rendered. The only
case still pending is currently awaiting drafting of the
sentence, which will be delivered later this year, after
which the ICTR will be able to close its trial activities.
For the appeals cases, we note that the commitment
to handing down four verdicts in 2012 has been
honoured, thereby confirming that the ICTR is firmly
embarked on the path to completion. My country urges
it to do the same with respect to its projected verdicts in
the appeals of seven individuals in 2013 and 10 in 2014.
We believe that the Council should take into account
the insurmountable practical obstacles that led the
ICTY to push back certain dates, and the impossibility
of completing the appeals in other pending cases within
the timeframe of 31 December 2014 established by
resolution 1966 (2010).

Togo welcomes the progress made by both
Tribunals with respect to transferring cases to national
jurisdiction and notes that the decision to transfer to
Rwandan jurisdiction an accused already under arrest
is currently under appeal. The decision will be made
in January 2013. We further note that the cases of six
accused not yet arrested will be transferred to Rwandan
jurisdiction, thereby guaranteeing that the closing of the
ICTR will not spell impunity for individuals of middle
or lower rank, whether or not they have been arrested.

Togo is also pleased to note that the ICTR has been
able to deploy a monitoring mechanism in the context of
the trial of a transferred accused. However, to the extent
that the ICTR appears to have met with certain obstacles
in concluding its negotiations with organizations that
were supposed to play that role, it would be helpful for
the Council to be better informed with respect to the
effective composition and operation of that mechanism,
as well as with respect to its authority to ensure respect
for the rights of those being transferred for trial.

My country notes that hearings to preserve
evidence under article 71 bis of the Rules of Procedure
and Evidence of the ICTR have been held in two cases
in which the accused are suspected of a high level of
responsibility and that the evidence thus preserved will
be able to be used at the appropriate time, with the right
to rebuttal by the accused.

We further welcome the active role of both
Tribunals with regard to the challenge of witness
protection, which has taken a more dramatic turn with
the fear that the end of the Tribunals will also spell
the end of their protection. We believe that the two
Tribunals should be encouraged to make all necessary
efforts to ensure that witnesses maintain their trust,
without which other individuals will be reluctant to
testify before the Residual Mechanism, with the risk
that justice for the victims will not be done and that the
rights of the defence will be compromised.
In addition, we hope that the Appeals Chamber
will, without excessive delay, render its decision in the
appeal filed by the individual acquitted by the ICTR,
whose request for financial damages and relocation to
a country of his choice was turned down by the Court
in June .

With respect to the implementation of sui generis
aspects of the completion strategy, Togo welcomes the
rigor with which the three bodies - the Chambers,
the Prosecution and the Registry - are attempting
to resolve the difficult equation concerning the end
of their mandates, which they are doing with success
and within the prescribed timeframes, except for a few
cases of delay.

In spite of everything, the facts show that the
support of the Tribunals for the Residual Mechanism
and the transfer of judicial and administrative functions
of the Tribunals to the Mechanism is continuing without
problems. While we note that the two Tribunals have
assisted the Mechanism in establishing its regulatory
framework for executing sentences, witness protection,
the defence counsel commission and code of conduct
issues, as well as guidelines for written depositions,
Togo encourages them to also put their experience at
the service of the Residual Mechanism to enable its
effective implementation as well as in negotiating
headquarters agreements for the two branches in
Arusha and The Hague. We commend the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR and the Residual
Mechanism to follow up within the functions of the
Mechanism on investigations and searches for accused
persons who have not yet been arrested.

Considering the crucial importance of cooperation,
we welcome the multifaceted and effective nature of
the cooperation that exists between the two Tribunals
and States and international organizations. In fact, the
continued willingness of States to cooperate with the
ICTR and ICTY and the Residual Mechanism is a major
advantage, without which the fight against impunity
could not succeed. It is therefore commendable that
the two Tribunals continue to cooperate with States by
providing them with technical advice and information
as they fight impunity.

In addition, Togo welcomes the fact that such
cooperation helps to raise people's awareness of
the importance of reaffirming the legacy of the two
Tribunals as it promotes the transfer of know-how to
other jurisdictions, as was recently the case when the
ICTR sent experts to strengthen staffing capacity of
the Court of the Economic Community of West African
States in Abuja in connection with various aspects.

