The President: Before making a ruling, to which we will come a bit later, I would like to quote rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. It reads: "The Security Council may invite members of the Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers competent for the purpose, to supply it with information or to give other assistance in examining matters within its competence." This rule says nothing about the procedure as to whom we invite or how, or on which of the questions before us now should be dealt with first and which second. Secondly, I would like to say that it is very rarely in the history of the Council - if at all, practically - that Ihave seen a briefer rejected, in particular one proposed by the presidency. If it is even possible to find such a precedent, such cases would be very rare and very few. We too have had many issues with certain briefers who have been proposed by our colleagues when they preside over the Security Council, but, as they might have noticed, we have not made it a habit to challenge any of them, however questionable, in our view, the competence of this or that briefer for a particular occasion may have been. I am speaking in English now just to be clearly understood and not to be lost in translation. I will not draw this discussion out now, although, let us be frank, I have the authority as the President of the Council to read the rules of procedure and lead the proceedings in such a way as I deem necessary. Members have the right to challenge me on that. However, I will not do that; I will cede to the wishes of certain delegations. I would be glad to see them vote on this question. I will not insist, unless other delegations should, on deciding as to which proposal shall be put to the vote first. I will put to the vote the question whether the Council agrees to invite Mr. Jose Bustani to brief it today. Those who are in favour should vote in favour; those who are against should vote against; those who wish to abstain should abstain. A vote was taken by show of hands. In favour: China, Russian Federation, South Africa Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Abstaining: Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam
