Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate.

France aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to focus on three aspects.

The first is the exemplary nature of peacekeeping
operations and more broadly of the Organization in
the field of the rule of law. For United Nations action
to be legitimate and effective, it must be based on
the principles of transparency, respect for rights and
accountability. In that regard, France welcomes the
Secretary-General's policies in those areas, including
the zero-tolerance policy for sexual abuse, the due
diligence policy on human rights, the screening policy
and the guidelines on limiting contacts with persons
subject to arrest warrants from the International
Criminal Court.

All staff of the Organization at all levels must
be aware of those rules. The United Nations cannot
provide support in the field of security to entities that
do not respect human rights or that recruit children. The
United Nations cannot deal with criminals as part of
its normal activities. The Office of Legal Affairs is the
guarantor of the proper application of those guidelines,
and we welcome once again the rigour ofthe services of
the Legal Adviser. We must be beyond reproach.

Secondly, I turn to the appropriateness of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions to the needs on the ground with
regard to the rule of law. Faced with conflict situations,
when the States concerned are weak or have even failed,
the Council has, over the years, identified several
key areas for action: support for the criminal justice
process, an independent judiciary, the prison system,
comprehensive security-sector reform, institutional
strengthening and support for international criminal
justice.

The Council has therefore specified in mandates
for several peacekeeping operations the contribution
that Blue Helmets can make to the fight against
impunity for the perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We have given them
mandates to assist national authorities to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court. The role of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali in supporting national authorities
should be highlighted in that respect.

If people still doubt that all the tasks I have
listed must be an integral part of the maintenance of
international peace and security, they need only look
at the Central African Republic. In that country, to
date - thanks to the work of the African forces with the
support of France - large-scale massacres have been
avoided. However, we are facing a general situation
of insecurity as a result of the collapse of the Central
African State. It is therefore essential, in parallel with
action on security, to act now to get the institutions
back on track and restore State authority. To do that,
it is crucial to ensure that officials are paid as soon as
possible, which will get the police, gendarmerie, courts
and detention centres back up and running. We must
also continue working towards the objective of holding
elections no later than February 2015.

The United Nations has an indispensable role
to play in those priority areas, at present through the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic and, as soon as possible,
through a peacekeeping operation. To get the State ofthe
Central African Republic functioning again and assist
it in establishing the rule of law, those projects need
resources. Members of the international community
must strengthen their mobilization.

My third point is adapting to cross-cutting threats.
In recent years, the Security Council has shown its
ability to adapt to new challenges. The support provided
to addressing judicial and prison aspects of the fight
against piracy off the coast of Somalia is an example.
Today, we must mobilize to build the capacity of the
States of the Sahel to fight drug-trafficking. France
again welcomes the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which allows all actors of the system to
be brought together to work against the development
of a criminality that threatens the stability of the
States of the region. Significant efforts are also being
made to enable States to regain control over the trade
of natural resources for the benefit of their citizens.
The grip on such resources by armed groups fuels
conflicts and deprives States of income. Once again,
the maintenance of peace and nation-building are part
of the same reasoning.

In that context, it is regrettable that the Council
has not yet mentioned in a statement or a resolution the
most expensive trafficking for the African continent
after drug trafficking, namely, wildlife trafficking. It
involves not only protecting threatened species, such
as elephants or rhinoceroses, but also dealing with
the issue from the aspect of organized crime. France
carefully follows the initiatives launched on that
topic at the United Nations, in particular by Gabon
and Germany, and we welcome the conference very
recently hosted by the United Kingdom. The Council
should address the issue.

Promoting the rule oflaw is part ofthe Organization's
DNA. In 2012, the General Assembly devoted a high-
level declaration to it, enshrined in resolution 67/1.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and our
peacekeeping operations, missions and teams on the
ground devote a large part of their work and resources
to it.

We can certainly further improve the alignment
of such mandates with needs. In that regard, I am
thinking of South Sudan. We can certainly work more
on mobilizing civilian capacities and devote more
efforts to planning transitions between peacekeeping
operations and country teams. However, promoting the
rule of law is fundamental to our mandate. France will
continue to support that goal within the Council. Today,
the urgent need is in the Central African Republic.

