Ms. Enge (Norway): Norway calls for an urgent
cessation of hostilities.

Hizbollah must cease its armed attacks and return
the abducted Israeli soldiers immediately.

While we recognize Israel's inherent right to self-
defence, we believe that all use of armed force must
satisfy requirements of necessity as well as
proportionality. It is imperative that the civilian
population be protected in accordance with
international humanitarian law. The indiscriminate and
excessive use of force is prohibited.

Norway urges Israel not to resort to
disproportionate action. We must prevent the violence
and conflict from expanding into neighbouring areas.

We call on the parties to end hostilities
immediately and to take all necessary measures to
protect the population from the consequences of war.
Civilians must be protected and given safe passage.
Moreover, humanitarian and relief workers must be
given unrestricted and safe access, both for themselves
and for relief supplies. All protected persons who
desire to leave the areas concerned, including foreign
nationals, shall be entitled to do so in accordance with
international law.
A peaceful solution to the situation in the Middle
East cannot be found through military action. Only a
political process and negotiations involving all parties
can yield a comprehensive and lasting peace. What is
needed is that the parties return to the negotiating table
as soon as possible. This is the only place where a
lasting solution may be found. We fully support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and call for active and
urgent Security Council efforts in this regard.

Norway expresses its full and undiminished
support for Prime Minister Fouad Siniora of Lebanon
and calls on all parties to respect the political and
territorial independence of Lebanon.

We remain deeply concerned about the continued
deteriorating situation in Gaza. Israel's attacks on vital
infrastructure constitute a form of collective
punishment that is unacceptable.

It is obvious that the humanitarian needs are
enormous. Norway is deeply concerned by the swiftly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Middle East.
In accordance with the assessment given by the
Secretary-General in his statement to the Council
yesterday, the lives of more than 500,000 people in
Lebanon are being directly affected by the military
operations.

Norway stands ready to respond substantially,
and the Norwegian Government has decided to allocate
$30 million in humanitarian assistance to the region.
The Norwegian contribution will be channelled
through non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations.

