Mr. Brown (Liberia): I am honoured to address
this meeting of the Security Council on behalf of the
Government and the people of Liberia, and thank the
Secretary-General for his thirty-third progress report
(S/20l7/510) on the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zarif and Ambassador Skoog
for their comments and statements, and thank the
Ambassador of the brotherly State of Senegal.

Allow me, Sir, to draw your kind attention to
three points.

The first is that the United Nations Mission in Liberia
is a successful peacekeeping operation. Today, as the
report confirms, Liberia is relatively secure and stable.
From previous levels of up to 15,000 men and women,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia will complete its
mission and undergo a final drawdown in April 2018.
After nearly 14 years since the first peacekeeping boots
landed on the bloody soil of my country, there is today
no doubt that the peacekeeping mission can be credited
with enabling and catalysing Liberia's ongoing political
and economic transformation.

Notwithstanding the present challenges, where
there formerly was pervasive hopelessness when the
troops arrived, ours has come to be a more hopeful
society. Where death and destruction once stalked
our streets, a renewed commitment to democratic
governance and the popular desire to rebuild the broken
nation now drive the discourse and motivate a break
with our tragic past. Having concluded the inclusive
development of a peacebuilding plan consistent with
resolution 2333 (2016), Liberia is seeking continued
partnerships and support to sustain its peace and
continue the needed reforms as the peacekeeping
mission comes to a successful end.

That brings me to the second point. It was 73
years ago when a living President last democratically
transferred power to another in Liberia. The inauguration
in January 2018 of a new Liberian Administration will
mark only the second time that that will have happened
since 1847 - the year Liberia became independent.
That historic significance is not lost on Liberians and
further motivates our will to succeed. Lest we forget,
beyond that historic significance, there are other
important consequences linked to a successful holding
of peaceful, democratic elections in Liberia.

We are proud to acknowledge that our West African
subregion is expanding the space for democratic
governance and the peaceful transition of power.
Given the shared history and sociology of our region,
in the same way in which it has been relatively easy
to experience the spread of conflict and misery across
our borders, peace and a renewed commitment to
democratic governance - notwithstanding the obvious
challenges - are now overtaking the subregional
space of the Economic Community of West African
States. Consequently, a successful holding of peaceful,
democratic elections in Liberia will continue to pave
the way for other important successes in expanding the
democratic space across the West African subregion,
as well as significantly impacting the consolidation of
regional peace and security.

At home, many still wish that the election was
about a choice of the best ideas in continuing to build
a future of continued peace and development, and
that, rather than the quantity of political parties, the
ongoing competition would be flavoured by the quality
of the political discourse. Imperfect as it currently
is, we seem to be getting better with each attempt at
institutionalizing the process of democratic change.

It must also be noted that the mere exercise of the
choice to freely and fairly elect the leaders of our country,
with a sense of growing regularity and confidence in
both the electoral processes and associated outcomes,
meaningfully contributes to deepening a new culture
of peace, lends itself to democratic governance and
expressions, empowers ordinary citizens and keeps the
elected leaders duly accountable. We intend to continue
along that path in order to resolve the attending
irregularities, improve upon the imperfections and
deepen public confidence, not only in the usefulness of
democratic elections, but also in the sustainable values
of democratic transitions and governance.

That is why the National Elections Commission
and other relevant stakeholders are working to resolve
irregularities that may have arisen from the recent
registration of qualified voters. Liberians know that
we win - all of us will be winners - if, once again,
this ground-breaking election proves to inspire public
confidence in the electoral process and if the outcomes
are based on the free, fair, credible and transparent
exercise of the public's rights and duties as responsible
citizens. Let me therefore assure the Council that for
the Liberian Government and people, to achieve that
important undertaking there is no lack of political will.
However, as we are beginning to see, political will may
not necessarily be enough.

The report of the Secretary-General is
comprehensive, including in its description of the
depressing state of the Liberian economy. That is why,
despite the various austerity measures currently being
implemented, the Liberian Government is growing
concerned about a $17.5 million funding gap for
the implementation of the activities of the National
Elections Commission. So far, out of the $45 million
requested by the National Elections Commission, the
Liberian Government has committed to the payment
of $20 million and the international community has
committed about $8 million. The difference is yet to
be committed.

That brings me to the final point. Despite the many
challenges that lie ahead, Liberians are still growing
in confidence about the future of our country. Indeed,
arriving at where we are has been a long, costly and
arduous journey. We pay special homage to all those
who made the ultimate sacrifice - voluntarily and
involuntarily - to get us here and we are grateful to
the United Nations, its various specialized agencies, as
well as our multilateral, regional and bilateral partners
for their continued support and accompaniment. We
also reserve special thanks for the people of Liberia for
their continued resilience and steadfast belief both in
the ongoing transformation of Liberia and in a future
of togetherness, security and peace. Especially in that
light, the report broadly confirms that we have not, as
yet, begun to run as we know we can. But the truth is
also that Liberians are no longer standing still, weighed
down by a dehumanizing sense of hopelessness or the
enormity of the challenges that lie ahead in sustaining
our peace.

We know that a more just, equitable and inclusive
society is the pillar required to strengthen the peace
and security architecture whose foundations we were
enabled to establish. We know that change is hard, but
change we must to realize the benefits of the enormous
potential in human and other natural resources with
which we have been blessed. We know that we must
continue to be transparent in the management of our
resources and accountable to each other, including
in confronting the darkness of our tragic past and
therefrom forever inscribe its valuable lessons on the
national consciousness. We know we must continue
to reform not only the things that are easy, but also
the ones that are difficult and necessary, including
laws concerning rights to land, local Government and
domestic violence, because they pronounce upon our
overall ability to sustain our peace.

Those are all various forms of development and
fruition. Of course, we Wish the pace were faster, but
we must also heed one of the stand-out lessons from
our tragic past, which is that it is best to lead where
others follow. That is even more profound for countries
such as ours, emerging from protracted conflicts that
were driven by the chilling effects of exclusions. The
slow pace is therefore not a consequence of the lack
of political will; it is the recognition of the need to
meaningfully strive to always bring the majority of
the people along in the change process and to link
reforms with institutional capacities, most of which
are non-existent, in order to enforce the change.
Consequently, we have seen that as the fiscal space
has unfortunately constricted around us, so too has the
pace of the reforms decelerated.

Notwithstanding, Liberians are growing in
confidence that we are on a more assured path to
consolidating our peace. The election, re-election
and subsequent leadership of President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, the first woman to be elected President, have
inspired Liberian women and girls, more than half
of the Liberian population, broken their silence and
steered them away from exclusion in the national
decision-making processes of the country. We know that
we must continue to inspire and engage them, including
our youthful population. Quite simply, Liberia will
never be the same. We continue to change for the better.

We still have a long way to go to be the society
that we know we can be, but we are pleased with the
growing recognition, including in the report that Liberia
has come a long way. We urge continued partnership
with the international community, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the various agencies of the United
Nations towards sustaining our peace. Liberia and
Liberians are ready for this. We are ready to draw on the
gains already made to build a society that is tolerant of
our differences and respectful of the rights of all of its
citizens. Once again, we are ready to present the United
Nations with an important story of success - this time,
with peacebuilding, just as we have with peacekeeping.

