Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important and timely debate. I also
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his very lucid
and comprehensive briefing and Ambassador Tanin for
a very perceptive outlook on his country's remarkable
progress.

Afghanistan is at a critical stage in its post-conflict
recovery. With a Government of national unity in place,
the political dimension of the recovery has been given
a significant boost. The Government is increasingly
assuming leadership of the country's affairs, while
pursuing national reconciliation through an inclusive
Afghan-led process. Nigeria commends the Afghan
Government for its commitment to the reform agenda
agreed at the London Conference of 4 December. We
welcome President Ghani's effort in not only promoting
the rights of Afghan women, but also empowering
them. No less significant is his unflagging commitment
to electoral reform, which is crucial to the progress of
Afghanistan's democratic transition. The decision of
the Government to involve civil society in the electoral
reform process is highly commendable. We look
forward to the establishment of the Electoral Reform
Commission, which, among other things, will address
fundamental issues of governance, as stated in the
political agreement of 21 December 2014.

We believe that transparency and inclusive
governance constitute the key to building a united,
secure and sovereign Afghanistan, where all citizens
have a sense of belonging. The prevailing economic
situation in the country, characterized by challenges
in institutional capacity, infrastructural deficiencies
and declining rates of economic growth, must be
improved in order to support the reforms in other
critical areas. We note that some progress has been
made in developing the private sector; however, more
effort is required to promote vibrant entrepreneurial
activity. Foreign investment will be vital to stimulating
economic growth in Afghanistan. We therefore ask the
Government to continue to work assiduously towards
improving the investment climate in the country, with a
view to attracting more foreign capital.
Illicit drug-production and trafficking in Afghanistan
remain a matter ofconcern to Nigeria. It is a major source
of terrorist financing. It also undermines the rule of
law, owing to its link with criminal activities, as noted
in the Secretary-General's report. Nigeria commends
the efforts of the Afghan law enforcement agencies,
which have led to the seizure of substantial quantities of
heroine, morphine and other narcotics, as well as to the
destruction of heroine laboratories. We note that that
success has been attributed to a combination of factors,
including the improved coordination of efforts among
the Afghan law enforcement agencies and the improved
capability of the police to conduct operations. It is
vital that counter-narcotic operations in Afghanistan
be strengthened with adequate support from the
international community. That is needed in order to
consolidate the gains made by the Government in the
fight against illicit drug production and trafficking.

According to the Secretary-General's report,
unexploded ordnance continues to affect a significant
number of communities across Afghanistan. Owing to
funding constraints, the 2014 targets set by the 10-year
work plan of the Anti-personnel Mine Ban Convention
could not be met. Unexploded ordnance is restricting
freedom of movement, impeding agriculture and
stifling economic growth. The removal of that threat
is, therefore, an urgent matter. We commend the United
Nations and its mine-action partners for their efforts
to clear minefields and battlefields. Much has been
achieved, but a great deal still needs to be done. We call
on all donors to scale up their support for that important
process.

Following the withdrawal of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force in December
2014, Afghan security forces assumed responsibility
for maintaining law and order in the country. That is
a major challenge, considering the prevalent security
situation. Terrorist groups have continued to launch
attacks against civilians, using suicide bombers and
improvised explosive devices. A case in point is the
assassination of an Afghan police commander on
28 January, followed by a suicide attack during his
funeral, which killed 15 people. Nigeria condemns, in
the strongest terms, attacks by terrorist groups. The
insurgents should lay down their arms and respond
positively to President Ghani's offer of inclusive peace
talks.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Nicholas Haysom and the staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their tireless efforts to carry out the
Mission's mandate. UNAMA's engagement with the
Government of Afghanistan remains vital at this crucial
period in Afghanistan's transition to a peaceful, stable
and prosperous country. That is why Nigeria supported
the extension of the Mission's mandate, as expressed
in resolution 2210 (2015), adopted this morning. We
commend Spain, as penholder, for its leadership role in
drafting that resolution.

