Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Like
preceding speakers, I congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Gunter
Pleuger and his team for the excellent work done last
month. I further thank Assistant Secretary-General
Danilo Turk for his presentation and for his very useful
description of the situation in Bougainville.

We welcome the progress made in the peace
process, in the military sphere and in the political
dialogue. We welcome the efforts of the parties,
particularly the Government of Papua New Guinea, to
achieve the compromises essential to reaching the
concrete results that have just been described to us.
Those efforts must be relentlessly pursued in order to
bring the peace and normalization process to a
successful conclusion with regard to the remaining
challenges ahead in establishing lasting stability on the
island. Those challenges include, inter alia, making
Bougainville a weapon-free zone, finalizing the
constitution in order to create a system of autonomy in
Bougainville, and verifying the constitutionality of
such autonomy as soon as possible. It is also necessary
to resolve problems linked to the effective exercise of
police powers by the provincial autonomous
Government of Bougainville, including through the
reinforcement of the staff and logistical capacities of
the Bougainville police units and the establishment of
the security conditions necessary for the holding of
regional elections in Bougainville, now scheduled for
late 2004.

Given such challenges, we urge those former
combatants who remain outside the peace process to
renounce violence and immediately to join in the
efforts of the international community with a View to
completing the peace process successfully.

We welcome all initiatives to consolidate the
achievements made to date. The notification of
imminent consultations in the framework of the
political process is a positive sign of which we take
note. We support in particular the strengthening the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement programme. In that regard,
we are pleased to note that measures to promote the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former combatants
take account of the need to counter social exclusion so
as to strengthen the island's social cohesion and to
ensure sustainable development there. Similarly, we
urge that steps be taken to promote post-conflict
reconciliation. We thank the donor countries and
international organizations that finance relevant
programmes there.

Finally, we pay a well-deserved tribute to the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville and
its staff for their excellent work with the parties and
neighbours of the subregion. The reasons offered by
the Government of Papua New Guinea in support of
the request to extend the mandate of the Mission until
the end of 2004 are a testament to its credibility. We
support that request, which reflects a well-defined exit
strategy and leaves behind solid democratic
institutions, as has often been recommended by the
Council.

