Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the President for convening today's
meeting and for the briefings of Ms. Bintou Keita
and Mr. Ismail Wais. We also wish to highlight the
important work they are doing.

We are dismayed by the extent of the humanitarian
crisis in South Sudan, as well as the ethnic violence and
atrocities reported in the first report ofthe Commission
on Human Rights in South Sudan, which includes
perverse and systematic practices of sexual violence
against women and children. It is urgent to put an end to
those crimes and punish those responsible. At the same
time, the parties must comply with the cessation of
hostilities agreement and commit to the revitalization
of the South Sudanese peace process.

Peru supports efforts to revitalize that process
and reiterates that the only way to achieve sustainable
peace is through a political solution, which can be
achieved only with the resolute determination of
all parties. The parties to the conflict must be made
aware of the opportunity to put an end to the conflict
presented by the involvement of the international
community, in particular the regional actors. We note
that that opportunity could be ruined by the South
Sudanese parties' lack of responsibility. In that regard,
we stress the importance of the efforts made by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union and the United Nations to contain
violence, end the suffering of the South Sudanese
people, find a balanced solution to the conflict and
alleviate regional tensions.

We support the call by IGAD and the African Union
for the parties to be held accountable for violations of
their own agreements. It is also essential that they be
held accountable with regard to their responsibility
for the heinous crimes committed, in accordance with
international law and international humanitarian law.
In that context, we believe that the African Union and
the Government of South Sudan must accelerate the
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan,
as agreed by the parties in the 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. We must urgently protect witnesses.

In conclusion, we wish to express our support for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan in its efforts
to protect the population, which is facing numerous
difficulties. We support the recommendations of
the Secretary-General aimed at strengthening the
Mission's ability to do so. We trust that a new mandate
for the Mission that includes the support and training
for Government and security institutions regarding
issues relating to international humanitarian law and
the investigation of grave violations of human rights
will lead to adequate conditions for achieving the
sustainable peace that South Sudan needs.

