Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for organizing this
important meeting. We also thank Mr. John Holmes for
the information that he has brought to our attention
and, first and foremost, for his great interest in the
tragic humanitarian situations in the African regions
that he has just visited. His recent fieldtrip was most
encouraging to the people of the region, who have
suffered so much.

As others have noted, the Horn of Africa and the
Great Lakes region have endured a persistent
humanitarian crisis, the causes of which are familiar to
all. I would emphasize that chief among those causes
are armed conflict, the lack of political settlements
and, of course, natural disasters.

Some progress and reasons for hope have been
noted, including an improvement in recent months in
general food security in Ethiopia and Kenya, in
particular thanks to better weather conditions. The
overall picture, however, retains far too many causes of
concern, and Mr. Holmes was, despite himself, a front-
row witness to the untenable situation.

That is why we emphasize the imperative need
for the Council and the international community to
continue to support the efforts of the countries and
organizations of the region. Those efforts should focus
primarily on assistance for economic and social
development in order to lay the foundations for
genuine sustainable peace and development. First and
foremost, we invite the leaders of these countries and
all the parties to the various conflicts to shoulder their
responsibility and take action, so that the international
community - which can do no more than support their
efforts - will be able to provide assistance over the
long term. The accent must be on the responsibility of
all the political actors, whose divisions and behaviour
fuel these difficult situations.

Finally, we agree that throughout Africa, and in
these two areas in particular, humanitarian crises could
be eased through factors such as improved early
warning systems, better access to basic health care,
education and sanitation, increased numbers of small
commercial farms in order to increase yield and
promote farming that will be less subject to the
vicissitudes of nature.

But the principal condition is the lasting
settlement of armed conflicts, along with good
governance and respect for human rights. All of this
must be based on an improvement in the economic and
social situation.

