Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased to provide members
of the Security Council with an update on
developments in Kosovo since our last briefing in mid-
January.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Haekkerup, has established four priorities
for the next phase of the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
These are, first, to establish a legal framework for
provisional self-government in Kosovo, including
preparations for province-wide elections; secondly, to
complete the set-up of an effective law enforcement
and judicial system; thirdly, to establish regular
dialogue with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
open an UNMIK office in Belgrade; and fourthly, to
resolve legal property issues in order to build a more
accountable and responsible local public administration
and facilitate economic reconstruction. I will outline
progress on each of these priorities before proceeding
to more general issues.

The first priority is the development of a Kosovo
legal framework. UNMIK is currently engaged in an
intensive exercise to elaborate the key principles which
will serve as the foundation for future discussions on
the legal framework for provisional self-government.
Once this process has been completed in the coming
weeks, the Mission will begin close consultations with
both its local interlocutors and the international
community. The mechanisms through which powers
will eventually be transferred to a provisional self-
government will require careful scrutiny if the transfer
is to be efficient and effective. The final decision on
the powers and competencies will be taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The mission's institution-building pillar, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), estimates that it will take eight months to
prepare for province-wide elections. Much ofthe initial
set-up work for the elections can begin before the legal
framework has been finalized. Nevertheless, decisions
on key elements of the framework must be completed
by April if elections are to be held this year. Progress
has already been made in the registration of habitual
residents of Kosovo, and this work is indeed essential
in order to update the voter lists needed for general
elections.

Meanwhile, UNMIK has begun to restructure the
Joint Interim Administrative Structure to take account
of the municipal election results, which provided a
measure of the level of support enjoyed by Kosovo's
political parties, and to prepare for a smooth transition
to an eventual locally managed structure. In this regard,
UNMIK has identified some areas, including law
enforcement and the judiciary, where powers should be
retained by the Mission. Departments are being
encouraged to assume responsibility for the budgetary
aspects of their activities. This is indeed essential, as
the Kosovo consolidated budget should become
increasingly reliant on domestically generated funds.

Work has continued on the implementation of the
municipal election results. There has been further
progress in the establishment of the municipal
assemblies. So far, 18 of Kosovo's 30 municipalities
have appointed their chief executive officers, and seven
have fully set up their boards of directors.

The second priority is the development of law
enforcement and the judicial system. The provision of
law and order remains a high priority for UNMIK. To
enhance the rule of law, a more unified judicial, police
and civil administration coordination structure is being
considered. Continuing work is being undertaken to
improve the quality of the judiciary in Kosovo.
Because of the urgent need for a justice system when
UNMIK started, over 400 local judges and prosecutors
were appointed. An assessment of their performance is
now being undertaken, and screening mechanisms for
prospective candidates are in place. This is a delicate
task, and the Mission considers that negative political
consequences, as well as local resistance, are possible.

UNMIK currently has 12 international judges and
5 international prosecutors who are responsible for
dealing with the most sensitive cases related to war,
ethnic or organized crimes. One key responsibility of
these international personnel is to ensure that human
rights are respected and that ethnic bias does not
intrude into cases. However, this can sometimes strain
the working relationship between local and
international judges and prosecutors and may be
perceived as lack of confidence in local judicial
personnel. The Mission must therefore balance the
need for effective and non-biased justice, which is
supported by the presence of international personnel,
with the importance of rehabilitating Kosovo's
judiciary.

On the police side, UNMIK has established the
Police Organized Crime Intelligence Unit. So far, 3,138
cadets have graduated from the Kosovo Police Service

School. The focus for training is now shifting from
basic training to supervisory training.

The third priority is the development of relations
with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
opening of an UNMIK Belgrade office. The democratic
changes in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Serbia proper have provided an opportunity for a more
constructive and meaningful relationship with
Belgrade. The establishment of an UNMIK Belgrade
office has been agreed in principle.

Negotiations are continuing with Yugoslav
Government representatives on detainees and missing
persons from Kosovo. The negotiations have focused
on the exchange of accurate and complete information
regarding the detainees, release of humanitarian cases
and details of a proposed amnesty bill. UNMIK has
requested that the amnesty bill should be extended to
include all Kosovo Albanian detainees. Those not
covered by the amnesty bill should be considered for
release under other mechanisms available to the
Serbian authorities, such as a presidential decree. The
Mission has also suggested that any remaining Kosovo
Albanian detainees should be handed over to UNMIK
for ajudicial review of their cases.

The fourth priority has to do with property issues,
public administration and economic reconstruction f
the socio-economic base of the development of
Kosovo. Work is continuing on both the public and
private sectors of Kosovo's economy. The Kosovo
consolidated budget is now about 68 per cent funded
from local resources, with 32 per cent coming,
therefore, from donor contributions. These figures can
be compared with those from 2000, which show a
50/50 split between local resources and donor
contributions. The Mission is working to improve
economic regulation and decrease the isolation of
Kosovo's economy from those of its neighbours, as
well as to encourage direct foreign investment in
Kosovo. Work is continuing on plans to restore the
viability of the Trepca industrial complex. Policy
issues under consideration include generating support
from the international community, developing a
structure for engaging Kosovo residents in
deliberations and a strategy to engage the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in the process. Other elements
also to be considered are tackling the issues of interim
management, ownership and debt claims,
environmental damage reconciliation, restructuring and
worker retraining, and the establishment of appropriate
mining laws.

(spoke in French)
I should now like to turn to more general
questions, first of all, those relating to security issues.
There have been recent demonstrations in south
Mitrovica which were sparked by the death of a
Kosovo Albanian youth killed by a grenade attack on
29 January. The demonstrations became a focus for
protest by which Kosovo Albanians wanted to show
that they did not trust the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to be
able to provide them with the necessary security. The
protests appeared to be planned to some extent, as
some protestors had gas masks and seemed to be well
organized in small groups under local control. The
Kosovo Police Service showed how useful it was and
demonstrated its increasing effectiveness by ensuring
that further gatherings in south Mitrovica were
peaceful. The protests elicited little reaction from the
Kosovo Serbs. However, there were reports of threats
against the Kosovo Albanian minority in north
Mitrovica; one house was reportedly burned down and
abandoned apartments have been occupied. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), some 23 Kosovo Albanian
families remain on the north side ofthe city.

In response, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Commander of KFOR
visited Mitrovica and held discussions with both the
local Albanian and Serb leadership. A joint declaration
was signed by the Special Representative, the
Commander of KFOR, the Mitrovica Municipal
Assembly and local political representatives.

The declaration calls for enhanced security and
for an expansion of the zone of confidence, ensuring
freedom of movement for residents. It calls for the
return of displaced persons, and for the establishment
of functioning political structures. Work has begun to
achieve these goals. However, representatives of all
local Serb factions lave signed a statement of non-
concurrence with the joint declaration, arguing that the
plan excluded Kosovo Serbs and that expansion of the
zone of confidence was only for north Mitrovica.
UNMIK is continuing its efforts to elicit Kosovo Serb
support for the plan, so that the plan will have the
support of all communities.

Another security concern relates to tension in the
Presevo valley and in southern Serbia. Increased
clashes, illegal checkpoints and training activities in
the ground safety zone surrounding Kosovo. UNMIK
and KFOR continue to take action against persons and
activities inside Kosovo known to support the ethnic
Albanian fighters and that use the safety zone as a
staging area. UNMIK is working with KFOR to
implement effective measures in selected areas along
the Kosovo side of the administrative boundary to
control more effectively the movements of individuals
attempting to support ethnic Albanian fighters. KFOR
has over 100 suspected ethnic Albanian fighters in
detention.

Discussions are continuing with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and with Serbian and ethnic
Albanian leaders to take effective measures to stop
displacement and to encourage returns to the Presevo
area. An inter-agency team including representatives
from the United Nations Development Programme, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Children's
Fund and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has been sent to the
region to conduct an assessment of basic humanitarian
needs in the Presevo valley area. These efforts, along
with those of the European Union and other
international organizations, and a package of
confidence-building measures developed by the
Government in Belgrade, could help stabilize the
situation and avert any negative impact on the Serb
population in Kosovo.

Let me say a few words about problems relating
to the treatment of minority communities in Kosovo.
There appears to be a rise in attacks on Kosovo Serbs
and their property in Prizren, Mitrovica, anilane and
Pristina. Pressure on Kosovo Serbs to sell their
property remains high, particularly in municipalities
where Serbs are mixed with other populations, such as
Kosovo Polje in the Pristina region. Dialogue has
begun with a wide range of Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Serbian and Kosovo Serb and Kosovo
Albanian political and community leaders on the
envisioned framework for Serb returns to Kosovo. The
UNMIK Department of Reconstruction is also
preparing to assess damaged housing and public
buildings in 24 locations identified as having the
potential for Kosovo Serb returns, pending
identification of funding for necessary repairs to those
buildings. Similar efforts are being reviewed for the
return to Kosovo of members of other communities.

In the area of civil administration, the situation
faced by Kosovo Serb teachers remains difficult
following intimidation in northern Mitrovica, Strpce
and Leposavic. Kosovo Serb teachers and school
support staff have been offered the same contractual
conditions as Kosovo Albanian teachers and support
staff. However, as a result of pressure from their
communities and from Serbian educators, they have
asked to receive different contracts temporarily.

In the more general area of economic activity in
Kosovo, despite sustained efforts to promote economic
recovery, unemployment in Kosovo remains very high.
Social assistance programmes for the neediest
unemployed have been established. A public works
scheme is under development to provide temporary
employment for uneducated and unskilled people.

Turning to the question of depleted uranium, a
draft report on the effects of depleted uranium has been
prepared by a World Health Organization assessment
team. It concludes that the threat to public health and
the environment from depleted uranium is minimal. It
also recommends an information campaign to
encourage public reporting of discoveries of depleted-
uranium rounds, improved medical health data and an
effective information system on the health situation in
Kosovo to help closely monitor all aspects of the
situation, including with respect to depleted uranium.

To conclude, the four priorities set out in January
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
are the road map for UNMIK's activities in the coming
months. The development of the legal framework for
elections and provisional self-government, which
would provide the people of Kosovo with substantial
autonomy, is a complex exercise. It should not be
rushed; nor should there be any unnecessary delay. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will,
of course, retain the final say on all these fundamental
matters.

Other pressing issues which we must address
include the continuing threats to the safety and security
of individuals and the ongoing struggle to establish the
rule of law in Kosovo. The situation in the Presevo
valley and the recent unrest in Mitrovica have had a
significant and regrettable impact on the activities of
UNMIK, as well as serious negative implications for
fulfilment by KFOR and by UNMIK of their
responsibility to provide a stable security environment
in Kosovo. In the short term, these challenges, these
threats, may increase. In the longer term, UNMIK will
continue to look to the Security Council for the
political support that it needs to find the just balance
between the day-to-day administration of Kosovo and
setting up the interim administration in which the
people of Kosovo can enjoy a substantial level of
autonomy, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

