Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): May I
start by congratulating the Russian Federation and you
personally, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Council. I would add my thanks to Qatar for its
stewardship of the Council in December. I would also
like to welcome the five new Council members and pay
tribute to the outstanding contributions of the five
members whom they have replaced.

I also want, in particular, to welcome the new
Secretary-General and assure him publicly of my
Government's unstinting support for his efforts
throughout his tenure.

Mr. President, it is timely that you have brought
the Council together with the new Secretary-General to
look ahead to the challenges and opportunities that we
face. This Council has always been at the forefront of
global efforts to maintain international peace and
security, its essential responsibility. But the
international landscape, with the consequent
requirement for Council activity, has rarely seemed as
complex as it does today.

In the past year the Council played a crucial role
in helping end the fighting between Israel and
Lebanon. It worked continuously to try to bring peace
to Darfur, and is still doing so. It responded firmly to
the actions of Iran and North Korea. It continued to
support African Union efforts to bring an end to the
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. It supported the first free
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
40 years.

The year ahead promises to be no less
challenging. We must ensure that international efforts
intensify to bring an end to suffering for the people of
Darfur. We must continue to tackle the threats of
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The international community needs a
comprehensive Middle East strategy. We must redouble
our efforts to support those who want to achieve peace
rather than to perpetuate turmoil in that region. At the
core of that strategy will be the question of Israel and
Palestine. This meeting is an opportunity to reflect on
how the Council, in partnership with the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat, as well as with other
United Nations organs, regional bodies and
international actors, can improve its capacity to meet
those challenges.

I want to focus now, particularly, on the conflict
cycle. The maintenance of international peace and
security demands, above all, more effective action to
prevent conflicts from occurring and then recurring
and, where they do exist, to help bring them to an end
on a sustainable basis.

So the challenges for us are how to be better at
conflict prevention and resolution and at crisis
management, including peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding. In each of these areas, the Secretariat
can, I believe, help continue to improve our collective
efforts. It is important and welcome that these issues
are covered concisely but cogently, and with proposals
for action, in the presidential statement that we will
adopt later today.

On conflict prevention, this Council adopted a
landmark resolution at its summit meeting in 2005.
Security Council resolution 1625 (2005) set out an
ambitious vision for a more comprehensive, integrated
and proactive approach to prevention. It called for
more regular and analytical reporting from the
Secretariat and asked the Secretary-General to help
countries at risk of conflict to perform strategic
conflict risk assessments. It also stressed the
importance of effective conflict prevention strategies,
embracing not just traditional security and political
factors, but also economic, social and humanitarian
factors, as well as the field of governance and human
rights. The resolution constituted, in fact, a very
comprehensive policy.

Too often, the Council and the international
community are witnesses to the emergence of conflict,
rather than actively being involved in prevention. We
see - or we fail to see - a crisis developing, and
agree to act only when it is too late. The Council and
the Secretariat must form a stronger partnership in
conflict prevention, through ambitious implementation
of resolution 1625 (2005), to ensure that we do better
collectively at the early stages in anticipating and thus
preventing conflict.

A second priority is peacekeeping. United
Nations peacekeeping is ever more in demand. The
surge in missions and numbers over recent years is
striking. It is therefore incumbent on us to ensure the
most effective use of scarce resources. An important
part of this endeavour is to ensure that peacekeeping
missions have clearer, more focused mandates with
specific objectives to be achieved within given
timeframes.

Peacekeeping missions should form part of a
wider peacebuilding strategy to achieve the progress
necessary so that such missions are no longer needed.
In many post-conflict situations, the risk is that
peacekeeping missions become part of the landscape
and allow a status quo to persist. We therefore need to
focus on a coherent approach with the goal of resolving
the underlying issues.

To do this, the Council should be more strategic
in assessing the underlying issues and in giving
missions more purposive mandates. This approach
requires from the Secretariat reporting which makes
clear proposals on how United Nations missions can
and should evolve and what action the countries
concerned, the international community and the
Council itself can take to accelerate transition from
peacekeeping to self-sustaining peace.

Finally, on a closely related point, we need to
strengthen our collective ability to pursue post-conflict
peacebuilding. Establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission was an important achievement, but it will
fulfil its objectives only if it becomes an action-
oriented, strategic body in which countries emerging
from conflict can discuss candidly and effectively with
international, regional and local actors in post-conflict
peacebuilding what needs to be done and who should
do it.

The United Kingdom considers, therefore, that
the Peacebuilding Commission needs to build on its
initial activities to ensure that it can make a real
difference. Its role in advising the Council is also
centrally important. Our continuing involvement in
Sierra Leone, Burundi and other countries that will be
on the Council's agenda in future must take full
account of the contributions and proposals that the
Peacebuilding Commission makes.

In conclusion, the Security Council plays a
central role in the international community's efforts to
maintain peace and security. But we cannot work in
isolation, given the interdependent nature of security,
development and human rights. The new Secretary-
General and the Council must and will, I am sure, work
in partnership with each other and with other
international actors to maximize our collective ability
to tackle threats, to seek opportunities and to promote
the cause of peace.

