Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to thank the French
delegation for initiating, and the Italian presidency for
convening, today's briefing on the situation ofmigrants
in Libya. We are equally grateful to the briefers.

The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, must respond to news reports
about African migrants being sold as slaves. That is
why we fully support the idea of a concrete outcome to
today's meeting.

The situation in Libya has already featured
prominently on the Council's agenda during this month.
It has a direct impact on the stability of neighbouring
States, the Sahel and the Mediterranean. Largely
owing to the current crisis in Libya, the latter is facing
numerous challenges ranging from terrorist threats to
irregular migration flows.

As we stated in the Chamber just one week ago,
Ukraine strongly condemns continuing violations
of human rights in detention centres in Libya, where
African migrants are being systematically abused and
harassed (see S/PV.8104). Reports about slave auctions
are shocking and horrifying. It is appalling that these
heinous crimes are taking place in the twenty-first
century. In that regard, my delegation joins other
Council members in appealing to all the competent
authorities in Libya to investigate this barbarism and
ensure that those responsible are held accountable.
We would also like to encourage the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to thoroughly look into
those atrocities as well.

The current situation of migrants constitutes just
one of many elements of the ongoing instability in
Libya. The lack of progress on the political track and
the security vacuum have been exploited by criminal
networks, which have flourished to an unprecedented
degree. Arbitrary detentions, torture, kidnappings,
unlawful killings, trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of drugs and arms have all become a reality
in the country. That is why only a comprehensive
approach to the root causes of the current conflict may
alleviate the suffering of the Libyan people.

In that regard, we believe it is vital now to invest
more efforts in the political process. My delegation
reiterates its support to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ghassan Salame' as he works with
the parties to advance the implementation of the United
Nations action plan for the resumption of an inclusive,
Libyan-owned political process. We call on everyone
involved to continue consultations until a compromise
on amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement is
reached. In our view, the Agreement remains the only
viable framework to end the current crisis in Libya. Any
attempts to undermine the process are unacceptable
and should be rejected. The longer the limbo in Libya
continues, the more the slave trade and other unlawful
activities will become entrenched in the country.

Ukraine believes that without economic
opportunities, particularly for the youth in Africa,
there is a risk that the North Africa and sub-Saharan
regions will remain unstable zones, with terrorists
and criminals exploiting the void left by the State
for illegal trafficking in persons and arms. In that
context, achieving sustainable peace and stability in
Libya and the region requires more investments in
socioeconomic development. Without functioning
Government structures, the provision of most essential
social services, operational law enforcement and
judicial organs, vulnerable communities in Libya
and other conflict-affected countries will remain an
easy target for criminals. Therefore, initiatives on
fighting terrorism, fostering economic development,
addressing migration flows and ensuring respect for
human rights must go hand in hand and complement
each other. Ukraine remains committed to contributing
to that endeavour.
