Ms. Maliavo-Samba (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, on behalf of
Mrs. Catherine Samba-Panza, President of the Republic
and Head of the Transitional State, and His Excellency
Mr. Andre Nzapayeke, Prime Minister and Head of the
Transitional Government, I would like to express my
country's thanks for the ongoing attention the Council
has given to the crisis currently rocking our country.
I would also like to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women for everything that her organization has
done for our country. She has described the situation
of women during the crisis in the Central African
Republic.

To respond to the crisis, our country must face
several challenges. There are the security crisis, which
must be addressed in order to guarantee the rights of
everyone living in our country, including women, who
are the main victims of the crisis. With respect to the
security challenge, today, as we know, the Central
African Republic does not have a national army to
guarantee security and the rights of individuals. The
Central African Republic is under embargo, which is
why we cannot fully shoulder our sovereign duties.

There is also the legal challenge. Today, the judicial
system in the Central African Republic is sick. The
police force needs to be rehabilitated. Judges must also
take up their work. But none of that can happen unless
there is security. Judges cannot return to their posts in
the back country due to security issues. Criminals thus
have free rein to commit harmful acts.

There is are also the challenge of governance. The
rebuilding of public State institutions is crucial, but
today, again because of security issues, the prefects
who represent the Government in the back country
cannot return to their posts. Therefore, the State is for
all practical purposes confined to the capital: the State
basically does not exist in the back country.

I would therefore very humbly ask for the Security
Council's support so that all of the compassion that has
been expressed for the Central African Republic can
truly be translated into deeds. It is time for us to take
action to save all of the lives that are being lost with
every day, minute and second that pass.

I would also like to note that the current crisis in the
Central African Republic is not a sectarian crisis, as has
been widely broadcast. It began as an inter-communal
problem, and the sectarian aspect came about as a result
of political manipulation and - we must underscore
this here today - the negative influence of certain
media outlets, at both the national and international
levels.

I would like to express my satisfaction regarding
the mission to the Central African Republic led by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Today, in Geneva, the independent
expert, Ms. Keita Bocoum, presented her report on
human rights in the Central African Republic to me.
She will of course also present it to the Security Council
here in New York.
Another mission also took place - that of the
Commission of Inquiry, also in Bangui. It will also
present its report to the Council shortly.

Given the limited means at the disposal of the
Central African Republic today, it is important for
the Government to receive support in order for it to
be able to bring to justice the criminals who continue
to practice sexism, rape and kill; for that to come to
an end in our country and for the entire population to
have its dignity restored. Therefore, on behalf of my
country, I call for action - and, I would emphasize,
swift, effective action - to be taken. The Executive
Director of UN-Women stated that only one third of
the funds necessary to meet humanitarian needs are
currently being provided. It is important that everyone
suffering in camps for internally displaced persons or
as refugees in neighbouring countries be taken into
account in the various efforts that will be undertaken.
What is at stake at the regional level as a result of the
Central African crisis is significant. It is also urgent
for the humanitarian aid that is to be provided to the
Central African Republic to also be provided to Central
Africans who are in neighbouring countries and who
are living in very difficult circumstances.

Those are, Sir, the few points that I wanted to
submit to the Council for its consideration.

