Mr. Lambert (Belgium) (spoke in French): Let
me start by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. The effects of climate change indeed
require renewed mobilization, and Belgium welcomes
this opportunity to give this question the attention it
deserves.

Belgium fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union,
and I will therefore limit myself to a few points.

Many speakers today referred to the debate held
in April 2007 (see S/PV.5663), and rightly so. The
2009 report of the Secretary-General requested by the
General Assembly (A/64/350) was also a major
milestone: it made the case for enhanced action on the
part of the United Nations system.

What has happened since then? Climate change
has returned to negotiations on the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). Despite the notable progress in that forum,
we should admit that this question is no longer given a
high priority in our debates in New York. We recognize
that the Framework Convention is the proper forum for
dealing with climate change, but other organs 4 this
Council and the General Assembly - should remain
seized of aspects of this matter that fall under their
jurisdiction.

Climate change acts as a threat multiplier. Some
might argue that those threats are remote, but that is
not the case. We should not close our eyes to what
science is telling us. Average global temperatures have
increased by 0.7°C since pre-industrial times.

 

Emissions already in the atmosphere will lead to a
further increase of 0.6°C. Continuing with business as
usual puts us in danger of a 3° change by the end of the
century.

What is worrying is that past changes in the
Earth's climate have always been non-linear and
unpredictable, with sudden shifts when key thresholds
were reached. That makes planning even more
challenging for policymakers. We are at risk of an
abrupt climate change that could cause a rapid dieback
of tropical forests, a precipitous melting of polar ice
sheets or glaciers and greatly accelerate the rise of sea
levels.

What can we do? The first avenue for prevention
is indeed mitigation. Major steps were agreed to in
Cancun and are now being implemented. However, the
negotiations in the Framework Convention should be
stepped up. The European Union has set itself on track
to a low-carbon and energy-efficient economy by 2020.
We are now expecting others to join these efforts.

Beyond that essential action, we have to increase
our readiness to cope with the effects of climate
change. Some of them are already felt today. In the
Pacific, the relocation of the populations of small
islands has already begun. The same is happening in
some villages of Alaska. The succession of droughts
and floods worldwide has intensified over the past
years and has led to an increased number of
humanitarian emergencies.

The effects of climate change are also threatening
the very resources that are so vital for human life.
Throughout history people have fought over natural
resources. Climate change is threatening the
availability of those resources. Water, fertile land, food
and energy supplies are all at risk. Scarcity of natural
resources is in some cases a threat multiplier; in other
cases it is itself a threat. The stress on crops and the
lack of fresh water will first affect the most vulnerable
populations.

Indeed, the impact of climate change will not be
spread evenly. Scarcity might lead to a breakdown of
coping mechanisms of groups and individuals, carrying
with it an increased risk of instability and conflict.
Today, we know that a wide range of factors - such as
ethnic tensions, transborder disputes, inequalities in
societies, population movements and failed States 4
can lead to armed conflict. But climate change will

 

become an ever more important factor among those
root causes.
How can the United Nations respond? This major
challenge for mankind should be addressed in a holistic
and preventive way. It would be irresponsible to reduce
climate change to its negotiating aspect. An overall
framework for preventive diplomacy is indispensable
to alleviate the consequences outlined in the reports of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
especially for the most vulnerable countries.

We have to take concrete steps towards a
coherent approach within the United Nations system.
Our international institutions should be prepared to
respond to the impacts of climate change and the
scarcity it will cause. Today we welcome this debate,
which paves the way for future Council action on this
issue and promotes a structured approach by the United
Nations system to the security aspects of the Climate
challenge.

