Mr. Von Amsberg: I thank the Secretary-General
and Ambassadors Momen and Gasana for their
leadership in this very important endeavour. I thank
you, Madam President, for inviting the World Bank to
brief the Council on the progress on the strengthening
and deepening partnership with the United Nations
to support peacebuilding and development in fragile
country situations.

I bring with me today the good wishes from the
World Bank President, Mr. Jim Yong Kim, who
assumed the presidency just last week. He is very much
looking forward to engaging over the next weeks and
months closely with all our partners on how to deepen
and strengthen our collaboration and, in particular, on
how to make our work on the ground in conflict and
fragile situations even more effective in the future.

Over the past 20 years, we have seen formidable
progress in global poverty reduction, but progress has
been uneven. Issues of conflict, fragility and violence
are among the biggest obstacles to development. Fragile
and conflict-affected States are the furthest from
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

I just want to make a few comments on how the
World Bank is scaling up its own efforts to fight
poverty and promote development in these particular
situations, talk about our rising partnerships, and make
a few comments on future developments.

On our own efforts over the past two years, when
we prepared the World Development Report 2011
on conflict, security and development, in very close
collaboration with the United Nations, we decided to
scale up and intensify our work in conflict and fragile
situations. We are now putting into operation that
document, which has set us on a new path. We have
seen that the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States, formed in Busan at the High-Level Forum
on Aid Effectiveness in November and December
2011, and which was endorsed by about 40, countries
embodies some of the same principles of more effective
partnerships in support of those partner countries. The
New Deal and the World Development Report 201] call
for the international community to re-examine the way
it engages in situations of fragility and conflict.

Challenges facing fragile and conflict-affected
countries cannot be resolved on a short-term basis or
with partial solutions in the absence of institutions
that provide people with security, justice and jobs.
The development assistance must support and must go
hand-in-hand with peace and State-building goals. We
at the World Bank are making four major changes on
how we engage in our work in situations of fragility
and conflict.

First, we are doing strategies differently. Our
country strategies for fragile and conflict-affected
States are now focused on support to peace and
State-building goals, directly or indirectly through the
programmes we are supporting.

Secondly, we are financing differently. Together
with our partners in the International Development
Association - the World Bank's fund for the poorest
countries - we are developing proposals to simplify,
adjust and accelerate the framework for allocating
resources to fragile and conflict-affected situations. We
also have a State- and Peace-building Fund, which we
use as a pilot fund to actually implement the ideas of
the World Development Report 2011 and the New Deal
for International Engagement in Fragile States. In fact,
aligning financial instruments is critical for all of us in
order to ensure coherence in our approaches to working
with fragile and conflict-affected situations. We have
therefore launched a discussion on how to align the
World Bank's State- and Peace-Building Fund with the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and on how we can
learn from each other.

Thirdly, we are operating differently. We are also
developing a package of internal reforms to enable
more informed risk-taking, more nimble operational
responses to changing environments, more hands-on
implementation support to partner teams, and new
approaches for measuring results.

Fourthly, we are deploying our human resources
differently. The g71L group of fragile and conflict-affected
States has challenged us by saying that they need more
face-time with more senior technology specialists on
the ground, working more closely with partners in the
United Nations and other agencies. In response, we have
created a new centre in Nairobi, the Global Centre on
Conflict, Security and Development, and are increasing
our staffpresence in several conflict-affected countries.

I would like now to turn to the partnership and
our work with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
New Deal and the g7+ have called for strong national
ownership of development and peacebuilding strategies
and for the alignment of development partners to support
those strategies. To achieve those objectives, we need
to see greater coherence across an international aid
structure that is often too divided and too stove-piped
between development, security and humanitarian and
diplomatic assistance. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission can play a fundamental role in bridging
some of those gaps, as it has in the past. The regular
exchanges that are being promoted between the United
Nations, its Member States and the World Bank Board
have also been instrumental in bringing about that
coherence.

The World Bank has supported the Peacebuilding
Commission's work since it was founded, six years
ago. It has engaged actively in all of the Commission's
country-specific configurations. We have been
coordinating our respective efforts well.

The Commission has provided useful inputs and
guidance to our country teams. I am also encouraged
to see that the Commission's country-specific
configurations are working to enhance coordination
and coherence on the ground. The suggestions made by
Ambassador Momen also offer promising avenues for
further enhancing the Commission's impact.

Over the past two to three years, the United
Nations-World Bank partnership has continued to
grow at both the institutional and the country levels.
Our teams are collaborating more than ever to ensure
that our strategies are aligned and that we respond in
a complementary fashion. We see progress in all of
the country-specific configuration areas and in all
six countries on the agenda. Ambassador Momen has
already mentioned some of the joint initiatives.

In the Central African Republic, we are working
with the former Belgian Chair on a common agenda to
support the Government and development partners.

In Liberia, we are coordinating our upcoming
country assistance strategy with the country-led
implementation of the New Deal and the Peacebuilding
Commission's efforts led by the Swedish Chair.

In Burundi, we are working hand-in-hand with the
Swiss Chair and are jointly supporting the Government
in organizing a partners' meeting this fall.

In Sierra Leone, the leadership of the Canadian
Chair helped all partners align behind the Agenda for
Change, and we are coordinating efforts in the critical
area ofjob creation.

In Guinea-Bissau, the World Bank and the Brazilian
Chair joined forces to support the country in reaching
the decision point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative.
In Guinea, as the Ambassador mentioned, we
collaborate closely with the Government and the
Ambassador of Luxembourg on a number of critical
issues, including employment generation, and we are
exploring ways to further engage in the area of security
sector reform.

The World Bank and the United Nations, along with
the European Union, are also strengthening coordination
on the framework for post-crisis assessments, as the
recent example of the joint assessment in Yemen
effectively illustrates.

In addition to the country-level collaboration I
mentioned, we have thematic collaboration in a joint
platform for coordinating job creation and collaboration
in the area ofjustice and security.

We are also working to more effectively address
on-the-ground implementation. The World Bank
and the United Nations are finalizing a review of the
important Fiduciary Principles Accord, which facilitates
implementation by one entity of trust funds managed
by the other, in specific post-crisis circumstances. That
review will open space for a broader discussion of how
the World Bank and the United Nations can collaborate
to address operational challenges to implementation
on the ground, including increased interoperability,
common approaches to risk management and the
development of instruments for combined operations.

We are also carrying out a joint review of the
United Nations-World Bank collaboration within the
2008 Partnership Framework Agreement to take stock
of cooperation and identify priorities going forward.

That brings me to my final point, on future
perspectives. We need to continue to strengthen our
partnership and alignment of activities in the countries
on the Peacebuilding Commission's agenda, especially
our work on needs assessments and poverty reduction
strategies.

We support the recommendations of the annual
report to further explore complementary programming
between the United Nations, the World Bank and other
international actors, where issues of security, justice
and development intersect.

It will be most useful to link the relevant
recommendations of the World Development Report
2011, the review of civilian capacity and the ongoing
work of the Peacebuilding Commission. Additionally,
the implementation of the New Deal offers fresh
opportunities to strengthen our collaboration. Six States
that have endorsed the New Deal are also on the agenda
of the Commission. The Commission has a role in
ensuring the coherence and alignment of international
assistance behind the New Deal's implementation.

Better support to peacebuilding requires moving
from needs-based approaches towards genuine
prioritization. The peace- and State-building goals
provide a great starting point for such prioritization
by highlighting the issues that States themselves
have identified as critical moving forward. The
Peacebuilding Commission could be a useful forum
in which to explore how the peace- and State-building
goals and specific challenges facing conflict-affected
countries can be reflected in the post-2015 United
Nations Development Assistance Framework.

Delivering results for people living in fragile and
conflict-affected situations will require concerted and
sustained efforts from all of us. The World Bank is
deeply committed to that agenda and looks forward to
working closely with all partners around the table.

