Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Two years ago we witnessed the signing of a tripartite
agreement at the United Nations authorizing the
holding of the 1999 election in East Timor, the first in
a series of very difficult phases that the people of
Timor had decided to go through in order to become an
independent country. The elections to be held in
August 2001 will mark a new turning point in this
endeavour. We would like to pay a tribute to the
members of the Timorese Government and the
international personnel, who are working together to
achieve this goal.

(spoke in English)

It is important that we all stay the course on East
Timor. We recognize that in due course the scope of
United Nations involvement will need to be reduced.
We believe, nonetheless, that we should not act
precipitately to reduce resources, military or civilian.
We all want this operation to succeed. Let us proceed
with circumspection and draw down only in such
numbers and at such time as we are sure that our doing
so will not prejudice that success that we are seeking.
At the same time, we call upon the East Timor
authorities to exercise reasonable budgetary restraint.

Let us not, however, gloss over the worst threat
there is to further progress, and that threat is impunity.
As many of us in this Chamber have said in the past,
there must be no impunity for those responsible for
committing atrocities in East Timor or anywhere else.
We commend the ongoing efforts being made by the
fledgling judicial system in East Timor to bring about
justice there for past crimes, and we welcome the clear
position of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
Timorese leadership, rejecting impunity and pursuing
accountability.

But East Timor should not be left alone in this
endeavour. Indonesia also must live up to its
commitment to bring perpetrators to justice. The
verdict and sentences in the trials for last September's
killings of three staff members of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in West Timor are deeply disturbing and
distressing. Sentences of mere months given to those
who openly confessed to murder can only reduce the
confidence the international system has in Indonesia's
justice system. The murdered UNHCR personnel were
colleagues of us all, as much as the people around this
table are our colleagues. They were there working on
our behalf, and we owe them justice at least. The
sentences for the perpetrators are an affront to the
deceased, they are an affront to us all, and they are
simply unacceptable. No one in this Chamber credits
for one instant that these murders were anything other
than acts of cowardice and thuggery. Treating them
lightly only encourages further attacks. To paraphrase
the words of our Jamaican colleague, justice has not
only not been done, it has been seen not to have been
done.

Canada endorses the recent statements by the
Secretary-General, by High Commissioner for
Refugees Ruud Lubbers and by UNTAET regarding the
unacceptable outcome of these cases and the need for
there to be sentences proportionate to the crimes. We
are encouraged that an appeal to these sentences has
been filed by the Indonesian authorities, and we hope
that this matter will be dealt with expeditiously and
effectively. Were the Indonesian system to prove
unable to defend the rule of law and enforce
internationally accepted norms of legal behaviour, the
international community would have no choice but to
pursue other means to ensure that justice is served.

