Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): First of all, I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting under this format, in which non-members of
the Council can also participate and contribute their
ideas to the Council's consideration of this important
issue.

We thank Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Fre'chette for her very important statement, and
particularly for her focus on the question of
implementing the various recommendations contained
in both the first and the current report of the Secretary-
General. We also thank the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mary Robinson, for her statement and
for her presence here, and in particular for her bringing
in the human rights perspective, which is the bedrock
of protection.

We would like to begin by commenting on what
we consider to be the two overarching themes for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and a culture of peace. Prevention
is at the heart of protection, and this has been made
amply clear in paragraph 8 of the present report and in
paragraph 29 of the first report of the Secretary-
General. The preventive capacity of the Organization
must be enhanced. At the same time, Member States
need to take steps to inculcate values of peace,
tolerance and harmony - conditions that contribute to
longer-term prevention. Two years ago, the General
Assembly adopted a Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace, which should be reflected in the activities of
the Organization at the national, regional and global
levels. We look forward to the outcome of the ongoing
work on prevention taking place in various forums, and
in particular to the Secretary-General's report on
prevention that is due next month.

The second theme is that of coordination with
other actors. The protection of civilians being a
complex and multi-layered process involving multiple
entities, effective cooperation and coordination with
regional and intergovernmental organizations is very
important. We support the observation contained in
paragraph 68 of the first report (S/l999/957) of the
Secretary-General that the United Nations is the only
international Organization with the reach and authority
to end the plight of civilians in conflicts. In paragraph
69 of the first report, the Secretary-General
acknowledges the leading role of the Council in
devising an overall approach to crisis resolution and in
encouraging close cooperation and coordination
between all components of the United Nations system,
regional forces, donors and non-State actors.

It is important to examine in this context the
modalities that the Council has at its disposal to carry
out that role. Recommendation 11 of the present report
mentions the monthly meetings between the Presidents
of the General Assembly and of the Security Council.
We believe that that consultation can be more
effectively utilized as an important input for the
Council's consideration of the items on its monthly
agendas.
I should now like to address some specific issues
covered in these two reports of the Secretary-General.

The first relates to the issue of resources
matching the mandate. As against the perception and
expectation of protection created by the very presence
of a peacekeeping operation, the mandate to protect
civilians should be explicit and fully matched by the
required resources. This observation has been made in
paragraphs 62 and 63 of the report of the Brahimi
Panel, with which my delegation fully agrees.
Therefore an initial assessment of the protection needs
of the civilian population in the mission area and in
resource planning will be crucial.

Strengthening the system-wide early warning
capacities of the United Nations, in regard not only to
situations that could lead to full-scale conflicts, but
also to impending humanitarian emergencies caused or
exacerbated by the dynamics of the conflict, will go a
long way towards ensuring a better understanding of
protection needs. It would be useful to strengthen, and
coordinate with, capacities that exist regionally.

Secondly, I would like to touch on the issue of
enhancing legal protection and enforcement and
prosecution. Member States should be urged to ratify
the major instruments of international humanitarian
law and human rights law in order to enhance legal
protection and facilitate prosecution of violations.
Bangladesh fully supports developments in this
direction, including the setting up of the two
International Criminal Tribunals, for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, as well as the adoption of
the Rome Statute.

We also believe that national judiciary systems
must be strengthened, as we are talking about in the
case of setting up a special court in Sierra Leone. We
believe that a lack of progress in that direction would
send the wrong signal.

The third point relates to the technical review of
the impact of sanctions. As stated in the first report of
the Secretary-General, a permanent technical review
mechanism for the impact of sanctions on civilians is
desirable. We would also underscore the importance of
a pre-assessment of the humanitarian impact of
sanctions.

The fourth point is humanitarian access.
Extending protection to, securing a humanitarian space
for, and providing unimpeded, timely, safe and
sustained access to populations in need is of the utmost
importance. In intra-State conflicts, due to the
multiplicity of actors both on the warring sides and on
the humanitarian side, an increasingly coordinated
approach needs to be taken in obtaining and sustaining
meaningful access. Access negotiations therefore
should be conducted on the basis of common policies
and criteria for engagement among aid workers.

We fully support the idea of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee's developing a manual of broad
guidelines on strategies for access negotiations which
may be suitably adjusted to local situations. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
should also build expertise on access negotiations,
drawing upon its experience.

The fifth point concerns "hate" media campaigns.
We agreed that issues of national sovereignty and
freedom of the press constrain efforts to contain hate
media campaigns in conflict situations. In reality, the
practical modalities of actually shutting down hate
media, though entirely desirable, are not quite
apparent. That may prevent its inclusion in the mandate
of peacekeeping operations. Short of that, the Council
should give serious consideration to the regular
integration in mission mandates of media-monitoring
mechanisms for effectively monitoring, reporting and
documenting the activities of hate media.

The sixth point relates to the separation of armed
elements. I will not speak at length on this area,
because the Deputy Secretary-General covered it in her
statement.

Finally, I should like to make some comments
about the general thrust of the present report, that is,
reviewing the implementation of the recommendations
made so far.

In operative paragraph 1 of resolution 1296
(2000), the Council decided to proceed on a case-by-
case basis, taking into account the particular
circumstances, and reaffirmed its intention to consider
the relevant recommendations of the first report of the
Secretary-General. Therefore, in reviewing the
implementation aspect, this context should be kept in
mind.

We would like to conclude by suggesting the
following areas for consideration by the Council if an
action is intended on the present report, which we
would recommend.

First, in a situation of potential or actual conflict,
the Council should encourage mediation through the
appointment of special commissions or high-level
personalities to look into the source of the dispute,
build confidence and recommend practical solutions.
Secondly, in a situation of widespread violations
of international law resistant to the usual diplomatic
initiatives, the Council should encourage the building
of an international coalition in favour of peace, with a
view to breaking the cycle of violence and, as
appropriate, through preventive deployment.

The Council should invite the General Assembly
to pursue efforts to extend the scope of the legal
protection provided in the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
Here we would like to suggest that there should be
increasing adherence to this Convention by the
Member States. Perhaps we should begin with all
Security Council members adhering to this Convention.

We should also encourage closer coordination
between the Department of Public Information and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations when setting
up missions or when revising mandates, with the aim of
disseminating relevant information targeted at the
armed groups and the civilian population in the mission
area, with a special focus on peace education and on
the special protection needs of women, children and
other vulnerable groups.

To broaden its information base and
understanding of the situation, the Council should
interact more frequently with non-State actors,
including civil society organizations involved in the
mission area.

We believe that, on a number of issues covered in
both reports, the Council needs to undertake further
discussions and analysis in the context of the
recommendations, to see if, in the missions so far
mandated, more could be done to implement them. We
recommend that the Council presidency organize
consultations on these aspects to make progress in
moving from, as the Deputy Secretary-General said,
intention to implementation.

