The President: The Security Council will now

begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members

to document S/2012/ 160, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General dated 14 March
2012 (S/2012/160) on the situation in Sierra
Leone and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). The Council welcomes the briefing
provided by the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General in Sierra Leone, Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, on 22 March 2012. The
Council reaffirms its support for continuing
efforts to consolidate peace in that country.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
Government of Sierra Leone bears primary
responsibility for peacebuilding, security and
long-term development in the country. The
Council notes the steady progress achieved so far
by the national authorities and people of Sierra
Leone in a number of areas including national
reconciliation, the promotion of gender equality
and the preparation for national and local
elections on 17 November 2012. The Council
emphasizes the importance of these elections for
consolidation of peace and security in Sierra
Leone.

"The Security Council calls upon all
political parties to engage constructively in an
honest and open dialogue aimed at furthering
national cohesion. The Council calls on the
Government of Sierra Leone, all political parties
as well as other stakeholders to intensify their
efforts to foster an environment that is conducive
to the holding of peaceful, transparent, free and
fair elections. The Council calls on the leadership
of the political parties to undertake cross-party
confidence-building measures, promote political
participation and non-violence among their
membership and ensure the full adherence to due
process of law and to the recommendations of the
2 April 2009 joint communique, which, inter alia,
calls for the establishment of the Independent
Police Complaints Committee to reinforce the
neutrality and professionalism of the police, and
the Political Parties Code of Conduct. The
Council believes that these steps are essential to
ensure public and international confidence in
Sierra Leone's democratic process.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
statement of the Government of Sierra Leone on
3 April 2012 clarifying its position regarding the
arms delivered to the Sierra Leone Police. The
Council underscores the importance for Sierra
Leone's national authorities to respond
proportionately to threats to the security of all
citizens in Sierra Leone. The Council calls upon
the Government to ensure that its security forces
remain committed to upholding human rights and
applicable international law.

"The Security Council calls on the
Independent Media Commission to proactively
monitor the media and ensure compliance with
the code of conduct for the media and calls on the
national authorities to address the administrative
and financial challenges facing the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation.

"The Security Council commends the
contribution of UNIPSIL and the United Nations
country team to the peacebuilding and
development priorities of Sierra Leone, and in
particular through the integrated United Nations
Joint Vision. The Council commends the
achievements of Executive Representative Von
der Schulenburg in Sierra Leone and urges the
Secretary-General to promptly appoint a
successor.

"The Security Council continues to
emphasize the important role of the regional
12-28998
organizations such as the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the Mano River Union in supporting Sierra Leone
to achieve its peacebuilding, security and long-
term development goals. The Council
acknowledges the work of the Transnational
Organized Crime Unit and calls on Sierra Leone's
authorities to work with its neighbours and
regional partners in order to intensify their joint
efforts to consolidate regional peace and security,
including through tackling the challenges posed
by drug trafficking and organized crime.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
supporting peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone,
12-28998
including in addressing the priority area of youth
employment. The Council urges the PBC to
continue working in support of UNIPSIL and the
United Nations country team.

"The Security Council remains actively
seized of this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2012/11.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
