Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership of
the Council this month, and the members of the Council
for their unanimous adoption of resolution 2278 (2016).

While today's resolution does not respond to
our urgent request regarding the Libyan Investment
Authority, it does reaffirm the sanctions directed at
all those involved in the illegal export of Libyan crude
oil. It also extends the mandate of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011). We have
seen a visible improvement in the Panel's performance,
based on its most recent report, as contained in
document S/2016/209.

We have worked with the delegation of the United
Kingdom and all the other members of the Security
Council to ensure that the resolution just adopted
represents an additional step that can help the Libyan
people assure, safeguard and develop its natural
resources. We believe that all Council members
understand the problems that the Libyan Investment
Authority is up against. We know of nothing that would
be an obstacle to the approval of our request that the
Investment Authority be enabled to manage its resources
within the framework of the current assets freeze.

However, we were surprised by the Security
Council's unfortunate refusal to respond to our request,
which thereby makes it henceforth responsible for every
loss incurred by the Libyan people. We are talking
about profits that we could have amassed to the tune of
$2 billion a year. That flies in the face of the fact that
Council members continue to affirm their willingness
to help the Libyan people and protect their resources.
That disparity between deeds and words certainly does
nothing to maintain the Council's credibility in the eyes
of the Libyan people, and I hope that the Council will
reconsider the issue as soon as possible and agree to the
request expressed in our letter addressed to it.

I welcome the return of the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord to Tripoli. As
I have said a number of times, there can be no peace
or security in Libya until that legitimate Government
can work in a safe environment. There can be no
question that the Presidency Council's return to Tripoli
is a courageous, necessary and important step in
confronting the extremist groups that have now been
occupying the capital for two years and that have
undermined all the revolution's gains, making the
people's lives an intolerable hell.

In that context, I would like to commend the efforts
of the Libyan armed forces, particularly the navy,
which has helped us to take that step, and I urge all
the armed groups and the Libyan people as a whole
to support the Presidency Council of the Government
of National Accord in dealing with all the extremist
and criminal groups that have tried to undermine the
political process or commit acts of terrorism in the
capital. That involves responding to the continuing
incitement by the former Mufti Al-Sadeq Al-Gheriani
and by the television channel run by his son, and that of
the Canadian national of Libyan origin Abd Al-Bassit
theila. I urge all Libyan army and police officers to
return to their posts in accordance with the requests of
the Presidency Council.

Those extremists and criminals who attempt
to undermine the political process are trying to
jeopardize the legitimacy of the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord. I would like
to make it clear, however, that the Presidency Council
and the General National Congress acquired that
legitimacy in accordance with the Libyan Political
Agreement, adopted by the House of Representatives,
and those institutions still possess that legitimacy. The
Presidency Council and the House of Representatives
must work together in order to convene the General
National Congress in order to approve the Government
of National Accord, as represented by the Presidency
Council, whether as is or after modifications have
been made.

Most Libyans no longer consider the question of
who will occupy the various offices of the Government
of National Accord significant. They have endured
displacement and fear for their lives and property. Their
salaries have not been paid; they have no health services.
They have only one option, and that is the Government
of National Accord, whatever its failings. It represents
the only way out of the crisis. All Libya's stakeholders
must therefore work together to give the Government
of National Accord the momentum it needs as soon as
possible, and until then, the Presidency Council can
green-light the various ministries and deputy ministers.
We need the international community to respond to
the Government, and I hope that today the Security
Council will send a clear message of solid support for
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord and that that message will take the form of a
press statement by the Council.

The meeting rose at10.25 am.
