Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The situation in
Liberia has taken a significant turn for the better over the
past several weeks. The cease-fire in Monrovia has held
since its re-establishment on 26 May 1996. The stalled
peace process has been brought back on track, thanks
largely to the patient and concerted efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We welcome the ECOWAS decision on 17
August 1996 to extend the Abuja Agreement of 19
August 1995 until 15 June 1997, as well as its adoption
of a new timetable for the implementation of the
Agreement.

The firm determination of ECOWAS member States
not to tolerate any further obstruction of the peace process
is backed by a comprehensive set of measures to ensure
compliance by the Liberian factions with the peace plan.
Of these measures, we note in particular the exclusion
from future elections of those obstructing the peace
process and the invocation of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) 1996 Summit resolution calling for the
establishment of a war crimes tribunal to try all human
rights offenses against Liberians. These are clear
reminders to the Liberian faction leaders of the
alternatives which await them in the event they fail to
comply with the peace plan.

As the Secretary-General notes in paragraph 53 of
his report, the ECOWAS decisions are intended to give
the Liberian faction leaders one last chance to restore a
democratically elected government. We have not forgotten
the atrocities committed by the feuding armed factions in
the streets of Monrovia last April. However, we believe
that the Liberian faction leaders are fully aware of what
they need to do to redeem themselves before the
international community for all their past misdeeds. While
we welcome the commitment of the Liberian faction
leaders to the ECOWAS decisions, we will be watching
closely how faithfully they abide by their commitments.

 

The final outcome of the peace process will hinge on
whether free and fair elections are held on 30 May 1997.
While ECOWAS Foreign Ministers have identified the
requisite conditions to ensure free and fair elections, we
attach great importance to the full independence of the
electoral Commission and to disarmament substantial
enough so that the free participation of the Liberian people
in the democratic process will not be constrained. In this
connection, the growing influence of Liberia's civil society,
manifested in the course of ECOWAS decisions and the
designation of the new Chairperson of the Council of State,
Ms. Ruth Perry, are encouraging signs for peace and
democracy in Liberia. We look forward to a greater
involvement of civil society in the process of free and fair
elections. We also emphasize that if disarmament is to have
true significance, it should be backed by strict enforcement
of the arms embargo imposed on Liberia by resolution 788
(1992).

Given the vital importance of the elections for the
future of Liberia, the imperative of ensuring the impartiality
and independence of the electoral Commission cannot be
overemphasized. By ensuring the independence and
impartiality of the electoral Commission, the international
community can avoid a situation in which the conscience of
humanity may be disturbed by the unfortunate election of
any of those who commits the heinous crime of violating
the basic rules of international humanitarian law. We share
the view that the United Nations should play a central role
in the organization and conduct of the elections. In this
regard, we believe that the Council should give serious
consideration to the request by ECOWAS and the Liberian
parties for assistance. We encourage the Secretariat to study
the optimal ways and means by which the role of the
United Nations can be enhanced to support the efforts of
ECOWAS and to create conditions conducive to peace,
stability and national reconciliation in Liberia.

In view of the commitment of ECOWAS to revive the
peace process and remain engaged in Liberia through the
installation of a new Government on 15 June 1997, my
delegation fully supports the extension of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) mandate
for a period of three months, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. We also support the deployment of
additional military observers within the Mission's currently
authorized strength, as developments warrant.

With these remarks, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before the Council. In concluding, I
wish to express my Government's appreciation to those
African States contributing troops to the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), despite serious financial
constraints. We are also grateful to the United States
Government for the generous financial support it has
committed to ECOMOG. We remain confident that the
active engagement of ECOWAS in Liberia can serve as
a model of successful cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in addressing the new
kinds of challenges to international peace and security we
now face in the post-cold-war world.

