Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his briefing.

France aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered shortly on behalf of the European Union.

More than 20 years after the Dayton-Paris
Agreement was signed, it continues to be the key to
institutional stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
unanimous adoption in November last year of resolution
2315 (2016) served to underscore that all the members of
the Security Council share the same cardinal principles
with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina. It also recalled
the urgent need for everyone to abide by the principles
and institutions set up by the Dayton-Paris Agreement
and respect the desires of all of the country's stakeholders
with regard to the European Union, as well expressing
support for the presence of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea, which, for the time being,
has an executive mandate.

The unity of the Council on that common basis
conveys a message of peace to a region that remains
fragile, as the past few months have shown. It reflects
the fact that the international community agrees to
support the independence and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which cannot be called
into question by any one of its entities, and to respect
the choices made by the country, provided that they
are in line with international law and the framework
established by the peace agreements.

In that regard, we are deeply concerned about
the various developments that in recent months have
revived tensions among the communities and brought
memories of past differences back to the fore. First, a
referendum was organized in Republika Srpska on the
issue of a national day. The vote was held in violation
of two judgments of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, whose decisions are binding and
final under both the Bosnian Constitution and the
Peace Agreement. The question of respect for the rule
of law is therefore a major issue. We also lament the
tensions surrounding the recent filing of an appeal for
review of the 2007 ruling of the International Court of
Justice. Political leaders must act within the framework
of national institutions and their respective functions.
The International Court of Justice dismissed the appeal
because it found that that had not been the case.

In general, we call for greater vigilance with regard
to any initiative that is likely to create new divisions
in the country. We once again urge all parties to
cooperate with the institutions mentioned in the Peace
Agreement, namely, the Bosnian Constitutional Court,
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Office of the High Representative. We expect
that the High Representative will focue his efforts
on facilitating a peaceful daily dialogue among the
different communities and entities.

It is more important than ever that the political
leaders grasp the full extent of their responsibilities.
The failure to adopt the necessary measures for the
granting of International Monetary Fund assistance is
a cause for concern in that regard. We therefore call
on all stakeholders to abandon their divisive rhetoric
and political games. The time has come to focus on the
implementation of the economic and social reforms,
which are the crux of the common aspirations of all the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of their
community of origin.

However, despite that fragile situation, we remain
convinced that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is moving towards normalization. Without calling into
question the founding principles of the Dayton-Paris
Agreement, our objective for the upcoming years
is to develop the international presence so that it is
fully adapted to the realities of the day. In particular,
consideration as to reconfiguring the Office ofthe High
Representative must also continue.

France welcomes the fact that the European
perspective is today the main engine for developing and
strengthening the country. In that regard, we welcome
the many positive developments in the past few months
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the areas of reform and
European integration. The official handing over to
the Bosnian authorities of the questionnaire to initiate
the European Commission's consideration of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's candidacy for European Union
membership is certainly one such positive development.
That is taking place in a context in which the prospect
of European integration is receiving massive support
on the part of the Bosnian population and enjoys
unanimity among the institutions, from the Presidency
to the cantons and the entities, which we welcome.

In that context, the European Union will continue
now more than ever to help the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in implementing reforms that fulfil
the people's aspirations. The reform agenda is central
in that respect. While much remains to be done, we are
pleased that initial concrete results have already been
achieved. As to the questionnaire, we attach particular
importance to demonstrating that the European
coordination mechanism is fully functional.

Lastly, as has been mentioned here, the European
Union-led stabilization force Althea will also continue
its activities and will adapt to the changing security
situation on the ground in order to allow the Bosnian
security forces to operate autonomously and to
participate in consolidating a peaceful and forward-
looking society. It will be the subject of a strategic
review in autumn by the European Union, which will
guide its work in the years to come.

Twenty-one years after the horror of the war and
25 years after the start of the conflict, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving in the right direction, with the
support of the European Union and its other partners.
The responsibility of the international community, and
especially of the Council, is to encourage Bosnia and
Herzegovina along this path so that it finally turns the
page on the divisions of the past.

