I would first like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and presence at today's meeting and, through him, express gratitude to the entire United Nations staff in Mali. I also salute President Buyoya and the African Union's commitment to peace, stability and development in Mali. We again deplore the deaths in recent months and even in recent days of too many civilians and soldiers in Mali. On behalf of Belgium, I would like to express our condolences to their loved ones, as well as to the people and the Government of Mali. The fifth anniversary of the signing in 2015 of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali will be in a few days. I wish to emphasize that, even though progress has been much slower than hoped, there is no alternative to peace and no alternative to the 2015 peace agreement. Some progress has been made on the agreement: the timid redeployment of parts of the reconstituted army in the north, the establishment of a decentralized administrative structure with a gradual transfer of responsibilities and resources, the establishment of a development zone for the northern regions and the beginning of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, which is a crucial process designed to prevent the resumption of violence. I also salute the work of the International Commission of Inquiry for Mali, as provided for in the peace agreement, whose final report will be presented in a few days. It is imperative that there be follow-up on the report and that the work accomplished by the International Commission is acknowledged. Nevertheless, it must be noted that since the signing of the 2015 agreement, progress has been too weak to guarantee a return to lasting peace. I regret that the benchmarks identified by the Security Council in June 2019 have, for the most part, not really been met. Challenges remain, and I will point out two in particular. First, security sector reform must be a priority in order to professionalize the sector and restore the confidence of all Malians in those whose mission it is to protect them. Secondly, the representation of all Malians - that is, of men and women - in State institutions, which has yet to see progress in terms of balance, for both elective and administrative functions, needs attention. After five years of modest progress, there is an urgent need for the parties to show a renewed sense of responsibility in the search for compromise in the implementation of the peace agreement. We can all see it - the situation in central Mali remains very worrying, despite the establishment of the crisis management political framework. We call on the reformed State to redeploy as soon as possible and fulfil its sovereign role of protecting citizens, starting with the most vulnerable. Security, justice and education are three basic services that could help undermine the recruitment of community militias and terrorists. I am convinced that the end of intercommunal conflicts and the fight against terrorism involve strengthening the legitimacy of the State. I would like to take this opportunity to salute the work of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in support of the Government's efforts. The MINUSMA adaptation plan is an important initiative in this regard, even if we all know that the work of the Mission, in which more than 80 Belgian soldiers are deployed, can be framed only as support for a political process. Let me mention another important topic: the fight against impunity. The feeling of injustice, which is one of the most powerful, has already provoked revolts. I encourage Mali to respond to the perception of injustice by adopting and implementing a national crime policy. In this regard, I regret that no investigations into the allegations of abuse by the defence and security forces have led to accused persons being brought to trial. Equally regrettable is that no trial has been held against alleged perpetrators of crimes against MINUSMA peacekeepers. Accordingly, I would like to reiterate that Belgium will carefully monitor the implementation of the recommendations of the International Commission of Inquiry. The crisis that put Mali on the agenda of the Security Council has been slow to resolve. Of course, some questions, including the global health crisis we are experiencing, climate change, the regional terrorist threat and transnational organized crime, all go beyond the Malian crisis in the strictest sense. But there are also major internal challenges. Rather than trying to put them into perspective or looking to find scapegoats, I call on all Malian political actors of goodwill to take on those challenges and overcome them. They should know that they can count on Belgium to assist and support them on the path that they themselves will have traced.
