Mr. Ivanov (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), I
would like to express my sincere gratitude for the
invitation to take part in today's debate on the issue
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We are greatly
honoured by the number of regional organizations
represented here and for the opportunity to address
and inform the Security Council. The Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) and the United Nations
have been cooperating since 24 March 1994, when the
General Assembly adopted resolution 48/237, granting
it observer status. Over the 25 years of its existence, the
CIS has moved into the mainstream of global processes
and has contributed to the development of a broad
political dialogue founded on equality. With time, the
Commonwealth has become a launching pad for creating
and developing new integrative institutions in the post-
Soviet space, such as the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Eurasian Economic Community.

A major event this year was the meeting in
September in Bishkek of the Council of CIS Heads
of State. It is worth noting four of the declarations
adopted at the Summit, of which the first concerned the
Commonwealth's twenty-fifth anniversary, assessed its
activity and discussed the importance of improving,
developing and promoting it. Other declarations adopted
included one on the outcomes of the special session of
the General Assembly on the world drug problem, one
on future joint efforts to counter international terrorism
and one on the seventieth anniversary of the Nuremberg
trials. The declarations were to be circulated at the
United Nations, which I heard today has been done.

The CIS is not a bystander with regard to current
world problems. In order to address them effectively,
we have established and continue to develop contacts
with the working bodies of the main international
organizations dealing with key issues on the global
agenda. The CIS Executive Committee maintains
relationships, including those based on agreements,
with such United Nations bodies as the Secretariat, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), the secretariat of the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), the
United Nations Office at Geneva, the secretariat of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Our
established practice of regular consultations between
CIS Foreign Ministers on current international issues is
very important in that regard.

The potential of the CIS for constructive action
has been recognized as an important element in broad
international cooperation, as reflected in resolution
69/10, on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States, adopted on
11 November 2014 by the Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session. This year we intend to adopt a new version of
that document at the seventy-first session, under agenda
item 126. In that connection, I would like to point out
that CIS representatives are regular participants in many
efforts organized in alignment with the United Nations,
such as the Tashkent international conference on the
outcomes of the creation of the Central Asia Nuclear-
Weapon-Free Zone, held on 12 June 2015, and a regional
seminar held in Ashgabat in March 2015 on border
security and management in countering terrorism. At
the end of this month, CIS representatives will take
part in an international conference in Minsk on laying
the foundations for the UNECE region's economic
integration and sustainable development by 2030, as
well as the Global Sustainable Transport Conference,
to be held on 26 and 27 November in Ashgabat.

I should also mention the regional workshop held
in Minsk from 15 to 17 January 2013 on implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), organized by the Executive
Director of the CIS in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
secretariat of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which was attended by
representatives from every CIS member State. Lasting
and productive partnerships have been established
between the CIS Executive Committee and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia. CIS representatives regularly attend
events organized by the Centre, and the Executive
Director of the CIS holds annual meetings with the
Head of the Regional Centre.

The CIS maintains active contact with specialized
United Nations agencies of the United Nations through
its cooperative sector bodies. For example, the CIS
member States' Anti-Terrorism Centre maintains
contacts with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), under the Security Council, and with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Anti-Terrorism
Centre experts regularly participate in CTC missions
verifying CIS member States' compliance with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). At the
request of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Centre prepares information for the
global survey of the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005). The CIS intergovernmental statistics committee
actively cooperates with the Food and Agriculture
Organization in implementing the Global Strategy to
Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics in the CIS
region. Our Intergovernmental Council on Industrial
Security maintains close contact with the secretariat
of the UNECE Convention on the Protection and Use
of Transboundary Watercourses and International
Lakes. Representatives of the Commission's secretariat
regularly participate in Council meetings, an in
September 2016, the Convention secretariat was
accorded observer status on the Council. Cooperation
with United Nations institutions is a priority for the CIS
Inter-Parliamentary Assembly.

On the economic front, we are cooperating with
the United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, and we are
preparing to sign a memorandum of understanding with
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme.
The Inter-Parliamentary Assembly pursues regular
contacts with UNESCO to promote its members' further
adherence to UNESCO conventions. We conduct joint
humanitarian actions and implement projects, while
UNESCO experts take part in the Inter-Parliamentary
Assembly's standard-setting activities. Our departments
have established cooperation with such entities and
divisions of the United Nations as the United Nations
Population Fund, UNESCO, the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
UNCTAD, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the World Meteorological Organization,
the World Health Organization, the World Intellectual
Property Organization and others.

CIS member States participate in all United Nations
activities. Economic cooperation is our priority, but now
issues related to cooperation on security are also taking
centre stage, thanks to the increasing threats in the area
of international security. We can see that today's world
is being constantly overwhelmed with new challenges.
New sources of tension are added to old conflicts, and
serious crises permanently endanger not just individual
countries but entire regions. The threats and challenges
posed by terrorist groups demand that we ramp up
our collective counter-measures, including through
regional organizations. The CIS believes that our united
efforts will produce the greatest effects if we steadily
and consistently strengthen the central coordinating
role of the United Nations and develop the potential
of its specialized institutions and global programmes.
The CIS member States affirm their commitment to
effectively implementing their obligations undertaken
through relevant United Nations decisions, as well
as their intention to fully support the United Nations
in implementing and improving its Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

Needless to say, we are concerned about the serious
risks in the immediate vicinity of CIS external borders,
specifically the continued tensions in the Afghan-
Pakistan region, which of course are a direct threat to the
security of the Central Asian States that are members of
the CIS. As a result of external interference, the export
of so-called colour revolutions and of artificial regime
change, once-stable countries have been plunged into
chaos and anarchy. Instead of the promised democracy
and prosperity, most of the citizens of these countries
are suffering horribly and have been obliged to flee.
Even Europe is now being tested by floods of migrants
and the significantly worsening threat of terrorism.

At the same time, the information space of the
CIS countries has been aggressively attacked by some
States that are trying to use their dominant position
in the global information network to achieve political
and military goals as well as economic ones. In such
circumstances, the Commonwealth countries affirm
their determination to expand international cooperation
and unite efforts to increase the effectiveness ofregional
and international security systems.

After 25 years of joint integration and development,
and despite the sovereign differences and particularities
of each country, the Commonwealth remains a well-
established and active party to all of the most important
international instruments that regulate cooperation
in the areas of security, disarmament and combating
today's threats and challenges, and makes a genuine
contribution to their implementation. Those joint
measures are being undertaken with due account of
the leading role of the United Nations and the need
for constructive partnership with other international
institutions and their specialized bodies.

Therefore, in the light of all this, we can conclude
that the CIS countries have done a great deal of work
to counter new threats and challenges. We have
every reason to believe that the Commonwealth has
made a considerable contribution to the joint efforts
to ensure international security at the regional and
global levels. At the same time, the dynamically
changing international situation, as well as the
ongoing growth and transformation of various factors
posing a real or potential threat to our States, require
further strengthened efforts to deepen and expand
the comprehensive cooperation of the CIS with the
agencies of the United Nations and other international
organizations in order to effectively counter existing and
new emerging threats and challenges to global security.

The development of collective approaches
necessary for effective cooperation in overcoming
modern threats and challenges requires increased
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we believe
that it would be appropriate to resume the practice of
holding conferences and high-level meetings between
the United Nationsm, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council ofEurope, which
had been held annually since 1993 on a rotational basis
and included the heads of other regional organizations.
Such meetings would provide an opportunity to the
heads of operational and executive bodies of those
organizations to engage in a high-level discussion
on the most pressing issues of the global agenda and
elaborate common approaches to address them.

