Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for taking the
initiative of convening this open meeting and to
welcome the participation and statement of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Wolfensohn, President of the World
Bank, and Mr. von Pierer, President and Chief
Executive Officer of Siemens, as well as the President
of the Economic and Social Council and the Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group for African Countries
emerging from conflict.

With the steady development of economic
globalization, the operations of many businesses have
extended to all corners of the world. In some cases,
contact with those businesses has a certain influence on
the development of a situation in the conflict region.
Therefore, how to push for and promote a positive role
for business in the peace process in conflict-afflicted
countries and regions is a question that merits our
serious consideration. In that respect, I would like to
make the following comments and observations.

First, businesses should scrupulously abide by the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and other codes of conduct. For some
businesses active in conflict-ridden countries in Africa,
profit is their only goal, and they engage in illegal
trade in products such as diamonds and timber, in
disregard of the provisions of the relevant Council
resolutions. That kind of illegal trade often abets armed
conflict in the region and undermines the peace process
concerned. Those activities must be stopped.

In that respect, we welcome and appreciate the
beneficial contribution the Kimberley Process has
made to severing the link between the illegal trade of
diamonds and armed conflicts. It is undoubtedly
extremely important for the prevention of the
escalation of conflicts that businesses enhance their
sense of moral responsibility, strengthen their self-
regulation in the conduct of their business and comply
strictly with the relevant Council resolutions.

Secondly, business should actively participate in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and post-conflict peace-building. In the wake
of conflict, the affected countries and regions lie in
ruins. The active participation of business in local
economic reconstruction can lead to a company's own
growth and help the country in question rehabilitate its
economy after conflict, thus providing jobs for the
people and enabling more ex-combatants to reintegrate
into society. That would favourably complement the
efforts of the international community and the
Governments concerned to achieve stability and
consolidate peace.

Thirdly, business can make an active contribution
to the prevention of conflicts. If we look at today's
world, we can see that most conflicts take place in
developing countries. Although the causes of conflicts
are various, they are to a great extent all closely linked
to economic underdevelopment. Business should
actively carry out operations in underdeveloped
countries and regions, providing financing and
transferring technology, in order to help the local
people eradicate poverty, improve their economy and
achieve sustainable development, thus preventing the
outbreak of conflicts.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts require the
joint efforts of the international community. The
United Nations, regional organizations and
Governments undoubtedly bear the major
responsibility in that respect. At the same time,
however, business can also play a role. We should
encourage business, especially multinational
corporations, to make use of their advantage, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and
Security Council resolutions, to work actively and to
play a constructive role in preventing conflict and
promoting the settlement of conflicts. We are in favour
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council further exploring this issue.

