Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing. The United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
will officially conclude its mission and be superseded
by the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), thereby ushering in a new era
in Haiti.

Since 2004, MINUSTAH, in the face of an
earthquake, hurricanes and other hardships, has
played an important role in promoting the stability and
development of Haiti. More than 100 United Nations
peacekeepers, including eight from China, have made
the ultimate sacrifice in Haiti, and China commends
and pays tribute to MINUSTAH, Special Representative
Honore and all the former Heads of the Mission for
their invaluable contributions. MINUSTAH's orderly
withdrawal has helped maintain a stable situation in
Haiti, creating conditions conducive to MINUJUSTH's
smooth deployment. China looks to MINUJUSTH,
the United Nations country team and other entities
to strengthen their coordination and consolidate the
progress achieved by MINUSTAH, thereby making
an even greater contribution to Haiti's overall stability
and development.

MINUJUSTH cannot stay in Haiti indefinitely.
The final solution to the question of Haiti will hinge
on the efforts of the Haitian Government. Along with
other relevant parties, the Government should work
diligently to take on the responsibility of maintaining
the country's stability and development of the country.
This will entail enhancing its self-development
capacities, reinforcing the rule of law, conducting
constructive national dialogue, implementing the
strategic development plan of the National Police for
2017-2021, ensuring stable funding and working to
ensure security in the country as a whole as quickly
as possible.

The humanitarian situation in Haiti remains grim.
China hopes that the international community will
increase its assistance so as to help Haiti eliminate
cholera, improve its capabilities in food security and
disaster reduction and prevention, and help provide
more support to Haiti in implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
