The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.

On 30 April 1998, when the Council took a decision
on the Rwanda Tribunal similar to the one now before us
for consideration, my delegation underscored the primary
goal of the two ad hoc Tribunals established by the
Security Council to bring peace and reconciliation through
justice. The cause of justice, however, cannot be served
unless the Tribunals and their organs are provided with
the necessary tools to enable them not only to fulfil their
mandates but also to function in an effective and efficient
manner.
The guarantee of fair and expeditious trials is
paramount, and it is for this reason that we welcome and
support the proposed decision to establish the third Trial
Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We thank those Member States that have
helped the Tribunal overcome some of its difficulties by
financing the building of additional court facilities. We
hope that these facilities will be fully utilized in order to
ensure the speedy conclusion of the pending trials.

The draft resolution urges all States to cooperate
fully with the International Tribunal and its organs in
bringing to justice all persons suspected of having
committed heinous crimes in the former territories of
Yugoslavia. As new evidence of gross human rights
abuses perpetrated against the civilian population in
Bosnia and elsewhere in the region continues to emerge,
we appeal to those concerned to take appropriate steps to
 

ensure that those who have been indicted for the war
crimes and are still at large are apprehended and brought to
trial.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the delegation of
Sweden for once again coordinating work on the draft
resolution, to which we are proud to render our support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/386.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1166 (1998).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.

