Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me join others in
thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, for his
valuable briefing. We appreciate the presence of
Ambassador Zahir Tanin at this meeting and thank him
for his statement. We welcome the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his new
assignment. He can count on our support during his
assignment.

We welcome Afghanistan's recent progress, as
indicated in the benchmark-assessment reports.
However, it is clear that the challenges facing the
country are enormous, spanning the spheres of security,
politics, governance, economic development,
corruption and drug trafficking.

On politics and governance, we note President
Hamid Karzai's commitments at the London
Conference to ensuring that the irregularities and
misconduct observed at the last elections would be
avoided in future. The parliamentary elections
scheduled for September 2010 should therefore be
preceded by thorough and adequate preparations.

Electoral reforms that guarantee the
independence and impartiality of the country's
electoral bodies and the credibility of the elections
themselves should be undertaken.

Serious reconciliation and reintegration efforts
are required to consolidate peace efforts in
Afghanistan. Thus we welcome the forthcoming
national peace jirga of reconciliation that the
Government has scheduled for April. We hope it will
become a genuine platform for seeking greater political
inclusiveness in Afghanistan. It is critically important
to guarantee Afghan sovereignty by strengthening the
Government's capacity to take ownership of the
country's political and development processes.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
precarious and extremely complicated, with terrorists,
anti-Government spoiler groups, the narcotics trade
and regional warlords creating instability and stalling
economic progress. The establishment of a national
peace and reintegration trust fund to offer economic
alternatives to those who renounce violence and cut
ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups is a
welcome development. Training, equipping and
strengthening Afghan security forces should be an
ongoing focus.

In regard to corruption and judicial reform, we
welcome the establishment of an anti-corruption unit
and the appointment of judges to head the tribunals.
We also welcome the reforms called for in the National
Justice Programme, as well as the adoption of a draft
policy on the integration of formal and traditional
mechanisms into the country's judicial system.

On the humanitarian front, there is a need for
better coordination of aid and the urgent resettlement
of internally displaced persons. We believe that
adequate donor funding for the recently launched
Humanitarian Action Plan will go a long way to easing
the country's humanitarian needs.

We support the outcome of the London
Conference. If the commitments made at the
Conference are followed through, Afghanistan will be
on its way to assuming sovereign responsibility for its
security, economic development, social cohesion and
regional cooperation. The forthcoming Kabul
conference, we hope, will build on the London
Conference in order to fast-track the consolidation of
Afghanistan as a stable and peaceful country.

We appreciate the role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
played in managing relief, recovery and reconstruction
activities and in holding elections, in addition to
providing political and strategic advice for the peace
process. At this time of strategic reviews, especially of
the outcome of the London Conference, UNAMA has
an even greater role in peacemaking, State-building
and coordination. We therefore support the Secretary-
General's request for the renewal of UNAMA's
mandate for another 12 months.

