Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this timely debate on a theme
that is of paramount importance to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

For centuries, the peoples of the Middle East and
North Africa lived together in peace and harmony,
regardless of their race, religion, language, sect or
ethnicity. They did so and flourished politically,
economically, socially and intellectually, with a sense
of shared destiny, embracing at the same time their
differences as a source of richness.

Today's reality differs dramatically from that
historical background, and the region is confronted
with ever-growing complex challenges. Sectarian and
divisive policies, the brutal repression of legitimate
demands for democracy and unresolved armed conflicts
resulting in mass displacements, coupled with feelings
of resentment owing to growing discrimination, have
created a breeding ground for relapse into violence.

Today the main challenge in the region remains
keeping the prospects for the resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict alive. It is regrettable that the
vision ofa two-State solution, which is the only feasible
path to resolve that long-standing issue, has been
deliberately weakened owing to unilateral and illegal
practices in the occupied Palestinian territories. Any
peace plan for resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
should endorse an independent, sovereign, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security. There is no other alternative to viable peace.

Concerning Syria, in addition to the horrific
crimes of Al-Assad's brutal regime in the form of
indiscriminate air strikes, barrel bombs, chemical
weapons, artillery shelling and, as recently seen once
again in Idlib, the deliberate targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure, there are other menaces facing
the civilian population in Syria, such as the well-
documented crimes of terrorist organizations such as
Da'esh, Al-Qaida and other affiliated groups, as well as
the Kurdish Workers Party and its Syrian brand - the
Democratic Union Party and the Kurdish People's
Protection Units. Let us not forget that only a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) can end the
Syrian civil war.

In that context, I would also like to refer to
hallucinatory remarks of the representative of the
Syrian regime with regard to my country. I repeat that
I do not consider him to be my legitimate counterpart.
His presence here is an affront to the millions of Syrians
who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of the
regime. Therefore, I will not honour his delusional
accusations with a response.

We are also deeply worried about the deteriorating
situation in Yemen. We call upon all parties in Yemen
to refrain from further deepening the political and
humanitarian crisis in the country. There can be no
military solution in Yemen. Inclusive political dialogue
is the only way to establish peace and security in the
country. Turkey will continue to support international
efforts aimed at promoting security and stability in
Yemen, as well as protecting the unity and integrity of
the country.

We also see no military solution in Libya. Peace and
stability in Libya can be achieved only through political
dialogue and compromise. Regional and international
actors have a crucial role to play in ending the conflict
and paving the way to peace and stability in Libya. The
divisions within the international community make it
impossible for the Council to assume its most-needed
role. There is an urgent need to return to the United
Nations-facilitated political process.

Inconclusion,theinternationalcommunity-firstand
foremost the Council - should play a more constructive
and assertive role in resolving the conflicts in the Middle
East. That requires, first of all, respect for the basic
principles of international law enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, including respect for political
unity and territorial integrity, the peaceful resolution of
disputes and good neighbourly relations.

Secondly, members of the international community
should respect and implement United Nations
resolutions that pertain to the security and stability of
the region, including those on Palestine. That is sine
qua non for a basis for mutual understanding.

Thirdly, it is essential that the international
community avoid approaching the conflicts in the
Middle East from a zero-sum perspective. Peace,
security and stability in the Middle East are in our
common interests. We are all affected by armed
conflicts, wars and crises in the Middle East, and by
ensuing mistrust, alienation and radicalization. preace
is to triumph, we should constitute a solid foundation
for better dialogue, understanding, cooperation and
collaboration within and with the region.

