Mr. Lamba (Malawi): The Malawi delegation, as
Chair of the permanent delegations of the Southern
Africa Development Community (SADC) to the United
Nations, would like to associate itself with the earlier
speakers who underlined without reservation the
importance of this debate on counter-terrorism
measures and, indeed, the excellent briefing this
morning by the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) of 28
September 2001 emphasizes the urgent need for
cooperation and unity among Member States in the
fight against terrorism in order to avert a repetition of
the tragedy of 11 September 2001, which took place in
New York. Malawi and other SADC States, in strong
support of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) -
which indeed represents a solid basis for concerted
international partnership in the anti-terrorism
struggle - readily welcomed the creation by the
Security Council of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
to coordinate steps taken by Member States in checking
terrorism. To that end, as will be shown later, Malawi
has put in place several measures to seal up the
loopholes of potential use by terrorists.

Representatives may wish to know that, following
the plenary session of the General Assembly in
December 2001, and in response to General Assembly
resolution 55/158 and Security Council resolutions
1269 (1999) and 1373 (2001), defining terrorism as a
threat to international peace and security, SADC States
demonstrated their concern by drawing up a document,
the Luanda Declaration of 18 December 2001.

SADC maintains the conviction that terrorism
represents the antithesis of socio-economic
development and an unacceptable disturbance to
people's fundamental rights and freedoms, which
deserve protection at any cost. We all agree that the
prerequisite for development is a climate of political,
social and economic stability and security. The triumph
of terrorism must therefore be curtailed in defence of
people's right to life and individual liberties, as defined
in international legal instruments. SADC States are
resolved to contribute to the cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations against terrorism in its various
manifestations.

To that end, and in line with the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Convention on the Prevention
and Combating of Terrorism, which was adopted at the
Algiers summit of 14 July 1999 - which SADC had
seen as leading in its thinking about anti-terrorism -
SADC decided to come up with this Luanda
Declaration as its guiding principle in combating
terrorism. In the Declaration, SADC affirms that it will
do everything possible to ratify and incorporate into
national laws all anti-terrorism instruments adopted by
the OAU and the United Nations; combat all forms of
terrorism that disrupt national and regional security,
constitutional arrangements and the organization of
States; exchange information related to persons,
institutions and organizations that are engaged in the
perpetration of terrorism; harmonize legal instruments
in the various States for the prosecution of terrorist
groups; and prevent any attempts to use SADC member
States as bases or support centres for the activities of
terrorist groups or organizations.

Malawi's response to the anti-terrorism crusade
includes the following: the establishment of domestic
anti-terrorism contact points under the chairmanship of
the office of the President and Cabinet; the adoption of
legislation against any terrorist activity, the review of
existing laws for enforcement and the strengthening of
membership in international conventions and protocols;
the intensification of scrutiny by immigration services
of all people entering the country; the strengthening of
aviation security at airports; the control of financial
flows to detect any irregular funds and funding from
external sources; the tightening of security by the
Malawi army, police and national intelligence bureau;
and vigorous cooperation with other Member States in
support of resolution 1373 (2001).

The outlined anti-terrorism agenda of Malawi
forms a common preoccupation of all SADC member
States. However, I would be remiss in my presentation
if I failed to mention some of our limitations in the
presentation of our counter-terrorism measures.

Malawi and most, if not all, other SADC States,
with their weak economies and therefore limited
resources, will clearly require assistance from the
international community. Malawi and all SADC States
appreciate and will utilize the invitation to submit,
through the Counter-Terrorism Committee, our
requirements for the facilitation of our effective
participation in the anti-terrorism struggle. Areas of
need generally include technical assistance, capacity-
building and human resource training, and an upgrade
of technology and equipment to enhance efficiency.
These presented needs will indeed require professional
technical assessments to establish their importance in
the counter-terrorism war.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the
determination and commitment among member States
of the Southern Africa Development Community to
supporting the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in implementing the Security Council's
resolution against terrorism. SADC will move in
unison with the rest of the world, determined to make a
notable contribution to rooting out and deterring
terrorism, the violence so destructive to global peace
and security.

