The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head ofthe United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his
briefing today as well as for the hard and commendable
work that he and his team are doing on the ground. We
also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for his important briefing.

At the outset, with regard to security, we must
acknowledge the Mission's positive results in
negotiating the ceasefire in Tripoli, which had been
the theatre of virulent clashes among armed groups
and cost the lives of more than 120 people. We were
pleased to learn that the armed groups that controlled a
significant number of public facilities have withdrawn
from them and are now under the control of the Libyan
authorities. We believe that UNSMIL's efforts, under
the leadership oer. Salame, have been key to reducing
tensions in that city. We also commend the Government
of National Accord for adopting the security plan for
Greater Tripoli, which has strengthened the ceasefire
and established a more stable environment. We hope
that its implementation will be effective and sustainable
for the benefit of the Libyan people.

The situation in other parts of the country, however,
is in stark contrast to that of the capital. The Dominican
Republic notes with concern the high level of insecurity
prevailing in the southern and western parts of the
country, in which armed confrontations, financially
motivated kidnappings, vandalism, human trafficking,
rape, murder and terrorist attacks, among other things,
have become commonplace. Illicit arms trafficking is
facilitating those crimes and exacerbating the conflict,
while illustrating the fragile situation in which Libya
finds itself. It is therefore urgent to strengthen and
unify security institutions, whereby the armed forces
and police personnel coordinate their activities and
work under the guiding principle of ensuring the well-
being of all, not of the individual.

Concerning the political situation, we underscore
UNSMIL'S good offices in convening the national
conference in early 2019 to realize the implementation of
the United Nations plan of action, which will be Libyan-
led and -owned. We also welcome the implementation
of the consultative phase of the national conference
process, which took place from April to June 2018 and
saw the participation of thousands of Libyans. The
conference could serve as the tool for finding a way
out of the political impasse that has dominated the
country. Its outcome must serve as a reference point
for an electoral process underpinned by coherent and
clear ideas identifying the needs of the people both
in terms of the electoral process and the future. We
commend the holding of the international meeting on
Libya in Palermo in November 2018. We highlight
the participation of Libyan representatives, which
demonstrates that there is a clear intention to make
changes for the sake of country's peace and security.

For that reason, we call on Libyan political
actors to fulfil their commitment by enacting the
necessary legislation for the holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections, since the restructuring of the
executive branch and the unification of State institutions
are unavoidable. Moreover, we hope that consensus will
be reached on the validity of the referendum law on the
constitutional proposal issued on 26 November.

There are a number of different interests among
various parties in maintaining the status quo, but that
has only served to plunge the nation into division,
chaos and imbalance. It is important to listen to the
people, who are asking to live in a place where peace,
development and stability reign, which State institutions
are currently unable to provide.

We hope that the political process will be fair
and inclusive, with women playing a significant
role. In that context, we applaud the decision of the
Presidency Council to establish the Women's Support
and Empowerment Unit on 24 October 2018. We also
welcome resolution 2441 (2018), which includes sexual
and gender-based violence as a listing criterion for the
Committee's Panel of Experts. Sexual and gender-based
violence is an issue of increasing concern, especially
in conflict zones, and it requires the attention and
concrete action of the international community,
such as by making sexual violence a criterion for
imposing sanctions.

Finally, we wish to underscore the need to
find a solution to the problems in Libya. We call on
the international community to support the Libyan
authorities in the process of strengthening structures
to respond to the population. That support should
also extend to holding transparent, fair and inclusive
elections. The institutions must be functional in order
to guarantee the security that Libyans have desired
for decades.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

