Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
all the briefers for their informative, if alarming,
interventions. I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and express our appreciation
for the work of all United Nations agencies in Yemen.

Despite the efforts to translate the outcomes of
the consultations in Stockholm into tangible results
on the ground, progress on the redeployment of forces
from Al-Hudaydah has so far been very limited. We
note the compromise reached by the parties on the
first redeployment phase and urge them to start the
withdrawal process without further delays. At the same
time, it is vital that the ceasefire be upheld and the
parties respect the Stockholm Agreement by renouncing
violence and showing restraint. Although the Council
continues to consider progress on Al-Hudaydah very
important, we remain mindful of developments in other
parts of Yemen. We are deeply concerned about the
threat of violence across various governorates and by
the impact of the ongoing atrocities on civilians. We
are particularly shocked by the suffering of Yemeni
children, who continue to bear the brunt of the
conflict. The loss of civilian lives is not only contrary
to international humanitarian law and international
human rights law; it is also morally abhorrent. I want
to reiterate that all parties must fully comply with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. All cases of Violations should be
investigated and those responsible held accountable.

Poland is also deeply concerned about the deepening
humanitarian crisis. Currently, more than 20 million
Yemenis are food insecure, and nearly 240,000 are
starving to death. The recent outbreak of cholera has
further exacerbated the already dire humanitarian
situation. As the humanitarian needs continue to rise,
we welcome the outcomes of the high-level pledging
event in Geneva and the generosity of the donors, whom
we join by pledging our contribution. The effectiveness
of the financial support, however, will remain limited
unless all the impediments to humanitarian access and
commercial deliveries are lifted. The parties must allow
and facilitate the flow into Yemen of humanitarian and
commercial imports, including fuel, and ensure safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
and personnel, including by lifting all bureaucratic
restrictions and ensuring the timely issuance of
visas. We also expect them to prioritize the opening
of humanitarian corridors and allow access to all
humanitarian facilities without further delay. The
delivery of humanitarian assistance into Yemen must
not be politicized by any of the stakeholders.

The situation in Yemen requires swift and decisive
action. The developments on the ground show how
pressing it is to relaunch the political process and find
a comprehensive political solution to the crisis. The
resumption of an intra-Yemeni political dialogue with
the meaningful participation of all groups of Yemeni
society, including women and young people, is a
prerequisite to bringing an end to the suffering of the
Yemeni people and should happen as soon as possible.

