Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like representatives of other delegations, I,
too, would first of all like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to extend thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Ouane, for the work that he
and his delegation did in September.

The Russian Federation is deeply disturbed by the
sharp deterioration of the situation in the Palestinian
territories, Israel and East Jerusalem. We deeply regret
that the new outbreak of violence has led to the deaths
of dozens of people, including children. In this
connection, we extend condolences to the families of
those who have died.

These tragic events were the result of provocative
acts committed in the Muslim holy places on 28
September. These acts were clearly intended to derail
any forward movement on the Palestinian-Israeli track
of a Middle East settlement.

For its part, the Russian leadership took
immediate steps to help defuse the situation. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia, Mr. Ivanov, had
urgent telephone conversations with the leadership of
Israel and that of the Palestinian Authority. He urged
that the necessary steps be taken to normalize the
situation and to avoid any provocation.

We strongly condemn any kind of provocative
acts, from whatever source, and similarly, we strongly
condemn any manifestations of extremism that are
aimed at derailing the negotiating process between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides. In addition, we cannot but
be concerned about the Israeli troops' excessive use of
force, with lethal weapons.

Russia, as a co-sponsor of the peace process in
the Middle East, urges the sides to demonstrate
maximum restraint so as not to allow for any further
outbreaks of violence. We also urge them to take steps
to stabilize the situation. Only in this way will it be
possible to revive the peace dialogue and arrive at
acceptable agreements.

In this connection, we welcome the meeting, to
be held tomorrow in Paris, between the Israeli Prime
Minister, Mr. Barak, and Chairman Arafat. We
sincerely desire to see that meeting succeed. We have
noted the efforts made by the United States and France
in organizing the meeting. We believe that that meeting
should put an end to the current wave of violence. It is
also particularly important to get the sides back to the
negotiating table.

Now it is necessary to make every effort to not
allow those who oppose a just peace between the
Israelis and Palestinians to undermine the peace
process. The Security Council must continue in the
future to pay close attention to the situation in the
Middle East, including in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The Council must respond adequately so as
to help to create a propitious political atmosphere for
arriving at a comprehensive settlement.

