Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I would like first of all to
thank the Japanese presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this open debate on addressing
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. It is indeed a crucial issue that
is at the core of the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to seek ways to better address today's
complex threats to international peace and security in
a holistic manner.

There is no doubt that today we are confronted
with an increasing number of conflicts and challenges
around the world. Crisis situations have a tendency
to last longer and have become increasingly complex
and volatile. Tackling global insecurity is a pressing
imperative, and our priority should be to pursue political
solutions in the context of a comprehensive approach to
the various challenges by combining and strengthening
our endeavours for peace and security, human rights
and sustainable development.

In this context, we would mention in particular the
adoption of the resolution on the restructuring of the
United Nations peace and security pillar (resolution 72/199). These reforms will enable the United Nations
system to better address the root causes of conflict,
focus on prevention and fully utilize the potential of
development programmes in securing long-term post-
conflict stability.

When it comes to regional challenges, Greece,
situated close to what continues to be an extremely
turbulent region, including the Middle East and parts
of North Africa, is a pillar of stability in the region and
spares no effort in engaging, in apractical and principled
manner, in promoting dialogue and cooperation.

In this context, we have recently undertaken a
series of initiatives, including the Rhodes Conference
for Stability and Security and the Athens Conference
on Religious and Cultural Pluralism and Peaceful
Coexistence in the Middle East, as well as the newly
established Asian Civilizations Dialogue Forum.
In particular, the Rhodes Conference focuses on a
positive agenda of cooperation between the countries
of the Eastern Mediterranean, with the aim of fostering
stability and security in the region. At the same time, the
second Athens Conference on Religious and Cultural
Pluralism and Peaceful Coexistence in the Middle
East focused on the future challenges that religious
pluralism faces in the region and proposed possible
fields where religious coexistence and pluralism could
be further developed.

At the global level, the Ancient Civilizations
Forum emphasize the need to enhance dialogue among
civilizations through continuous communication and
cooperation in order to promote understanding and
tolerance among cultures and peoples.

I would also like to mention that in the framework
of promoting peace and stability in our neighbourhood
and the broader region of the Eastern Mediterranean,
we have established a number of trilateral themes of
cooperation that include many countries in the region.
Our main objective is to develop a positive, broader and
manifold agenda of cooperation in international affairs
focusing on synergies and joint activities, especially
through culture as one of the main drivers of soft power
in international relations and other constructive areas
of cooperation such as trade, education and research.

Dealing with security challenges in another region
of our neighbourhood, the Balkans, is vital, and we
have therefore established trilateral and quadrilateral
themes of cooperation with significant actors in the
region in order to promote common priorities and
strengthen cooperation on a number of issues in line
with European democratic values and principles.

An important thematic challenge affecting my
country directly is, of course, migration. Greece
considers migration as a global phenomenon and a
challenge that demands a global response and action.
As a front-line country, Greece encourages the
streamlining and development of migration governance
within the United Nations system by making use of
existing forums while achieving coherence through
the various global and regional procedures. In this
respect, we have engaged constructively in the process
of adopting a global compact for migration, wishing to
see the cooperation among countries of origin, transit
and destination further strengthened.

At the same time, we should follow closely
challenges such as climate change, as discussed at the
Arria Formula meeting held last Friday. In this context,
we would like to commend the role of France and the
success of the recent One Planet Summit.

I wish to assure the Council that Greece will lend its
unfailing support as the United Nations endeavours to
rise to the Herculean task of creating a more peaceful,
sustainable and prosperous future, securing justice and
solidarity for all, especially for the coming generations,

