Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the important subject of the working methods of the
Security Council. We also thank you for your helpful
concept note (S/2012/853, annex).

Indonesia associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

At the recent debate in the General Assembly on
the annual report of the Security Council (A/67/2)
and Security Council reform, an overwhelmingly
large number of countries once again underscored the
need for a more transparent, democratic and effective
Council. Indeed, the Council is entrusted with the heavy
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security - a responsibility that requires its constant,
vigorous and even-handed oversight, as well as the full
support and cooperation of all United Nations Member
States. The Security Council has risen to the occasion
during many challenges, and Indonesia commends its
role, but there is no doubt that the Council would be
able to discharge its responsibilities more effectively
through modified working methods that enhance
its transparency, inclusiveness, accountability and
efficiency.

Indonesia welcomes the Council's efforts to
improve its working methods over the years, including
by holding a significant number of open meetings with
the countries concerned, troop and police contributors
and other stakeholders. Those efforts need to be
intensified. We hope that there will be comprehensive
improvement in all aspects of the Council's workings.
Allow me, in this regard, to put forward the following
observations.

First, the Council should be more accessible,
transparent and efficient, particularly for non-member
States. Greater transparency in the Council's
workings and more meaningful interaction with the
non-permanent members and non-mmbers would
enrich the Council's decision-making and strengthen
support for its actions.

Secondly, there should be greater consultation,
especially with members with a special interest in
substantive matters under consideration by the Council.

Thirdly, Member States, in particularly those
affected by sanctions, should, at their request, be given
the right to participate and offer substantive inputs in
the meetings of relevant sanctions committees.

Fourthly, draft resolutions, presidential statements
and other draft documents tabled at informal
consultations of the whole of the Council should, if so
authorized by draft authors, be promptly made available
to non-Council members.

Fifthly, the Council should hold regular, timely
and meaningful consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries, host countries, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, financial
contributors and other countries directly concerned
by a peacekeeping operation throughout all its
stages. Substantive interaction with all peacekeeping
stakeholders is necessary to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping missions are effectively enabled to
achieve their mandates.

Finally, States must explain their reasons for
using the veto when they do so, and a copy of such
explanations should be circulated to all Member States.
The Council is entrusted on behalf ofall United Nations
Members, and its actions and reasoning must be fully
clear to everyone.

Indonesia thanks you, Sir, for this opportunity
to present its views. We will continue to support the
Security Council in its efforts to tangibly improve its
working methods.

