Mr. Lindner (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank my colleague and friend from Equatorial
Guinea, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, for convening
this timely debate, as well as the speakers who have
already spoken on the topic and those who will speak
later today.

(spoke in Spanish)

I thank you for your initiative, Mr. President - you
and your country have my full respect.

(spoke in English)

I have come to this debate to express our support
for the topic. I spent a number of years in Africa during
my career, having been Ambassador in Kenya, Somalia,
Burundi, South Africa, Eswatini, Lesotho and, during
the Ebola crisis, in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Conakry,
Guinea. This is a topic that is very close to our hearts
and to my heart personally, which is why I wanted to
come to express our support.

Our African partners have set themselves an
ambitious goal for ending conflict, as the founder of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution
of Disputes already mentioned: no more arms on the
continent by the year 2020. I suppose that is an illusion,
but equally, as Mr. Gounden expressed, it is important
to set that goal because it makes us all aware that there
is something to be done. The progress already made
has been tangible - there has been some progress.
The African Peace and Security Architecture provides
a framework, and the implementation of the action
plan to silence the guns in Africa is well under way.
In all of those efforts, the African Union (AU) is an
indispensable partner, and we welcome the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security.

I also wish to commend Equatorial Guinea for the
resolution that was just been adopted unanimously
(resolution 2457 (2019)). The framework of the resolution
is quite broad and comprehensively addresses the root
causes of conflict and puts emphasis on prevention
and peacebuilding. In particular, we welcome that
it addresses climate change, natural resources - or
rather, the misuse of natural resources - terrorism
and organized crime as well as human rights. We fully
support that it also highlights the need to enhance the
role of women in all aspects of political life.

Let me highlight four areas in which my country
works hand in hand with African partners and the
African Union to further peace and security in Africa.

First, we support the strengthening of the African
Union's capacity to prevent and respond to conflict. A
major challenge is to secure lasting conflict resolution
on the ground. We often see a resurgence of conflicts
that we thought had been deemed resolved or at least
contained. That proves that it is crucial to address
the whole conflict cycle, as Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo mentioned, starting with early-
warning mechanisms, crisis prevention, civilian
capabilities, mediation support and the African capacity
to respond to security threats. All of that constitutes a
cycle wherein we have to address every stage.

In that respect, Germany is an active supporter
of mediation efforts in the Sudan, South Sudan and
a number of other countries. We also support the
Mediation Support Unit of the African Union, which
increases the efficiency of African-led mediation
efforts, as well as the African Peace and Security
Architecture, as mentioned by the President of the
Council. We also provide training and specialized
equipment to a large number of African troop and
police contributors. We have expanded our support to
peacekeeping training institutes in Mali, Ghana and
Kenya. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Heiko
Maas, has just landed in Mali, where he is visiting a
training camp at which an assault with weapons was
carried out against peacekeepers a few days ago. I
believe that it is important that we see the dangers out
there and do something about them. Germany is also
the largest contributor to the European Union's current
involvement in seven African peace missions.

Secondly, Germany has made fighting the
proliferation of weapons and ammunition, which are
the hard fuel of conflicts - without them, the conflicts
would not be as deadly - a priority of its Council
membership, which began two months ago. We fully
support the AU action plan to silence the guns in
Africa by 2020 - for example, through involvement
with the Mines Advisory Group and the Small Arms
Survey. We also welcome the African Union Strategy
on the Control of Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and
Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, which
was developed under AU leadership in close cooperation
with subregional African organizations.

We all know that implementation is key. We have
partnered with the AU to cut the flow of weapons into
areas of conflict, improve the control of arms and
ammunition in fragile States and train a new generation
of experts to take the lead in arms control. We need
to mobilize additional donors to give implementation
another push ahead of the symbolic year 2020. Germany
stands ready to support the AU in that endeavour.

Thirdly, as mentioned by the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, we
support strengthening the protection of human rights.
Human rights violations are often initial indicators
that a country is heading towards conflict. We need
to monitor such situations and prioritize preventive
measures. The failure to protect human rights is closely
intertwined with the aggravation of conflict. Tackling
that nexus is another priority of our membership of the
Security Council during the next two years.

In order to prevent abuse and strengthen compliance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, we must promote transparency, the
rule of law and the effective regulation of commercial
security providers. Germany welcomes initiatives such
as the Montreux Document. We encourage all States and
stakeholders to align themselves with it. Peacekeeping
operations have a special responsibility to protect the
most vulnerable. Adequate human rights components
play a crucial role in preventing grave violations against
children in armed conflicts, as well as women, as I
mentioned earlier. We therefore strongly encourage the
inclusion of appropriate child protection provisions in
all United Nations peacekeeping mandates, including
for regional peacekeeping operations.

Fourthly, Germany is a long-standing partner
of Africa in development cooperation and efforts to
advance beyond it. Given that armed conflicts are
linked to social, political and economic grievances,
it is critical that efforts to silence the guns be aimed
at enhancing reconciliation, social cohesion and, in
particular, economic development. Private sector
engagement in that area is of key importance. Job
opportunities, investment and growth must be assured
by that. Germany has therefore launched initiatives
such as the Group of Twenty Compact with Africa in
order to spur economic activities with and in Africa.

In conclusion, we remain committed to supporting
the African Union and regional and subregional
organizations under a multilateral approach to
sustaining peace. Whether it be in the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission or the Human Rights Council, we must
use synergies and work closely together in order to
efficiently expend our scarce resources, maintain
coherence and avoid duplication. Our meeting today
illustrates the value of a cross-cutting discussion on
threats to peace and security with the African Union,
subregional organizations and donor countries. The root
causes of violence and conflict in Africa deserve the
close attention of the Council. Germany is committed
to keeping this topic on the agenda. We wish to reiterate
what was said by the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs: may the wind of
hope we are seeing in Africa become a long-lasting one.

