Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for his briefing, and to assure him of our
full support. We also thank Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for her
briefing and welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Libya.

Today I will focus on two issues - first,
developments on the ground and on the political front,
and secondly, humanitarian developments. With regard
to political developments, we reiterate our support
for the three-step proposal announced by Special
Representative Salame at the end ofJuly (see S/PV.8588).
The first step was realized through the Libyan warring
parties' commitment to the humanitarian truce for
Eid Al-Adha, as well as the quite significant progress
represented by the three preparatory meetings held
in Berlin to conclude the second step of holding an
international conference on Libya. We hope that the
next preparatory meeting will ensure that this eagerly
awaited Conference is held as soon as possible. That in
turn could lead to an intra-Libyan national conference
aimed at ending the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences ofa conflict that has produced numerous
civilian casualties and displaced more than 140,000
people from conflict areas, as well as the constant
strikes targeting civilian infrastructure, the latest being
the shelling of a factory in Wadi Rabia this morning,
which killed and injured dozens of people.

We call for an end to hate speech in order to
consolidate efforts aimed at resuming the political
process based on dialogue, ending the institutional
divide and paving the way for sustainable security and
stability, as part of an inclusive democratic process
through transparent presidential and parliamentary
elections, in accordance with the Paris, Palermo and
Abu Dhabi understandings. We reiterate our call to the
Council to remind all Member States of the importance
of honouring their commitments under the relevant
resolutions on the arms embargo on Libya, which the
Special Representative just emphasized in his briefing,
because any violation of the sanctions regime will
hinder United Nations, regional and international
efforts to prevent the escalation of conflict there. We
also reiterate the importance of helping all the Libyan
parties to launch a sincere dialogue, restore the rule
of law throughout the country and ensure that it has
control over arms, and support Libya in building
unified security institutions in order to address all the
security challenges undermining its stability, security
and territorial integrity.

Secondly, on the humanitarian front, the worsening
armed clashes are increasing the Libyan people's
suffering every day. That has now reached the most
vulnerable groups, such as illegal migrants in detention
centres. We support the proposal of the Special
Representative on the importance of releasing them
and providing them with safe shelter, pending either the
processing of their asylum applications or assistance in
repatriating them to their countries of origin. We call on
all the parties in Libya to exercise restraint and respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, while refraining from targeting
civilians or civilian infrastructure and ensuring safe
access for humanitarian groups and personnel to the
areas concerned in order to provide aid to those in need.

