Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
this debate and the excellent report submitted by the
Secretary-General (S/2009/277). In the ten years since
the Council first took up the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the changing nature of
armed conflict has continued to have a profound
impact on the plight of civilians in armed conflicts.
And indeed the report before us reveals a continued
gap between the existing standards of international
humanitarian law and the current realities on the
ground.

We hope that this debate will prepare the ground
for an open debate in November on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary, that reaffirms the commitment of the
Council to this agenda and results in a set of effective
measures to further advance it. Among the recent steps
taken, we welcome in particular the adoption of the
third version of the aide-memoire and the
establishment of the Security Council Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians. As illustrated in the
Secretary-General's report and its annex, the
challenges to the Council in the area of implementation
continue to be very significant.

The development and universal acceptance of
international humanitarian law is among the landmark
achievements in the history of international law.
Among its core principles are the distinction between
combatants and non-combatants, proportionality of the
use of force as well as the requirement to take all
feasible measures to minimize civilian casualties. The
applicable provisions of international humanitarian law
must be respected in any armed conflict and by any
party to it, under all circumstances and irrespective of
the question of the legality of the use of force itself.

The repeated violations of these rules, such as in
the conflicts in Sri Lanka and Gaza, warrant a clear
response from the Council in order to promote the
observance of international humanitarian law in
practice. The Council must unequivocally demand
compliance with international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict and call for accountability in cases
where massive and systematic violations have
occurred.
09-38414

Such accountability mechanisms are, ideally,
established at the national level, where necessary with
the assistance of regional or international
organizations. When necessary, the Council should
establish commissions of inquiry or similar bodies in
order to enhance accountability for serious violations.
In the most serious cases of the inability or
unwillingness of the State concerned, the Council can
consider referring the matter to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

One of the most important goals of the
establishment of the ICC was to promote effective
investigations and prosecutions at the national level.
We therefore fully support the call of the Secretary-
General on Member States to adopt legislation that
holds perpetrators accountable for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

Access to civilians in need of assistance is a
grave problem in the area of the protection of civilians.
Access is often unsafe, or is granted too late or under
conditions that hinder effective delivery. The annex of
the report refers to bureaucratic constraints imposed by
the authorities in charge, the intensity of hostilities and
attacks on humanitarian personnel and assets as the
most severe and prevalent access constraints. The
restrictions by the Government of Sri Lanka on the
delivery of supplies to the conflict areas, the unclear
and inconsistent criteria and procedures on the entry of
certain relief material to Gaza and the dramatic rise in
kidnappings of humanitarian personnel are disturbing
examples from the recent past.

The Council must call, where necessary, on
parties to conflicts to remove all unwarranted
impediments to humanitarian access and allow safe
passage for civilians seeking to flee conflict zones, and
it must call for temporary ceasefires that are long
enough to enable effective relief action by
humanitarian actors. The Council has a particular
obligation to protect United Nations staff and to ensure
that there is no impunity for attacks on humanitarian
and peacekeeping personnel, which are war crimes
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court.

The protection of civilians is an inherent task for
all peacekeeping missions, not merely a military task,
so all components of peacekeeping missions must
contribute to carrying out protection mandates. We thus
3
welcome the development of mission-specific inclusive
strategies and plans of action. That applies, in
particular, to acts of sexual violence. When committed
on a large scale and in a systematic and targeted
manner, sexual violence is not just a by-product of
armed conflict, but rather a method of warfare aimed at
destroying the social fabric of communities in order to
achieve political and military ends.

In that respect, we reiterate our support for
resolution 1820 (2008) and call on the Security
Council to provide clear guidance on how to protect
civilians from acts of sexual violence.

