I thank the President for convening today's debate. I also thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), for his briefing. Similarly, I would like to congratulate the members of the Investigative Team for conducting their work in particularly difficult circumstances due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. My delegation believes that the quest for accountability for crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is an important component in the fight against terrorism. Our wish is that no crime committed by the fighters of Da'esh terrorist groups in Iraq, Syria and around the world should go unpunished. That is why my country, the Niger, hosted a visit by the Investigative Team, led by Special Adviser Khan, from 30 April 2019 to 2 May 2019. During the visit, a cooperation agreement was signed between the Government of the Niger and the Investigative Team in support of the implementation of the UNITAD mandate. Turning to the report presented to us (see S/2020/1107), I would like to focus my speech on the three main points developed therein, namely, the strategy for collecting and storing evidence, the establishment of responsibility and the prospects envisaged by the Investigative Team. With regard to the strategy for the collection and storage of evidence, we welcome the progress made by the Investigative Team during the reporting period. We particularly welcome the innovative approach adopted by UNITAD in the context of COVID-19, which involves the use of remote interviews and the ability of survivors and other witnesses to directly submit evidence relating to crimes committed by ISIL to the Investigative Team. In terms of the establishment of responsibilities, we are pleased to note the good cooperation between the Investigative Team and the relevant Iraqi authorities, both executive and judicial, which has led to significant progress in the investigations, in particular in Sinjar, Tikrit and Mosul. Similarly, the training provided by UNITAD to Iraqi judges will help them in the preparations for the prosecution of ISIL members. My delegation also welcomes the Iraqi Parliament's consideration of draft legislation establishing a legal basis for the prosecution of Da'esh members on Iraqi soil for war crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide. We dare to hope that such a text would take into account the wishes expressed by many survivors and victims' families. With regard to the way forward, my delegation takes note of the main priorities identified by the Investigative Team for the next six months, as mentioned in the report. We particularly encourage efforts aimed at strengthening the capacity of the Iraqi investigative judges in order to build the case files necessary for the prosecution of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country's support for the work of the Investigative Team and for the mandate of the Special Adviser, Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, to promote accountability worldwide for acts that may constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity or crimes of genocide committed by Da'esh.
