Mr. Oussihamou (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. This
initiative reflects the importance that your country
attaches to the Palestinian question, in particular
given the current conditions. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on this issue.

We continue to monitor with great sorrow the
deteriorating situation in the Middle East, in particular
in Palestine. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories continues to deteriorate owing to the
Judaization and settlement policies, land-grabbing and
coercion exercised by the occupying Israeli authorities
against the Palestinian people in a systematic fashion,
stoking more tensions and frustration.

In the past few days, we have seen these
facts illustrated. The Israeli authorities have used
unprecedented force against unarmed civilians, causing
several victims. This has only exacerbated the situation,
perpetuating the cycle of violence and counter-violence.
The use of force and violence has never led to peace or
to peaceful solutions. We are now witnessing the total
absence of the conditions necessary for a dignified life,
owing to the siege and acute shortage of essential goods.
This stands in the way of launching a peace process on
a firm basis.

The ongoing building settlements contrary to the
United Nations resolutions, especially resolution 2334
(2016), is an act of provocation against the Palestinians
and the international community. Unilateral policies
that flout international legitimacy and international
law have hampered the achievement of a two-State
solution comprising an Israeli State and a Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and within
4 June 1967 borders.

Given our faith in the just Palestinian cause and
our unconditional support for it, the Kingdom of
Morocco hosted in the capital Rabat, from 26 to 28 June
2018, the fifth International Conference on Jerusalem
under the slogan "The Palestinian question after 50
years of occupation and 25 years of Oslo accords".
The conference addressed the Palestinian question
along with the negative consequences of the stalled
negotiations. His Majesty King Mohammed VI, who
chairs the Jerusalem Committee of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, said in his statement:

"First, we reiterate that our support for the
Palestinian question is absolute and untiring.
This is a promise that will always be honoured
by Morocco until the Palestinian people regain
all their inalienable rights under international
law and in accordance with the attestation of land
and history."
His Majesty also added that it is the duty of the
international community to pool its efforts in order to
bring this issue to a fair and secure negotiating table
and on a firm track, based on a realistic vision and a
fixed timeframe and in line with the existing terms of
reference. The two parties have to seriously participate
and assume their responsibilities.

The Kingdom of Morocco has always stood beside
the Palestinians and supported their just cause. This
support is not limited to political and diplomatic one
in international bodies, but involves a humanitarian
aspect which deals with the Palestinian human being
who yearns to live a decent life. That is why His Majesty
King Mohammed V1 has personally ensured the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people via the Mohammed V International Airport in
Casablanca this past May. That process provided the
Palestinian people with food and medicine, and ensured
the establishment of a field hospital by the Moroccan
Royal Armed Forces, as well as the provision of
blankets and essential medications. The Mohammed
V Foundation for Solidarity provided food aid. The
Moroccan hospital in the Gaza Strip will also provide
medical care for the Palestinian victims of the most
recent incidents as well as for other citizens.

In conclusion, Morocco's position on this conflict
is firm and based on the Arab Peace Initiative, the
principle of achieving peace and the terms of reference
relevant to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the 4 June 1967 borders, living side by side with
the Israel in peace, security and harmony. As it has in
the past, Morocco will spare no effort to engage with
all initiatives that support the peace process and seeks
a political settlement that will lead to security and
stability in the region.

