Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/628) and
Special Envoy Ian Martin for his briefing. We would
also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste, who is here among us once again at
this meeting. We wish to pay a special tribute to
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, who was unable to
attend this meeting, and to the entire staff of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for
continuing their work under extremely difficult
conditions. We also express our appreciation and
thanks to the military police from Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal for helping to maintain
order in T imor-Leste.

It was with the assistance of the United Nations
that Timor-Leste achieved independence and began the
process of nation-building. People often refer to Timor-
Leste as the child of the United Nations. The United
Nations thus bears special responsibilities and
obligations with regard to Timor-Leste.

Over the past few months, the Security Council
has been closely following the developments in Timor-
Leste and has often held discussions and consultations
about the situation, from which the Council has sought
to draw lessons. The Council has also been working
out appropriate decisions as to what actions should
now be taken in Timor-Leste by the United Nations and
the rest of the international community to help the
country maintain stability and promote development so
as to consolidate as much as possible the progress it
has made since independence and nationhood and to
prevent further reversals in the momentum of
peacebuilding.

In that context, the Chinese delegation believes
that the Government, national leaders and other social
and political forces in Timor-Leste should put their
national interests first and engage in good-faith
dialogue within the constitutional framework, seeking
common ground and setting aside differences in order
to create favourable conditions for next year's
presidential and parliamentary elections. Here, the
United Nations and the international community must
play an active and constructive mediating role.

Secondly, the United Nations and the
international community must work out an effective
long-term assistance plan for Timor-Leste. It must be
said that for some time, while the success story of
Timor-Leste was being enthusiastically told and retold,
people easily overlooked the fact that the country had
existed for only four years. In effect, it was starting
from scratch in terms of human resources and
institutional capacity-building and could not possibly
stand on its own overnight. Therefore, China is in
favour of sending a new multidimensional integrated
mission to Timor-Leste and helping to establish a
"compact" between Timor-Leste and the international
community.

Thirdly, with regard to the new mission's
composition and mandate, we must configure the
mission so that it will be able to address the root causes
of the crisis. The views of the Government of Timor-
Leste must also be fully respected and taken into
account. In the short term, in order to improve and
maintain security, it is imperative that we urgently
address the potential danger of widespread weapons,
help to reorganize the military and police sectors and
rationalize their relationship, supporting the new
mission by providing it with robust police functions
and a small military component.

Fourthly, the international community should
continue to encourage and support Timor-Leste in
developing long-term friendly relations with its
neighbours. It is gratifying to note that two of its large
neighbours have played a positive role in calming the
unrest in Timor-Leste. We hope that the Truth and
Friendship Commission will continue to work actively
to achieve results at an early date and appropriately
resolve the outstanding issues.
As an Asian country, we are very concerned about
the stability and development of Timor-Leste, but also
about how the situation in the country might affect the
South-East Asian region as a whole. During the
turmoil, the Chinese medical team continued to carry
out its duties and remained at its post. Our two
Governments recently signed an agreement to send a
second medical team to Timor-Leste. In the future, we
will continue to provide assistance within our capacity
and to play our part in helping to achieve stability and
development in Timor-Leste.

