Mr. Omer (Somalia): The Government of the
Federal Republic of Somalia welcomes this timely
debate organized and chaired by Egypt on the topic
countering the narratives and ideologies of extremism.
Violent extremism is an issue that is truly dangerous
and needs to be countered effectively and immediately.
It is a threat that causes suspicion, hatred and division
across the world. It is also fuelling many of our wars
and humanitarian crises across the globe, crises that are
perpetuated by the lack of a political solutions and the
rise of radicalized foreign fighters.

The Government of Somalia welcomes the
Secretary-General's call to action and unity on
countering violent extremism. Our Government is
working across all groups in our society to counter
extremism in Somalia, and we are partnering with the
United Nations and other key stakeholders, including
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the Global Coalition to
Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
individual partner nations to overcome that evil.

Countering violent extremism is indeed a key
challenge in our time. Where once people had to cross
borders to radicalize and divide societies with mindless
violence, today they just need to click a button on their
computer. That brings the threat of radicalization closer
to each home, street and nation around the world. That
is why we must work together as a community ofnations
to formulate and execute a coherent and responsive plan
that safeguards our citizens and deals an ideological
blow to the extremism that has caused so much misery
and instability.

Confronting violent extremism requires a
combination of good governance, respect for the rule
of law and the promotion of the ideals of peace so that
we can show a better alternative to those at risk of
radicalization. Given the immanent and fluid nature of
the threat, everybody's job is to work together to put
effective responses into practice. Governments, civil
society, religious leaders and the business community
must join hands at the local, national and international
levels to end radicalization so that one of the major
forces fuelling violent extremism can be extinguished.

Despite the misinterpretation of Islam by the violent
extremists, a central belief in Islamic teaching must be
used to defeat their fraudulent ideas. That is tolerance,
interfaith dialogue and education. We should bear in
mind, however, that Islamophobia is as extreme and
dehumanizing as other forms of extremism and must be
challenged and defeated collectively.

Currently in Somalia, we are countering violent
extremism with genuine religious education, amnesty
for those seeking to return from radicalization and
educating our people about the evils of radicalization
and violent extremism. We are also collaborating with
our partners and stakeholders to exchange knowledge
and formulate best practices. Furthermore, our draft
national security plan specifies countering violent
extremism as a priority. That is further evidence of our
Government's commitment to addressing that crucial
issue purposefully.
As more and more Al-Shabaab fighters return from
the violent wilderness into Government hands and their
communities, we are confident that the Somali strategy
on countering violent extremism will steadily continue
to become more successful, especially as we make
further political, security and economic development
gains nationally.

