Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Nigerian
delegation for assuming the presidency, as well as to
congratulate Ambassador Salam and his delegation for
their excellent leadership in September.

I would like now to voice our deep concern over
the situation in Syria. Instead of witnessing a peaceful
democratization and reform process, we are seeing
further deterioration of the situation. Day in and day
out, the Syrians continue to count increasing numbers
of casualties. We would like to express our deepest
sympathies to the families and friends of those who
have lost their lives since the outbreak of the crisis in
the country.

While expressing our full support for Syrian
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, we
call upon the country's authorities to immediately start
seeking ways to meet the legitimate aspirations and
demands of their people through an inclusive and
meaningful Syrian-led dialogue. We believe that the
effective implementation of announced reforms can
truly contribute to ending the unrest and restoring
peace and order in Syria.

We furthermore strongly condemn the continuing
violence and use of force, which is unacceptable under
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
call on the Syrian authorities to immediately stop such
actions. Human lives must be respected and protected.
We also reiterate our firm position that all those
responsible for committing crimes must be brought to
justice and held accountable for their actions.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is particularly worried
about information regarding the flow of refugees
fleeing the violence. We therefore underline the
importance of unimpeded access of the United Nations
and other international humanitarian organizations to
the affected population.

We strongly believe that the proposed draft
resolution addressed a number of critical issues.
Moreover, we still consider that only prompt and
decisive measures can bring about stabilization and
avoid further escalation of the crisis in Syria. Had it
been adopted, the proposed draft resolution could have
benefited the Syrian people and contributed to peace
and security in the region. Syria is an important
regional stakeholder, and its stability is crucial for the
peace process in the Middle East.

