Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I should like to begin
by making a special reference to Mr. Michael Williams,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
and to let him know how much we have appreciated his
solid, thorough and dedicated work. We wish him well
in his new job.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Montenegro and Serbia and the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this declaration.

The European Union believes it is a matter of the
utmost urgency to carry forward a credible peace
process that will give the Palestinian people an
independent, democratic and viable State, living side
by side with Israel and its other neighbours in peace
and security. Europe's resolve to contribute to the
resolution of this conflict as part of bringing peace and
stability to the Middle East remains unchanged.

At this moment of increased diplomatic
initiatives and dialogue, we sense a window of
opportunity that should not be missed. The European
Union strongly encourages the parties to continue their
bilateral dialogue, which should both accomplish
concrete results and lead to meaningful political
negotiations to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the conflict. In addition to the
engagement of the parties, the continued support of the
international community is crucial to advance the
peace process.

The European Union is firmly committed to
playing an active role, particularly within the
framework of the Quartet, to put in place a political
and diplomatic process offering the prospect of a
comprehensive settlement, in conformity with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and on the basis
of the Road Map, notably its goals and principles. That
commitment was renewed last July when the Quartet
principals met in Lisbon, with the participation of Tony
Blair as Quartet Representative for the first time. In
that context, the European Union welcomed President
Bush's speech of 16 July. We expect that the Quartet
will participate and play an active role in the
preparation of the international meeting proposed for
November.

The European Union also stresses the importance
of renewing the Quartet's dialogue with the parties and
representatives of the Arab League. We believe that the
Arab Peace Initiative is a major element intended to
advance regional peace. We look forward to a fruitful
next meeting of the Quartet, in the margins of the
General Assembly, to hear the first proposals of the
Quartet Representative and further discuss the way
forward.

The perspectives opened up in the political and
diplomatic spheres need to be matched by substantive
progress on the ground, where the situation remains of
particular concern.

The European Union is deeply concerned by the
serious events in Gaza. We reaffirm our full support for
President Abbas and the Government under Prime
Minister Fayyad. Reconciliation and national unity in
support of the programme of peace articulated by
President Abbas are the only way to achieve
Palestinian national goals by peaceful, lawful and
democratic means. The European Union opposes any
division of the Palestinian territories and confirms its
readiness to engage with all Palestinian parties whose
policies and actions reflect the Quartet principles.

We are following with particular apprehension
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
continue to provide emergency and humanitarian
assistance to its population. In this context, we urge all
parties to work towards the opening of the crossings in
and out of Gaza for humanitarian and commercial
flows, in accordance with the Agreement on Movement
and Access.

Stopping all acts of violence and terror among the
parties is of the utmost importance if the peace process
is to succeed. We reiterate our call for the release of the
abducted Israeli soldier as well as of the Palestinian
legislators detained in Israel. Following recent
meetings between Prime Minister Olmert and President
Abbas, the European Union welcomes, as a first step,
the partial transfer by Israel of withheld Palestinian tax
and customs revenues, and we reiterate our call for the
immediate and regular release of the remaining and
future funds. We also commend the initial release of
prisoners, and we urge further steps to honour the
commitments made at those meetings, including the
removal of barriers and checkpoints in the West Bank.
Such moves will support progress on the political track
and help to create the necessary framework and
confidence to advance the peace process.

Settlement activities in and around East
Jerusalem and in the rest of the West Bank and the
ongoing construction of the barrier on Palestinian land,
which are against international law, are of particular
concern. As we have stated many times, we will not
recognize changes to the pre-l967 borders other than
those agreed by the parties. The European Union has
resumed its direct financial and technical assistance to
the Palestinian Authority. We are committed to helping
to build the institutions and the economy of the future
Palestinian State, which we believe will play a
fundamental role in expediting the peace process. That
is also the core of the mandate of Tony Blair, whose
appointment as Quartet Representative the European
Union warmly welcomed.

The European Union strongly supports the
reinforcement of Lebanon's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence and its legitimate and
democratic Government. We renew the call for the full
and speedy implementation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004) and of all other relevant resolutions,
and we call on Syria and other countries in the region
to refrain from destabilizing the country.

The European Union welcomes the decision by
the Security Council on the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and renews its commitment to continue to
play an active role in the Force. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence against UNIFIL, in particular the
07-49245
one in June, which claimed the lives of six
peacekeepers of the Spanish contingent.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing violence in Lebanon, in particular at
Nahr el-Bared, and reiterates its condemnation of the
attacks on Lebanese people and the Lebanese Armed
Forces. The European Union urges all political forces
to search for a solution to the political deadlock
through dialogue and with full respect for the country's
democratic institutions. In that context, we also
welcome all the constructive initiatives and mediation
efforts that have been carried out by the international
community.

