Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom delegation on your successful presidency
in the month of August. We appreciate in particular
your efforts to maximize effectiveness through the
efficient and timely management of the Council's
work. We would also like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for having led the Security Council mission
to Europe and Africa. The visit was very substantive
and constructive and has greatly enriched the work
of the Council. The visit to Europe enabled us to gain
valuable insight in the areas of conflict prevention and
long-term reconciliation, as well as the fight against
impunity. The visit to South Sudan and Somalia helped
us to take stock of the achievements so far and the
challenges we face today in the situations of the two
countries.

Regarding Gaza, we welcome the recent
announcements of an open-ended ceasefire brokered
under Egyptian auspices. All parties should fully
implement the agreements and work towards building a
more durable peace. For that purpose, we believe that a
sustained and regular flow of goods and people through
the Gaza crossings should be ensured, while Israel's
legitimate security concerns are duly addressed.

The threat posed by Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) is an unprecedented challenge to the
stability ofIraq and the region as a whole. In that regard,
resolution 2170 (2014) is an important and timely step
in the right direction by the Security Council. It reflects
the collective will of the international community to
address the ever-growing threats posed by terrorist
groups such as ISIL.

Turning to the thematic issues, the open debate
on conflict prevention was especially noteworthy (see S/PV.7247). The difficulty of dealing with conflicts

that have already begun reminds us of the importance
of conflict prevention. The Security Council and the
international community should improve their capacity
to read early warning signs in order to take swift action.
In that connection, resolution 2171 (2014) provides a
solid basis to explore all possible preventive measures
through efforts across the United Nations system. We
look forward to the Secretary-General's reports on
actions to promote and strengthen conflict-prevention
tools.

Finally, with regard to non-proliferation, the
Council had a valuable opportunity to take stock of the
work of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) during the past three months.
In the meeting the Council members condemned
the continued ballistic launches by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea as violations of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In that light, we urge the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to heed the
solemn warnings of the Council and to refrain from any
further provocations.

Once again, in thanking the presidency of the
United Kingdom for the achievements in August, we
would also like to congratulate the incoming President,
the United States, and assure it of the full support of the
Republic of Korea.

