Mr. Pedersen: I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the alarming situation in north-west Syria, which has further escalated since last week's briefings (see S/PV.8707 and S/PV.8708). Heavy strikes, from both the air and the ground, are causing massive waves of civilian displacement and major loss of civilian life. We are witnessing the humanitarian catastrophe about which the Secretary- General warned and about which Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark Lowcock will brief the Council very shortly. It is causing human suffering, which is totally unacceptable, and endangering international peace and security. Yet it can, and therefore must, stop now. On 12 January, Russia and Turkey announced that they agreed on a fresh ceasefire for the north-west. Yet heavy clashes and mutual shelling continued despite the ceasefire. Two days later, air strikes by the Syrian Government and its allies resumed. Syrian Government forces have since launched a ground offensive in areas south-east of the Idlib de-escalation zone. They have made significant advances, most recently establishing control over the major town of Maarat Al-Numan,whose population has fled from earlier attacks. Maarat Al-Numan lies on the strategic M5 highway. Pro- Government forces have continued to push north, reaching the city of Saraqib, the junction of the M4 and MS highways and close to Idlib city. In Idlib city there are already reports of deep fear and of civilians fleeing or preparing to flee. There are also reports that aerial bombardment in support of the Government's offensive continues. Hostilities have also intensified on other fronts, especially in western Aleppo, where Government forces have advanced. During the same period, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham - a terrorist organization designated by the Council - and armed opposition groups launched several attacks and counter-attacks along those fronts, including western Aleppo and Al-Bab, in northern Aleppo. There were reports of intensified shelling in civilian areas of western Aleppo and of civilian casualties. There are reports of weaponized drones being launched on Syrian and Russian military installations south-west of Idlib. The Russian Foreign Ministry has stated that Russian military personnel have been killed. Turkish forces and Syrian Government forces have directly clashed inside Syria. On 3 February, Syrian Government artillery reportedly hit a Turkish observation post near Saraqib. Seven Turkish soldiers were killed and several more injured, according to the Turkish Ministry of Defence. We have since seen differing reports of dozens of Syrian Government forces killed in Turkish strikes on Syrian Government positions. Statements from the Russian and Turkish leadership in recent days have shown deep differences between the sponsors of the Idlib de-escalation arrangements. Two days ago, the Secretary-General noted his enormous concern about the fact that the most recent developments constituted a change in the nature of the conflict and reiterated his strong appeal for a cessation of hostilities. So far those calls have not been heeded. Hundreds of civilians have been killed in the past two months, more than half a million civilians have been displaced and most are fleeing into ever-shrinking areas, where they still hope to find relative safety. Further mass displacement seems inevitable if fighting continues. We appear to have lost sight of the principle of proportionality. Let me be very clear and remind all parties that attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, including health-care and educational facilities, are unacceptable. All military operations, including those against and by terrorist groups designated by the Security Council, must respect the requirements of international humanitarian law, including with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian objects. Ordinary people in Idlib are conveying to me their grave fears for their lives and safety. They feel totally voiceless. Civil society actors inside Idlib, the best antidote and counterweight to radicalism, feel dismayed and abandoned. Syrian women have shared with me their fears of continued insecurity, including increased violence targeting women fleeing and living in displacement. Idlib is the place that became a refuge for hundreds of thousands of civilians from other parts of Syria who had fled violence. As a result, the population of the Idlib de-escalation zone has now swollen to an estimated 3 million, the vast majority of whom are civilians. It is also the place that fighters who refused to settle their status earlier had also sought refuge. Moreover, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other Security Council-proscribed terrorist groups, including foreign fighters, are a major force in Idlib. Their presence and influence in the area is unacceptable and constitutes a major challenge, first and foremost to the civilian population of Idlib itself and also in the wider sense for Syria, as well as for regional and international security. But we know from bitter experience that a continued all-out military approach will not solve this problem and that it would come at a completely unacceptable price. What we are now seeing creates the very real prospect of a bloody and protracted last stand on the Turkish border, with grave consequences for civilians and the risk of the dispersal of foreign terrorist fighters and ongoing insurgency afterwards. We know that the continuation of the military approach will only entrench and further harden the deep international divisions over Syria and lead to more and more pressure, thereby weakening prospects for a step-by-step dynamic to build trust and confidence. The events of the last few days, in which the armies of two United Nations Member States - Syria and Turkey - have clashed inside Syria, suggest the very real prospect of conflagration in the immediate region, as well as far beyond. But we also know something else. We know that it is possible via agreement to stabilize parts of Syria and work on ways out. Idlib is a de-escalation zoneestablished by agreement in May 2017, and it was the subject of a further Russian-Turkish stabilization memorandum in September 2018. Those agreements do not have third-party monitoring, and we are therefore not in a position to comment on their terms or observance. What we do know is that those agreements can enable prolonged periods of calm. So why can we not make that happen once again? That is the message that I impressed in my meetings recently in Moscow and Damascus, with high-level Turkish officials and with the co-Chairs of the Humanitarian Task Force meeting today in Geneva. I will take this message to Tehran in the coming days, and I will continue to press on the most important actors their responsibility to take a different path. I do not pretend to have a magical solution for Idlib. But I am convinced that, with a serious attempt at international cooperation, a solution can be found, while building on and augmenting earlier agreements. There is an urgent need for a sustained ceasefire and immediate unfettered humanitarian access to the civilian population. There is a need to contain the situation to give additional time to enable solutions to be found. There must be strengthened engagement with the civilian population. The question of foreign fighters needs to be squarely tackled. The provision of support to internationally proscribed terrorist groups needs to be further restricted. Any use of force against internationally proscribed groups should be carefully targeted. There could be serious exploration of a strengthened international presence, with the consent of the Syrian authorities. The combined resources of the international community need to come together. I appeal for an end to the hostilities, and I appeal to all to engage in a serious international effort to cooperate on Idlib. It is a humanitarian imperative. It is the way towards effective counter-terrorism. It is in the interests of regional and international peace and security. And it is the essential foundation for a sustainable path out of the Syrian conflict, which is now approaching its tenth year. The Council recognized that when it unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015), which stipulated a nationwide ceasefire alongside a cooperative approach to combating terrorism, full respect of Syria's sovereignty and a credible and inclusive United Nations-facilitated political process. That remains the only path to end the conflict. The major players and the members of the Council need to put their full weight behind that logic.
