Mr. Ping (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, in turn, on
behalf of Gabon, would like to thank President Frederick
Chiluba for the important statement he has just made to the
Council and for his unrelenting efforts to promote a
negotiated settlement to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the same time I would like to
thank all of those who have helped President Frederick
Chiluba in achieving these results. These people include the
heads of State of the Southern African Development
Community and others in Central Africa, both those that
have acted publicly and those that have acted through quiet
diplomacy. I would also like to note that the Organization
of African Unity and its Secretary-General, Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, have also taken part in the entire negotiating
process.

Gabon fully agrees with the points that Mr. Chiluba
made. That is why in the Security Council we have
advocated having the President of Zambia speak here today.
We are pleased that his statement has greatly contributed to
an understanding of the problems pertaining to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which, for the first
time in African history, we are seeing roughly a dozen
countries directly or indirectly involved in such a major
conflict. It is now urgent for the Security Council to take a
look at the practical modalities involved in conducting a
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in order to safeguard the achievements that the
President of the Republic of Zambia has just outlined for
us.

Gabon welcomes the proposals made by the Secretary-
General in this regard and hopes that the Council will be
able to translate these recommendations into practice.
African opinion, which is carefully following what the
Council is doing elsewhere in the world, would have great
difficulty understanding delays in the Council's
establishing a peacekeeping operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have understood from
President Chiluba's statement the feelings of the African
countries. Those feelings are widely shared, and I think
that, as I noted earlier, all the heads of State have made
contributions to see to it that the negotiations regarding
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that have been
undertaken under the strong leadership of President
Chiluba have a chance of achieving positive results.

We now have those results, and we feel that the
signal is a clear one, given by all of those who are
involved in the conflict. We await equally urgent action
from the Security Council with regard to that country.

But this action also concerns refugees and displaced
persons. There is the feeling that all refugees and
displaced persons are not accorded the same importance.
Africa today has the largest number of displaced persons
and refugees if we consider only humanitarian operations.
Simply in humanitarian terms, we can see that an African
refugee is not accorded as much importance as refugees
in other continents.

