Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): First, I would like to join my colleagues in expressing my sorrow at seeing our dear Dame Karen leaving us. As many people have said, she has been such an inspiration. Her positive and constructive approach to everything we do in the Council has really been such an important lesson for us - especially for us young members, the rookies. I am sure I speak not only for myself in saying that we will feel like orphans when she is gone. But fortunately, it is a small world, especially when travel picks up and the world is again connected, so not only do I hope but I am sure that our paths will cross again. I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for their briefings. We are very concerned about the ongoing escalation in northern Yemen, with the latest clashes taking place in Al-Jawf governorate. Another 70,000 people have reportedly been displaced as a result of this latest fighting, adding to the suffering of the Yemeni people. Unfortunately, civilians continue to bear the brunt of the conflict. As reported by the United Nations, during the first two months of this year, the fighting has resulted in the killing of 74 people, including 43 children, and injury to another 107. We call on all parties to the conflict to maintain the protection of civilians as a priority and to adhere to international humanitarian and human rights law. We are also alarmed by the latest ceasefire violations in Al-Hudaydah governorate. We urge all parties to refrain from undermining the Al-Hudaydah ceasefire and recall the importance of implementing the Stockholm Agreement. We call on all parties for an immediate cessation of hostilities and the start of an unconditional de-escalation process. As has been repeated so many times before, there is no military solution to the conflict. Only a political compromise that is inclusive, comprehensive and mediated by the United Nations can lead to a lasting solution. Despite the challenges, we encourage the parties to break the cycle of violence and return to implementing the existing agreements and confidence-building measures. We also urge all international stakeholders to support the Special Envoy in his efforts to bring about the resumption of political talks. As pointed out in the earlier briefings, humanitarian conditions in Yemen are deteriorating. In addition to lack of food and medical necessities, there are also worrying reports about a possible cholera outbreak. In this context, we welcome the readiness of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to host a high-level pledging event for Yemen, on 2 April, in Riyadh. Unfortunately, the delivery of humanitarian aid continues to be obstructed, particularly in northern Yemen, for which there can be no excuse. We reiterate the obligation of all parties to allow safe and unrestricted humanitarian access and to respect humanitarian principles. We also repeat our call on the Houthis to grant United Nations officials access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker without delay, in order to prevent an environmental disaster. We also urge the Houthis to grant access to the representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Finally, we express our appreciation to those members of Security Council who supported resolution 2511 (2020), extending the Yemen sanctions regime and addressing several relevant issues brought out in the latest final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2020/70).
