Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Deputy Special Representative Zenenga;
Mr. Madeira, Special Representative ofthe Chairperson

ofthe African Union (AU) Commission for Somalia; and
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings.

Since the end of last year, with the concerted
efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia, the
United Nations, the African Union and the rest of the
international community, Somalia has seen positive
progress in rebuilding the State, in particular with regard
to security and capacity-building. China commends the
Federal Government of Somalia, the relevant United
Nations agencies on the ground and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their efforts.

Somalia is an important country in the Horn
of Africa. Maintaining peace and stability there is
in the common interests of the region and the entire
international community. Currently, the overall situation
in Somalia remains complex and, looking forward,
it faces challenges on multiple fronts. The Security
Council, the United Nations and the international
community should draw on past experiences and
lessons in helping to address hotspot issues in Africa,
such as this one, and step up support and assistance.

China would like to highlight the following
three points.

First, we should fully respect and maintain the
national ownership of the Federal Government of
Somalia in its domestic affairs. We should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Somalia, help establish an authoritative and
capable Federal Government and optimize its federal
institutions. We should strengthen communications
and coordination with the Somalia Government, give
full play to its own initiatives and improve its ability to
achieve development independently.
Secondly, we should continue to support the

efforts of the AU and other regional and subregional
organizations that help maintain peace and security
in Somalia. At present, Somalia continues to face
serious threats posed by Al-Shabaab. It is necessary
for AMISOM. to maintain its deployment in Somalia.
China supports the Security Council's extension of
the AMISOM. mandate and maintaining the necessary
level of Mission forces in the country. We hope that
the United Nations and the international community
will provide stable, predictable and sustainable
financial support for AMISOM. and help the relevant
troop-contributing countries build capacity in order to
combat Al-Shabaab more effectively. At the same time,
the international community should continue to help
Somalia improve its security capacity-building so as
to ensure that the Somalia security forces will be able
to assume security responsibilities from AMISOM. in a
gradual and steady manner.

Thirdly, we should continue to increase
humanitarian assistance and social and economic
development support for Somalia. The social and
economic foundation in Somalia is weak. A relatively
large gap in the provision of international humanitarian
assistance remains. We hope that all international
partners will honour their commitments in good faith
and provide assistance in a timely manner. China will
continue to actively support the Somalia peace process
and play a constructive role in bringing peace, stability
and development to Somalia and the Horn of Africa.

