Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would first like to
congratulate you and your delegation, Madam
President, on Australia's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and for
convening this important meeting. Malaysia also
welcomes the presidential statement adopted earlier
(S/PRST/2014/23), and we thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.

My delegation is further encouraged by the

presence of the high-level representatives of Argentina,
Luxembourg, Lithuania and the Republic of Korea. Such
high-level participation reflects the importance all we
attach to the subject of today's meeting, which we feel
affords us the opportunity to take stock of the progress
that has been made in combating the twin scourges of
terrorism and violent extremism, particularly in the
context of implementing resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014), adopted earlier this year.

Malaysia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Saudi
Arabia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

Malaysia reiterates in the strongest terms its
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as of all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism. In the wake of the rampant
advance of terror and violent extremist groups, in terms
of capturing actual territory as well as intellectual and
ideological space, Malaysia was a sponsor of resolution
2178 (2014), adopted in September. In doing so, we
sought to lend our support to the effort to galvanize
international action in the fight against terrorism in
general and the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters in
particular.

So far, 2014 has witnessed disturbing developments,
particularly in the tactics employed by violent extremist
groups. The brutality of the punishments and retribution
inflicted on their opponents and victims is appalling
and horrific. Perhaps even more worrying is the fact
that the narratives of such groups appear to be gaining
ground and seem to resonate increasingly with a diverse
cross-section of the world's population. In that regard,
my delegation believes it is imperative to halt the flow
of funds and recruits to such groups. We join others in
calling for robust and effective international action to
fight terrorism and violent extremism, undertaken in
full respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
for universally recognized principles of law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

Malaysia has consistently worked to enhance
its domestic legal framework in order to ensure that
measures aimed at safeguarding national security fully
respect human rights. That is apparent in the evolution
of our relevant legislation on combating terrorism and
countering violent extremism, whereby our much-
criticized Internal Security Act of 1960 was repealed
and replaced with the Security Offences (Special Measures) Act in 2012.

In terms of law enforcement, since 2000 the
Royal Malaysian Police's counter-terrorism division
has forged strong bilateral ties with approximately
50 foreign intelligence and enforcement agencies,
with particular emphasis on information-sharing. In
regard to compliance with resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014), our existing legal and policy framework
has successfully prevented the movement of potential
recruits out ofthe country. In 2013, Malaysia amended its
2001 Anti-Money-Laundering Act to include measures
combating terrorism financing. Now known as the
Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism Financing
Act, it provides comprehensively for freezing terrorist
funds and implementing the provisions of resolution
1267 (1999) and, more broadly, resolution 1373 (2001).

In 2003, Malaysia established the Southeast Asia
Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism, designed to
provide capacity-building and technical assistance at
the national, regional and international levels. As of
31 October, the Centre has conducted 140 capacity-
building programmes attended by almost 3,000 local
and 1,260 foreign participants. The Centre works
closely on various aspects of counter-terrorism with
many countries, as well as with bodies such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.

At the regional level, cooperation in combating
terrorism takes place primarily within the framework
of the Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
In addition, ASEAN's annual senior officials' meeting
on transnational crime implements and reviews the
Ministerial Meeting's decisions, as well as exploring
further areas of cooperation. The ASEAN Convention
on Counter-Terrorism provides a legislative framework
at the regional level that complements the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, international conventions
related to counter-terrorism and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

At the international level, Malaysia has ratified nine
of the 14 international conventions and protocols aimed
at combating terrorism. We continue to take various
measures to implement our international obligations,
including the legislative measures necessary to enable
us to accede to the remaining conventions and protocols.

On a related note, Malaysia also welcomes
the signing in June of a cooperation agreement
between CTED and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, which, among other things, establishes
a regular framework for consultation between the two
entities. While the Alliance is not exclusively geared
to countering terrorism, it engages in projects aimed at
improving inter-cultural understanding and addressing
feelings of isolation among certain groups, especially
vulnerable young people. That in itself constitutes a
formidable bulwark against the recruitment efforts of
terrorists and violent extremists. Malaysia strongly
believes that the Alliance's emphasis on promoting an
approach anchored in the principle of moderation should
be further supported by Member States, particularly in
the context of our common endeavour to combat the
narratives of terrorists and violent extremists.

In the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
it is fair to say that we have all come a long way.
However, we still have quite some distance to go. We
must continue to vigorously counter the narratives and
appeal of terrorists and violent extremists and combat
their murderous actions every step of the way. Malaysia
reaffirms its unwavering commitment and continued
support to that goal.

