Spain aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 18) and the statement submitted by Nauru on behalf of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security (see annex 21). I would like to thank Germany for its efforts to convene this debate on climate and security, as well as the briefers for their very informative contributions. I would like to centre my remarks on three issues. First, the coronavirus disease crisis has shown how climate change, pollution, habitat destruction and biodiversity loss are at the root of increased social and economic fragility. The greater the fragility, the more vulnerable societies are to security risks. There can be no doubt - climate change should be considered a cross-cutting issue when designing the world's recovery from this pandemic and when defining security policies, from the strategic to the tactical level. Nevertheless, that should not take away from a country-specific analysis. My second point is on the links between climate and security. Spain continues to support regular comprehensive Secretary-General reports on climate-related security risks in order to better understand the challenges and opportunities we face. Such reports must be gender-sensitive and include concrete recommendations for action by United Nations organs, as well as access to risk-assessment and early- warning mechanisms that integrate the impact of climate change. Those factors all need to be taken into account in strategic planning for conflict prevention and disaster responses, as well as in the scope of ground operations related to conflicts and natural disasters. The United Nations system, both as a whole and at the regional level, must be strengthened to tackle climate-related security risks. The Climate Security Mechanism is a useful tool that should be reinforced. We also support the establishment of new mechanisms, such as a special envoy on climate and security, ad hoc expert groups on the ground and a Secretary-General advisory unit. As a general principle, we strongly emphasize the close links between climate and security. Spain has promoted that approach in several forums, including during our co-leadership of the Social and Political Drivers of Climate Action Coalition in the Climate Action Summit. Finally, let me make a third point. National measures should also be encouraged. Spain has incorporated an analysis of the impact of climate change in its national security strategy. We monitor trends and consequences. Today, we would like to suggest the establishment of a coordination mechanism to allow countries to voluntarily share national data and experiences in their implementation of national strategies. We are facing the worst crisis the world has known since the foundation of the United Nations. Let us address the climate and security nexus within our response for a better and safer recovery.
