The President: I wish to confirm the Council's
condemnation in the strongest possible terms of
the recent terrorist attack in Nairobi, which caused
numerous deaths and injuries, and to convey our
condolences to the victims and their families and to
the people and the Government of Kenya. I note that
the Council issued a press statement to that effect on
21 September.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Small arms

The impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons on international peace and
security

Report of the Secretary-General on small arms
(S/2013/503)

Letter dated 6 September 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/536)

The President: I warmly welcome the Secretary-
General, the President of Guatemala, the Deputy Prime
Ministers of Luxembourg and the United Kingdom,
Ministers of the countries members of the Security
Council and other representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter to be addressed.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Germany,
Japan, Liberia, Lithuania, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and Trinidad and Tobago to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/570, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Costa Rica, Cote
d'Ivoire, France, Germany, Guatemala, Japan, Liberia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Morocco, New Zealand,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/503, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms.

I also draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2OI3/536, which contains a letter dated
6 September 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Australia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I am very pleased that the Council is convening this
high-level meeting to consider the issue of small arms.
The proliferation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons threaten peace and drive conflict in many of
the countries the Council considers. It is an issue that
cuts across much of the Council's work, from sanctions,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding to the women, peace
and security agenda. Yet it is an issue that the Council
has not considered in a dedicated way for more than
five years. It is therefore entirely appropriate that we
do so today.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


