Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security Chergui and
Executive Director of UN-Women Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, for their briefings and their very active
engagement in South Sudan, including in their joint
visit to the country. I think that the visit serves to show
the strong partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations, which is very welcome.

The briefers brought to our attention the horrible
and difficult situation for many women and girls in
South Sudan and the need for meaningful political
participation for them.

I just returned from South Sudan last week,
having led a visit of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The historic
and significant developments in the Horn of Africa,
triggered by the reconciliation process between Eritrea
and Ethiopia, have dramatically changed the dynamics
in the region and opened a new chapter of peace and
cooperation. Those dynamics also provide new positive
momentum for South Sudan, which needs to be built on.
In that regard, I want to commend the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the facilitators for their
efforts in having reached the revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The Agreement is now the only game in town.
We must all weigh in to ensure its implementation.

I was in South Sudan for only three days, but
the people all testified to a new atmosphere of hope
for peace. The region's continued engagement in
monitoring progress and holding the parties to account
will be vital. The Council must continue to support their
efforts. We believe that the Council should be actively
engaged, and that means acknowledging progress made
by the South Sudanese parties as well as pointing out
where they fall short of their commitments.

What is needed now is a clear political will to
implement what has been agreed upon and to engage
in genuine peacebuilding and reconciliation. We
welcome the steps taken so far, including the reduced
levels of fighting. At the same time, we are concerned
by continued reports of military clashes. A complete
cessation of hostilities by all parties, the Government
and armed groups alike, must be unconditional, as all
of the briefers have pointed out. That is a prerequisite
for a meaningful political process. There must be
consequences for violations ofthe Agreement, including
targeted measures against those who incite violence or
seek to derail the peace process.

The spirit of inclusiveness must be safeguarded in
the coming political process. The process will be viable
only if it includes all stakeholders, in particular youth,
women and civil society. In that regard, we strongly
welcome the provisions for including 35 per cent
women in the transitional Government, as an increase
in the political representation of women is crucial for
lasting peace.

Part of the way forward will also be advancing
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms,
including through establishing a hybrid court. The
culture of impunity for crimes committed in the
conflict, not least acts of sexual violence, must come
to an end. Sexual and gender-based violence is now a
stand-alone sanctions criterion, which should serve as
a stern reminder.

We also remain strongly concerned by the continued
dire humanitarian situation. Rapid, safe and unhindered
delivery of relief across South Sudan must be assured.
Humanitarian workers are doing admirable work and
must be allowed to carry out their work safely. I have
stressed the need for the Government to build trust and
support all the people working on the humanitarian
side. Revisiting the issue of registration fees is one of
the urgent ways for the Government to move forward.

The conflict in South Sudan has had a devastating
effect on the children in the country and has left deep
scars in the next generation. The revitalized Peace
Agreement represents an opportunity to now finally
turn a corner and make the protection of children a
priority. We were encouraged by the commitment to
improve the situation of children affected by armed
conflict expressed by our interlocutors during the visit,
but action is key.

The demobilization, release and reintegration of
hundreds of children in 2018 and the recent accession
by the Government to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, on children and
armed conflict, are important positive steps. During the
visit we presented recommendations to the Government
on the way forward. That included the need to work with
the United Nations to expand the current action plan,
which is focused on recruitment, into a comprehensive
action plan that would address all grave violations
against children.

Another important recommendation that we
made was to continue to facilitate the release and
reintegration of children as part of the implementation
of the peace Agreement, and to allocate sufficient
funds for the reintegration of former child soldiers. In
that regard, the Security Council should also consider
whether the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan should be adjusted to that new situation,
including the possibility of adding a stronger emphasis
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
the capacity-building component.

We also undertook a field visit to the towns of
Bor and Pibor, in the eastern parts of the country. We
met with children affected by the armed conflict and
visited reintegration programmes for former child
soldiers. It became very clear that the reintegration of
children cannot take place in a vacuum. If there are
no schools or health services, then reintegration will
not lead to the desired results, neither for the victims
nor for society as a whole. Hopefully, the Agreement
now signed will also trigger the Government, with the
support of the international community, to invest in
long-term development.

Protecting the children of South Sudan is our
moral obligation. But it is also an investment for the
future, critical to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
The challenges ahead for the country are immense, and
the path to peace will be very difficult. We must not
be naive, but the revitalized Peace Agreement provides
an opportunity that now must be seized. The Council
should step up its engagement in the next few months
and work closely with the region, while encouraging
progress and making sure that the parties live up to
their commitments. Including women and protecting
children should be a priority, for all of the reasons that
we heard in the briefings today.

