Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for this morning's briefings by Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe and by Mr. Craig Boyd,
as well as for the presence among us of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.

My delegation would like to begin by
acknowledging the intensive work of the Transitional
Federal Government in reaching out to opposition
groups, forging national reconciliation and ensuring the
security of the Somali population. The development of
a strategy of negotiation, persuasion and inclusion of
those groups in dialogue has borne fruit with the
agreement reached with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a. We
hope that in the future we will see more members of
the insurgency joining this process in order to achieve
a lasting political solution in Somalia.

In that context, we welcome the fact that the
pledges made in Brussels by the international
community are being disbursed, and we hope that very
soon the various financial mechanisms established for
cooperation with Somalia will receive the promised
funds. We believe that the Somaliland and Puntland
communities should also receive funds to enable them
to safeguard stability in their regions.

Likewise, we acknowledge the improved
administrative capacity of the Transitional Federal
Government. The establishment of effective governance
in Somalia is an essential basis for ensuring public
order. We believe that the international community and
institutions of the United Nations system should
continue to provide Somalia with the support necessary
for institutional-building, enhancing Government
capacity and improving infrastructure with a view to
ensuring a comprehensive approach to deal with the
humanitarian, political, security and development
issues at the root of the current crisis.

These positive developments, however, cannot
lead us to ignore the escalating violence in Somalia and
the alarming decline in the humanitarian situation
during the period under review.

There have been attacks against the Transitional
Federal Government and AMISOM. personnel, thefts at
United Nations facilities and widespread violence
against civilians by armed groups. We have also noted
the existence of criminal activities on the part of
domestic and foreign saboteurs, who take advantage of
the fragility in the country to further their smuggling
and trafficking in human beings and illegal drugs. All
those activities pose an ongoing threat to the Djibouti
peace process.

Against that backdrop, efforts should be stepped
up to continue to make progress in the parallel
equipping and training of Somali security forces to
enable them to take on responsibility for security in
their country, thereby contributing to finding a solution
to the fundamental problem in Somalia. In that regard,
we acknowledge the work done by the Transitional
Federal Government and AMISOM. in setting up
transitional security institutions, developing the
national security strategy and improving the capacity
of other legal, judicial and public administration
institutions. In particular, we hope that work of the
Joint Security Committee will yield greater concrete
results in the future.

We also believe that, in addition to ensuring the
strengthening of the Government's security institutions,
it is also urgent that we strengthen AMISOM. In that
regard, we would like to reiterate our gratitude to the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda for their
contributions to the Mission. We deeply regret the loss
of life resulting from recent attacks on AMISOM
facilities.

The impact of the unstable security situation on
the provision of humanitarian assistance within and
outside Mogadishu is a source of concern for my
delegation. The systematic looting of the compounds of
personnel providing humanitarian assistance coupled
with the ever-lengthening drought are worsening the
living conditions of more than 50 per cent of Somalia's
population, which currently needs humanitarian
assistance and support to survive. We are especially
concerned about the increase in child malnutrition,
which today affects one in five children. It is therefore
urgent to ensure that there is adequate financing for
humanitarian and recovery programmes, as well as free
access for humanitarian assistance and an improvement
in the security conditions of humanitarian personnel in
Somalia.

We condemn forced displacements and acts of
violence against civilians, whether due to or as a result
of clashes between Government forces and insurgent
groups. In that regard, we remind all the parties to the
conflict that they have an obligation to observe the
norms of international law, and especially those of
international humanitarian law. Given that combating
impunity should continue to be a priority for the
international community and for the authorities in
Somalia, we welcome the Government's establishment
of a ministerial-level post for the coordination of
human rights.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our
support for the strategy drawn up by the Secretary-
General to address the crisis in Somalia. We would also
like to acknowledge the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, to further strengthen the political
process in especially difficult circumstances.

