Mr. Nzo (South Africa): It is indeed an honour for me
to participate in these proceedings today as South Africa's
representative on a delegation of the Organization of
African Unity. Since an African issue is being considered
today, it is particularly appropriate that the Security
Council's work is being guided this month by a fellow
African Member State, the Republic of Botswana.

I wish at the outset to associate myself with the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of Malawi on
behalf of the ministerial delegation of the Organization of
African Unity. It needs to be emphasized that a peaceful
settlement of the Angolan civil conflict is not only essential
for the people of Angola themselves, but also of major
importance to political stability and economic development
in southern Africa as a whole.

For these reasons, the South African Government
welcomed the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 by the Angolan Government and
UNITA. The South African Government has also
subsequently noted with satisfaction the first steps that
have been taken in the implementation of the accord. We
are pleased to note that the cease-fire is generally
respected. The United Nations Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
has played a pivotal role in this process and deserves
great credit for his dedication and perseverance. States in
the region played an important role in the process -
particularly Zambia, which hosted protracted negotiations.

I also wish to refer to the substantial role that has been
played by the observer States - the troika of Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America.

Yet it is the Angolan Government and UNITA that
deserve our particular congratulations on reaching an
agreement to end the civil conflict. We must accept that
the durability of the peace process in Angola is largely
dependent on the political will of the Angolan people
themselves. In this respect, we are encouraged by the
prospects of a meeting between President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi. This meeting will no doubt further enhance
the peace process.

The South African Government is of the opinion that
the people of Angola need not only the encouragement
but also the concrete support of the region and the
international community at this decisive stage of their
history. In this regard, a crucial aspect in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is the role of the
United Nations in Angola. The South African Government
believes that an effective United Nations presence is
needed on the ground, together with a realistic and
adequate mandate. It is therefore essential that such a
United Nations force be established and deployed without
delay.

Members of the Council are aware that our presence
here today follows from the meeting of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity in Addis
Ababa from 23 to 27 January. The Council of Ministers
requested that the Security Council should decide today
to establish the third United Nations Verification Mission
in Angola (UNAVEM. III) as well as on an early
deployment of its forces. As a member of the delegation
of the Organization of African Unity here today, I wish
to emphasize my Government's support for this position.
The Angolan peace process has entered a crucial phase;
it urgently needs to be consolidated and strengthened.
Only an expanded United Nations force with a broadened
mandate will be able to bring the necessary support to

 

bear on a process which remains fragile. The South African
Government therefore agrees with the recommendations
contained in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on UNAVEM. II, especially the recommendation that a new
United Nations operation, with the mandate and strength
described in the report, should immediately take over from
UNAVEM. II. We are therefore pleased that these
recommendations are embodied in the draft resolution to be
adopted today.

Let me conclude by saying that such an expanded
United Nations presence will be able to count on the
practical support of the South African Government, which
in principle remains prepared to play a role when called
upon to do so.

