Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank the Dominican Republic for organizing this
debate on a crucial topic. Switzerland welcomes
this opportunity to discuss the nexus between
climate-related disasters and peace and security in the
Security Council. We recognize the urgent need to take
proactive steps to limit the impact of climate change on
international peace and security.

Today's open debate clearly demonstrates the
global dimension of climate change, the effects of which
differ according to the specific characteristics of each
country. Switzerland is also increasingly experiencing
the consequences of climate change. For example,
during the heat wave of 2018 in our region, shipping
on the Rhine, which is of high strategic importance to
our country's economy, was heavily hindered by high
temperatures, insufficient rainfall and, consequently,
low water levels. That interrupted import and export
trade, leaving landlocked Switzerland with limited
access to Vital goods, such as fuels. In a globalized
world economy, the acceleration of climate change will
have an increasing impact on human and economic
activities. Such developments threaten our collective
stability and security.

In order to prepare for these new challenges,
Switzerland has adopted a national strategy on
adaptation to climate change. In addition, Switzerland
has commissioned impact studies and an assessment
of existing climate change and safety measures to
implement the adaptation measures needed to protect
its population. Switzerland's concerns about the effects
of climate change on peace and security are reflected
in its international commitments. For example,
Switzerland launched the Blue Peace Initiative in 2010,
which aims to strengthen cross-border cooperation on
water resource management.
We note that climate change also affects human
security, that is, the material and immaterial security of
individuals in areas as diverse as the economy, health
and culture. In order to mitigate those effects, the focus
should be on prevention. That requires early-warning
systems to systematically identify situations in which
climate change acts as a risk multiplier, in order to
develop adequate responses.

The Security Council has an important role to
play in this context, particularly on two points. First,
the Council must systematically integrate climate
risks into the regional and country situations already
on its agenda. Secondly, the Security Council must be
able to take full advantage of the existing information
and resources available within the United Nations
system. Climate data collections, climate scenarios
and early-warning systems already exist and are being
successfully applied today. It is therefore vital to
exchange that knowledge and utilize synergies within
the United Nations, including the Security Council.
Effective coordination should be established so that the
topics of climate change and security can be adequately
tackled and addressed.

In conclusion, we must take proactive and
systematic measures, including in the Council, in order
to ensure international peace and security in a context
in which the risks of climate fragility, extreme disasters
and slow-onset hazards are increasing. Another
excellent opportunity to address climate change in the
specific context of disasters will be the Global Platform
for Disaster Risk Reduction, which will meet in May
in Geneva.

