Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary- General Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador Filho for their briefings, which set out clearly the achievements that Guinea-Bissau has made, but also some of the challenges that remain. I would also like to welcome the Foreign Minister of the Niger to the Council. As current Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Niger has a vital role to play in supporting the democratic process in Guinea-Bissau. The peaceful holding of legislative and presidential elections in 2019 were significant steps forward in Guinea-Bissau's political transition. We commend the Guinea-Bissau authorities and people on this progress, and we welcome the ongoing neutrality of Guinea-Bissau's military and security forces in the political process. We are concerned, however, by the political instability that we have seen following the election. The uncertainty that this creates risks undermining the democratic process and damaging public confidence in the electoral system. We call on all political actors to work together to resolve the situation as quickly as possible so that a new Government can be inaugurated and focus on the important work of consolidating democracy and providing development and stability for its people, as per the 2016 Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS road map. The United Kingdom appreciates the supporting role played in Guinea-Bissau by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), the Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations country team and other United Nations bodies and offices, which have helped build a more robust and inclusive political environment. We thank Ms. Sori-Coulibaly for her work and will continue to provide our full support to her in the discharge of her mandate. The United Kingdom also welcomes the key role played by ECOWAS and the group of five international partners in holding political stakeholders in Guinea- Bissau to account. We trust that they will remain as engaged and vigilant throughout the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement. Given the recent progress, the United Kingdom supports the drawdown of UNIOGBIS by December 2020, and we are confident the steps are under way to ensure a smooth transition. It is important that key tasks be handed over to United Nations agencies or other actors, such as the United Nations country team, with respect to development, and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with respect to drugs trafficking and transnational crime, and that those agencies have sufficient resources to take on the tasks. As UNIOGBIS draws down, the good offices of Mr. Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, will be increasingly important in accompanying Guinea-Bissau on the path to greater political stability. The Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund will also play a helpful role in ensuring the continuity of support for peacebuilding tasks. It is vital that political stakeholders in Guinea- Bissau continue to engage positively with the United Nations good offices and sustain their commitment to the reform agenda until the Conakry Agreement has been fully implemented. In conclusion, we hope that the political progress achieved in recent years can be maintained to carry Guinea-Bissau out of its past into a stronger, more stable and more democratic future. The primary responsibility for delivering that lies with the Bissau- Guinean Government. The United Kingdom, along with the international community, will continue to monitor the situation and work with the Government in support of that objective.
