Mrs. Mungwa: I would like to begin by
presenting the apologies of the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, His
Excellency Ambassador Tete Antonio, who has
travelled to Addis Ababa for the meetings of the
upcoming African Union summit and was therefore not
able to attend this meeting in person.

We join previous speakers in commending you,
Mr. President, for initiating consideration of the well-
focused theme of this debate, which is extremely
pertinent for Africa. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
for attending this meeting in person, and for their
pertinent remarks delivered to the Council earlier
today. Thank you also, Mr. President, for the concept
paper (S/20ll/ 16) that you provided for the guidance
of this debate, and also for the presidential statement
delivered early in the meeting today.

As a matter of high priority to Africa, post-
conflict reconstruction and development as a whole is
one of the issues addressed in a range of policy
instruments of the African Union, beginning with its
Constitutive Act and including the Protocol Relating to
the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union.

In their remarks in the debate this morning,
representatives of various African States mentioned the
African Policy Framework on Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development, which was adopted
by the Executive Council during its 7th Ordinary
Session, held in Sirte, Libya, in July 2005. We would
like to note that this was one of the very first policy
instruments adopted by the African Union, just three
years after its establishment in 2002, to indicate the
importance of the issue at the level of the African
Union. This Policy Framework details the concepts,
principles, approaches and even the benchmarks that
are concerned with the important topic of post-conflict
reconstruction and development as a whole. A
significant amount of the content is devoted to the
question of institution-rebuilding and building.

Previous speakers have mentioned the concept
paper. we are very pleased to note that the international
community has mentioned a lot of the elements
contained in the concept paper and in the African
Policy Framework to which I have referred.

I do not think that I can do justice to presenting
the Policy Framework. In the interests of time, we
would simply highly recommend that policy instrument
to members of the Council and all stakeholders.

In adopting the Policy Framework on Post-
Conflict Reconstruction and Development, the
Executive Council of the African Union indeed
addressed the need to build the institutions of the
African Union, which would then drive the task of
post-conflict reconstruction and development,
including institution-building. This included a
ministerial committee on post-conflict reconstruction
and development, to be established to provide political
support and resource mobilization for implementation
of the Policy Framework. It is also envisaged that the
ministerial committee will interface with the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission at the highest
level.

Various member States of the African Union are
also leading key efforts for post-conflict reconstruction
and development through the establishment of
institutions such as the African Centre for Study and
Research on Terrorism, based in Algiers, and through
the commendable initiative to establish an institution
for post-conflict reconstruction and development
announced by the Permanent Representative of Egypt
in his intervention in the Council today.

While building necessary continental
institutions- which I have just mentioned - to
support the task of post-conflict reconstruction and
development as a whole, the African Union has also
taken a number of concrete steps towards translating
the Policy Framework into concrete actions at the level
of concerned member States. These have included the
establishment of the Post-Conflict Reconstruction
Committee on the Sudan, as mentioned by the
Permanent Representative of South Africa in his
remarks earlier today. We seize this opportunity to
commend the outstanding leadership of South Africa
on this issue.

The African Union also maintains field offices in
a number of member States that are facing the complex
situation of having to rebuild after conflict, such as
Burundi, Chad, the Central African Republic, Cote
d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, the Sudan and Somalia, in
order to provide permanent support and to accompany
them with the arduous tasks they face in consolidating
peace and rebuilding the institutional, policy and
human development fabric that is often devastated by
conflict.

As others have today, we take this opportunity to
commend the Peacebuilding Commission for its work
on the five African countries under its consideration.
We would like to take the opportunity to re-pledge and
restate the support of the African Union and its
intention to continue working closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission. Please also allow me to
take this opportunity to recall the sentiments expressed
to the Security Council late last year by the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, regarding
Somalia in particular (see S/PV.6409).

We would also like to underscore the importance
of strengthening various institutionalized and inter-
agency frameworks of cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations for effective institution-
building and recovery in post-conflict countries in
Africa. The growing cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as frameworks such as the
recently launched African Union-United Nations Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security, will, we believe,
play a crucial role in guiding institution-rebuilding in
African countries emerging from conflict.

Furthermore, the African Union looks forward to
the implementation of the outcome of the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We are also very pleased
with the ongoing cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations regarding the
strengthening of international civilian capacities. We
also look forward to the review of the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union
that is being implemented by the Peacebuilding
Commission. We are convinced that all of these
frameworks will contribute to strengthening the entire
process of institution-building in the aftermath of
conflict.

With these brief remarks, we again welcome the
Council's consideration of today's theme, and we take
this opportunity to reiterate the African Union's
appreciation to the Security Council and United
Nations for their unwavering support for post-conflict
reconstruction and development in Africa as a whole,
among all the other areas to be focused on. The African
Union remains ever grateful and looks forward to the
continuing support of the Council on this issue,
including on a number of initiatives launched within
the context of the recently concluded Year of Peace and
Security in Africa.

