I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov; and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit; as well as the statements delivered by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Commerce of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sir Louis Straker; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia, Mr. Noureddine Erray; the Minister of State for the Middle East and North Africa of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Mr. James Cleverly; the Deputy Minister of International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, Mr. Alvin Botes; the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, Mr. Dang Minh Khoi; and by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, the Niger, the Russian Federation and the United States of America, in connection with the video teleconference on "The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question", held on Wednesday, 24 June 2020. Statements were also made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and by the representative of Israel. Pursuant to the understanding reached among the Council members for this video teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Costa Rica, Egypt, the European Union, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
