Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to highlight three very important main issues that I
have been raised during the course ofthe meeting today.

First of all, let me thank all members ofthe Council
for condemning the terrorist attacks that took place
yesterday. That reflects the Council's unanimous
support for the people of Afghanistan, particularly
those who lost their loved ones. I wish to share that the
majority of those affected were civilians.

Secondly, I refer to the issue of women. Today's
women are totally different to those of yesterday. The
situation of women in Afghanistan today cannot be
compared, at any level, with that of the past. I really
appreciate and support the statement delivered by the
Deputy Secretary-General and the work of her team.

Thirdly, I shall turn to the matter of elections. I
wish to strongly state that the Government and His
Excellency President Ashraf Ghani are committed to
organizing free and fair elections. The most important
point I would like to highlight is the violation ofwomen's
rights, on which President Ashraf Ghani has a zero-
tolerance policy. Regardless of what we have heard,
President Ashraf Ghani is personally working on this
issue at the Government level and at the national level.

I thank the Permanent Mission of Peru for
convening this briefing on the occasion of the visit of
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and her
high-level delegation to Afghanistan, in the context of
women and peace and security, as well as development.
I also welcome Ms. Jamila Afghani's participation in
this meeting via video-teleconference.

A visit ofthis kind truly underlines the commitment
of the United Nations to continuing its support and
bringing its agenda to the most relevant stakeholders:
the people on the ground. The United Nations has
always been an engaged partner for the benefit of our
country, and we are thankful that Ms. Mohammed and
her delegation chose to travel to Afghanistan at a time
when a vital process for the achievement of lasting and
comprehensive peace is taking place.
The momentum for peace continues to grow
stronger and the Government of Afghanistan is
determined to bring the decades-long conflict to an
end. As Ms. Mohammed highlighted during her visit,
however, a comprehensive settlement must have women
at the very centre ofits agenda and must recognize their
role as leaders and agents of change, willing and able
to delineate what peace means to them. Their rights
and the institutional gains of the past 18 years must
be preserved and protected. From the Government's
side, we will continue our commitment to ensuring the
inclusive role of women in peace and in development
as we move forward in our efforts towards building a
stable and self-sustaining Afghanistan.

Regarding other ongoing processes in the country,
allow me to once again reiterate the Government's
commitment to the holding of firm, transparent,
free and secure elections on 28 September, the date
selected by the Independent Election Commission
of Afghanistan. Holding these elections will assert
the will of the people of Afghanistan to reaffirm our
commitment to democracy and the rule of law in our
country. Furthermore, a joint security plan has been
finalized to ensure that the presidential elections are
held in a secure environment.

More broadly, our security forces have kept terrorist
groups from making any major gains in the country
and operating with great confidence and efficiency.
The effort will continue, prioritizing the defence of
our people and our country's territorial integrity, in
parallel with the ongoing peace negotiations. In that
regard, we reiterate our call on the Taliban to honour
its commitment to peace through deeds and not words,
particularly in the aftermath of yesterday's deadly
blasts in Kabul, which once again claimed the lives
of innocent civilians. We maintain our belief that
only a dual-track approach of pressure and incentives
can ensure a conducive environment for a successful
comprehensive agreement with the Taliban.

Despite the challenges that remain, the past 18
years have seen the emergence of a new democratic and
developing Afghanistan. Reforms in the security and
civilian sectors, as well as in the rule of governance,
have allowed us to continue with strong determination
the implementation of the Afghanistan National Peace
and Development Framework and the national priority
programmes and to follow a steady path towards
stability and self-reliance through the fight against
corruption, the empowerment of youth and women, the
promotion of economic growth and the development of
stronger and more efficient public institutions. Those
efforts, coupled with particular and tangible regional
steps within the Afghan-led platforms, the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and
the Heart ofAsia process, have allowed us to also emerge
as a catalyst for economic and regional cooperation.

Allow me to reiterate Afghanistan's gratitude
and support for the work of the United Nations in our
country. We further hope that the visit was able to
provide Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and her
delegation with valuable perspectives and input on the
importance of a thorough renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

We look forward to the discussion of that matter
in September, in the hope that the United Nations
Assistance Mission will be renewed for a period of one
year, at the minimum, and that the renewal document
will retain core priority issues for Afghanistan and
incorporate new developments, including the upcoming
elections and the peace process. The commitment of the
international community and the United Nations to the
people of Afghanistan is instrumental in protecting
and preserving the gains achieved in these years of
partnership and transformation.

In closing, allow me to once again thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and her high-level delegation
for their visit, which truly symbolizes the strong
commitment between the United Nations and the people
of Afghanistan. We look forward to continuing to work
together towards a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
