Mr. Romulo (Philippines): Mr. President, I am
very pleased to see you occupy the presidency of the
Security Council. I also wish to congratulate your
delegation on organizing an open meeting of the
Council on this important topic.

The dangers to international peace these days are
posed less by conflicts between countries and more by
the deadly web of terrorism, weapons proliferation and
the political turmoil brought about by dysfunctional or
failed States. Old paradigms of conflict management
and peace-building that were current in the era of
bipolarity and major-Power rivalries do not prove
useful anymore, since today's threats or breaches to
peace emerge more from State weakness than strength.
As experience over the last decade has shown, the
attainment of sustainable peace in countries shattered
by conflicts involves complex and multidimensional
aspects calling for harmony of the efforts of the
international community, through the United Nations.

For the Philippines, peace is an imperative. With
over 7 million Filipinos overseas in over 180 countries
and on ships passing through all the world's oceans and
straits, the stakes are higher for the Philippines.
Conflicts can and have had a direct impact on the
safety of our nationals. As a nation, conventional
notions of physical territory no longer solely define us.
Our interests lie wherever events and developments
bear upon the lives and futures of our Filipinos
overseas. As a nation and as a people, we dream of
peace in all lands and believe that the work of civilians
can help build firm foundations for peace.

The Spanish concept paper for today's debate,
emphasizing the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building, correctly builds on an
element required to face the challenge for better and
more collective efforts to address and resolve conflicts
and to build an effective peace. The principles and
doctrines of military readiness are well understood, but
often neglected are the civilian or non-military aspects
for achieving sustainable peace after these hostilities
have ceased.

Sustainable peace demands that failed States and
States recovering from debilitating conflicts develop
their Governments and build their economies and civil
society. However, without external help, this will be
impossible to achieve. International assistance is
required for these States to foster responsive,
accountable institutions of governance, such as rule of
law mechanisms, including the justice system,
administrative bureaucracies, central banks and fiscal
and financial rules and mechanisms, and to guard
against a possible relapse into conflict.

The United Nations does not lack the structural
mechanism for the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building. In fact, the United
Nations has specific expertise in the most important
areas of humanitarian assistance - conducting
elections; disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration; strengthening of rule of law
mechanisms; protection of human rights, and various
aspects of civil affairs. The problem is not so much of
capacity - even if this, also, is a genuine problem -
but the effective harnessing of such capacity to reach
the goal of stabilizing post-conflict States.

Fortunately, the horizon is far from bleak. The
United Nations has been cognizant of - and
responsive to - the strong trend towards synergistic
approaches between the military and civilian aspects of
conflict management and peace-building. As early as
1992, then-Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
had introduced the concept of post-conflict peace-
building to describe the range of civilian tasks, as it
were, in modern-day United Nations peace operations.
The United Nations mandates in Kosovo and East
Timor in the 1990s were the benchmarks on how the
nature of peacekeeping had evolved from a purely
military dimension into civil administration,
governance and even development-type tasks, or, in the
context of today's debate, the civilian aspects of
conflict management and peace-building.

Security Council mandates are now
multidimensional in character, giving significance to
human rights, economic and social factors and even
health in peace operations. These realities have also
been translated into concrete reform of the United
Nations Secretariat conflict management structures,
such as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The most recent of these reform exercises, which is
still under way, was laid out in the August 2000
Brahimi Report.

At the working level, cross-sectoral mechanisms
are now in place at United Nations Headquarters. This
welcome trend in the way various United Nations
bodies have been performing their mandate under the
Charter has contributed to an environment in which
military and civilian aspects are now seen as a
seamless whole under the rubric of conflict
management and peace-building.

While there has been a noticeable and qualitative
improvement in the comprehensive approach to - and
structures for - attaining sustainable peace in post-
conflict States, it is critical to continue to re-energize
our efforts for a more effective and coordinated
response to complex crisis situations.

On a broader level, one factor that could improve
the civilian aspects of conflict management and peace-
building is to get the United Nations committed to
peace missions for the period necessary to establish
new and effectual governmental institutions in war-
shattered States. To attain long-lasting peace in war-
ravaged States, we should assist them for as long as
necessary in establishing stable and functioning
governmental institutions. The results, and not the
contingencies of the length of a mission, would be the
prime factor for effective conflict management and
peace-building.

On a national level, Member States may wish to
revisit the White Helmets Initiative, introduced in the
United Nations General Assembly almost a decade ago
by Argentina. The White Helmets Initiative calls on
Member States to establish corps of volunteers for
humanitarian relief operations who may be deployed to
other countries in need of such assistance, in
coordination with the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. They are largely
self-financed and/or supported by contributions and
thus are not a burden to the limited United Nations
budget or the official accounts of Member States.

This and similar voluntary endeavours and
programmes, such as the United Nations Volunteers,
are able to harness the noble spirit of volunteerism
which fortunately continues to pervade much of our
citizenry and civil society.

I began by emphasizing how important
international peace is to a country that has more than
one-tenth of its population in other lands. I have
discussed our thoughts and our support for the theme
of our debate and the specific ideas and mechanisms
that will ensure a meaningful role for civilians in
peace-building.

Our interest in this theme goes beyond our desire
to ensure the safety of our nationals overseas. Our
interest in this theme is also driven by the fact that the
very nationals whose safety would be ensured by
genuine peace are themselves deeply and meaningfully
involved in building peace. Many of our nationals are
directly involved in peace-building around the world
through international organizations and non-
government organizations. Some work on behalf of our
Government, providing assistance to civilian
authorities in post-conflict areas in the fields of
governance, electoral process, judicial administration
and the training of civilian police.

But many more, as migrant workers, are helping
build the peace. They are the medical personnel who
tend to the sick and wounded in post-conflict and even
in conflict areas. They are the engineers who help build
roads that link villages and tribes who are now at
peace. They are the pilots and loadmasters who help
bring sustenance to areas starved by war. They are the
teachers who help foster knowledge, openness and
tolerance. They are the field workers who help manage
the natural resources that were once the cause of
conflict. Though they are migrant and contract workers
earning a living far from their land and loved ones,
they often play significant roles in building peace,
unheralded and sometimes at grave risk to themselves.

The quest for international peace and security is a
multifaceted challenge. Peace requires a
comprehensive, concerted and determined approach
that addresses the root causes of conflicts, including
their economic and social dimensions. To the extent
that the goal of peace is indivisible, the approaches and
efforts at achieving it must be holistic, well planned
and well coordinated.

The strategy in responding to threats to and
breaches of the peace requires the effective and
efficient harnessing and use of all resources of the
United Nations. It demands interdependence,
cooperation and coordination among United Nations
organs and agencies whose mandates impact the
attainment of sustainable peace. It often also demands
sacrifice.

