Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
thank Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
comprehensive briefing. Let me also commend him for
his management of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) in
difficult times, particularly during the attacks by
opposition groups in May.

Austria strongly condemns the renewed
escalation of violence. This was the fourth major
incursion by Chadian armed opposition groups
crossing the border from the Sudan. This has again led
to a temporary deterioration of the security situation in
eastern Chad. We are also concerned about reports that
recruitment by the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) and others - both voluntary and involuntary -
is on the rise in refugee camps. A political solution
remains the only viable one. Progress needs to be
achieved at all levels with the armed opposition and the
political opposition and with regard to relations
between Chad and the Sudan.

Concerning the internal political dialogue
between the Government of Chad and the political
opposition, Austria welcomes the significant progress
that has been made in implementation of the 13 August
agreement. The establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission now opens the way
for elections, which we hope will be held in June 2010.
We believe that the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
could play a supporting role in the election process,
which therefore should be considered positively if
requested by the Government of Chad. Austria also
welcomes MINURCAT's activities in resolving
localized conflicts in eastern Chad.

Efforts are also needed to bring the armed groups
back into the democratic process. Three groups signed
a peace deal with the Chadian Government in Tripoli
last weekend. That shows that the Sirte process
remains open. We hope that progress can be made in
bringing the main rebel group, the Union des forces de
la resistance, to the negotiation table. We would like to
commend the efforts of the Government of Libya in
that regard. It will be very important to keep the
implementation of those agreements on track.

We are deeply concerned about the continuation
of severely strained relations between the Sudan and
Chad. The signing of an agreement in Doha on 3 May
provided us with a glimmer of hope. However, the
subsequent incursion of armed groups across the
border has once again shown how tense and
unpredictable the security situation between the two
countries is. Joint border monitoring by Chadian and
Sudanese forces has been suggested on several
occasions. Austria thinks that that is an interesting
proposal, and we would be interested in the opinion of
the Special Representative on that issue.

Relations between the Sudan and Chad have a
direct impact on all developments in the region. All
regional and international actors should use their
influence to achieve an improvement of the situation.
We therefore also welcome the fact that the issue of the
improvement of overall peace and security in the
region is now a benchmark by which to measure
progress in the implementation of MINURCAT's
mandate.

Austria would also like to underline the
importance of MINURCAT's monitoring of the human
rights situation in eastern Chad. We are concerned
about increasing reports of attacks on humanitarian
personnel, sexual violence and child abductions from
internally displaced persons (IDP) camps. Efforts
should be made to prevent demobilized children from
being recruited once again by rebel groups. All parties
to the conflict should act in compliance with their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights laws.

On IDPs, the facilitation of voluntary return and
resettlement in secure and sustainable conditions
constitutes a core part of MINURCAT's mandate. We
understand that such returns have repeatedly hit
obstacles or are difficult to measure because of
migratory habits. Due to the volatile security situation,
challenges to creating an environment conducive to
returns remain. Furthermore, alternatives to return and
resettlement need to be identified. We hope that those
further aspects will be incorporated into the first
benchmark.

Austria welcomes the training and deployment of
police officers of the Detachement inte'gre de securite
(DIS) in eastern Chad, which has contributed to
enhancing security in refugee camps and key towns.
We acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the Chadian
authorities to deal with recent cases of ill discipline,
and look forward to the upcoming comprehensive
assessment of DIS.

We continue to believe that Chad has a key
significance for the stability of the entire region. As is
known, Austria is engaged in MINURCAT with some
130 troops. An Austrian national, Ambassador Georg
Lennkh, is the Special Representative of the European
Union Presidency for the Political Dialogue in Chad.
Austria highly appreciates all efforts undertaken by
MINURCAT and the United Nations country team, and
welcomes the benchmarks and timelines for progress
elaborated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/359).

