Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): I thank the Secretary-
General for the report concerning the situation in Liberia
contained in the document S/ 1996/ 147.

Let me also express my delegation's appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for initiating this orientation meeting on
Liberia, which is providing a useful opportunity to
exchange views on the subject and to acquire new
information. We are glad to see His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Liberia among us, and we welcome his
determination to succeed in the rapid achievement of peace
in his country. We are also grateful to Ambassador Albright
for her reflections on her Visit to Liberia and on the most
recent developments in the conflict area.

It is with great interest that we have acquainted
ourselves with the report before us, especially since it is
focused on the period in which the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) was fulfilling its adjusted
mandate in conformity with Security Council
resolution 1020 (1995) of 10 November 1995.

This resolution also serves as a valid point of
reference in our debate today, since in its prearnbular part
the Security Council notes some positive trends in the
development of the situation, such as the progress towards
a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Liberia and the
determination of the parties involved to maintain peace and
stability within the State.

Unfortunately, the fifteenth progress report of the
Secretary-General on UNOMIL does not confirm that those
processes have been lasting ones. Our delegation remains
particularly concerned by breaches of the cease-fire
agreement: the Tubmanburg incident, as a result of which
16 Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) members lost their lives, is
a most serious violation of the Abuja Agreement of
19 August 1995. It is regrettable that it has been followed
by other cease-fire violations and by other assaults on
ECOMOG centres and personnel.

It is evident that the Tubmanburg event contributed
to an escalation of tensions throughout the country: it
undermined confidence between the political and the
armed groups, and by increasing the military threat
caused significant delay in the planned deployment of
ECOMOG and UNOMIL. It also adversely affected the
humanitarian situation for the population. As a result of
the incident, the confidence of the international
community in the lasting character and momentum of the
peace process in Liberia has been seriously weakened.

The Polish delegation welcomes the activities
undertaken by the Liberian National Transitional
Government, the Chairman of the Economic Community
of West African States and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Liberia to defuse the incident
and to ensure the prompt release of the civilians and
ECOMOG soldiers who have been detained. We express
our sincere hope that these activities will alleviate the
situation in the region, and will have a positive effect on
the overall situation in Liberia.

We would also like to refer to those parts of the
report which allow us some hope that the political process
in Liberia will go forward despite the delays. Specifically,
we attach great importance to the existing political
dialogue. The importance of that dialogue can hardly be
overestimated.

Humanitarian assistance is being provided and it is
expanding into areas that have been inaccessible so far.
We wish to underline the role of the United Nations
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Office in this
respect.

The voluntary repatriation of refugees is a significant
factor in providing fresh impetus for the renewed
cultivation of abandoned land.

We also welcome the latest phase of consultations
concerning the programme of disarmament and
demobilization of combatants.

Let me state clearly that the present moment appears
crucial for the future of the peace process in Liberia. The
major responsibility for developments in the country lies
with the political parties, and a successful defusing of the
crisis that has arisen after the Tubmanburg incident and
the further implementation of the Abuja agreement

 

depend, ultimately, on their political will. Similarly, we can
say that the fate of their country is contingent upon their
degree of maturity and responsibility.

I should also like to stress the importance of continued
action by regional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Organization of
African Unity, both of which are already deeply involved
in the peace process in Liberia.

Let me also emphasize the fact that the region's ability
to fulfil its important mission in the conflict area depends
also on material and logistic support that is to be provided
by the international community. We should spare no effort
to enhance the peace process in Liberia.

We should also rest secure in the conviction that,
thanks to the sincere will of the warring parties, the
international community's involvement and contribution
will not be in vain.

