Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing. I am also grateful
to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeic', First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku for
their briefings.

I am pleased to underline that the overall
security situation in Kosovo during the reporting
period remained stable and that Kosovo's institutions
managed to maintain a peaceful environment in a
complex political landscape. We also witnessed some
progress in the normalization of the relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, due to the continuous efforts
of the European Union (EU) to intensify the political
dialogue between the parties. That means that despite
a number of existing challenges, Belgrade and Pristina
are moving in the right direction and taking important
steps to strengthen peace and stability in the region.

It also proves that we need to resume discussions on
the role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the current
circumstances and on actions by the Security Council
that are needed to advance political dialogue, achieve
long-due reconciliation and rebuild trust between
communities. In the light of the general trend at
present, Ukraine supports the idea of extending the
reporting period to six months or even longer, as well
as considering potential options for downsizing the
structure, size and tasks of UNMIK. We are sure that
United Nations resources thus freed up could be put to
better use elsewhere.

We are confident that present challenges could be
successfully met within the EU integration process
through the active involvement of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the International
Security Force in Kosovo and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. With that in
mind, we think it is the right time to conduct a review
of UNMIK in order to provide the Council with options
on how to improve the Mission's efficiency.

We welcome the latest statements by President
Vucie on beginning a new phase of internal dialogue,
the outcome of which would define the relations
between Serbia and Kosovo. We hope that that step
will be translated into actions, leading to the complete
normalization of relations. Ukraine commends the
readiness of the sides to intensify efforts to implement
existing agreements.

In our View, fulfilment of the agreement on the
establishment of the Association of Serb-majority
municipalities, the agreement on the freedom of
movement across Mitrovica and the agreement on
energy should be among the top priorities. We highly
value the role of the EU in the process of normalizing
relations and its assistance in implementing the
European reform agenda. Despite some problems in the
latter area during the reporting period, we welcome the
informal consultations at the highest level conducted
here in New York and in Brussels. Continued efforts
in the direction of full implementation of the judiciary
agreement also deserve our attention.

Next month, Ukraine finishes its term as an
elected member of the Council, and this is likely to
be our final statement on this issue. I would like to
take this opportunity to once again underline that
Ukraine remains fully committed to the normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina and the
intensification of cooperation between them on the path
towards European integration, which is the real key to
their long-term stability.

