Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like, first of all, to welcome you, Sir,
and to say how pleased our delegation is to see you
presiding over the work of the Security Council for the
month of September, and to express our esteem for you. At
the same time, I should like to express my thanks to the
delegation of Indonesia for the work they did on behalf of
us all during the month of August.

The continued complaints regarding the acquisition of
illegal arms by some members and the militia of the former
Rwandan Government in neighbouring territories, as well
as their military training, armed infiltration and acts of
sabotage, all aimed at destabilizing Rwanda, have made it
vital that the Council establish an International Commission
of Inquiry in order to clarify the situation and recommend
measures to put an end to these illegal actions.

The Secretary-General, following his recent visit to the
region, informed us that the leaders he had interviewed
were aware that the instability of any State of the region
would have repercussions beyond its borders, that is, on its
neighbours. For that reason, we hope that the work of the
Commission will receive the total and constant support of
the Governments involved. Without that support, it might
not only be seriously hampered in its task, but the task
itself might be reduced to a mere academic exercise.

We see with great appreciation that the Government
of Zaire has already expressed both its support for the
Commission and its clear readiness to cooperate with it.
We hope that the other Governments of the region will
also respond positively, and that the Commission will be
able to begin its work as soon as possible; and that it will
be able, with the cooperation of all, to submit its
conclusions and recommendations to us within the time-
frame proposed by the Council.

This Commission constitutes another instrument to
deal with the burning subject of refugees in the region. Its
action will be extremely important in seeking to restore
confidence and putting an end to the many suspicions and
deep resentments that persist. This will help attain the
ultimate objective, which is that the great mass of
refugees in the region will be able to return voluntarily to
their places of origin. This will be accomplished only
when the population recovers a minimal sense of security,
when it sees that justice does indeed exist, and that
peaceful coexistence, with tolerance among different
ethnic groups, is possible.

We trust that the international community will
respond generously with the necessary resources, both
financial and other, to the cooperative efforts of the
countries of the region, which should be supported and
sponsored by this, our Organization.

