Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. My delegation would also like
to express its appreciation for your outstanding and
substantial contributions to the maintenance of
international and regional peace and security, as well
as your principled and fair positions during the
Council's consultations on all important regional and
international issues. In addition, through you, I would
like to express by gratitude to Mr. Herve' Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for the briefing he has just given us, in which he
presented the main elements of the periodic report
(S/20ll/74l) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
In its political section, the report before us
emphasizes that progress has been made in the
implementation of the Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area, which was signed on 20 June.
However, in paragraph 9, the report highlights an
important fact, namely, that progress towards the
establishment of Abyei's administrative bodies has
been delayed considerably due to continuing
reservations on the part of the Government of South
Sudan in connection with all the recommendations
made by the Government of the Sudan with regard to
the selection and appointment of the members of those
bodies. That is the main reason for the delay. However,
this is not motivated merely by who has been
nominated; rather, there is an underlying motive to
obstruct the establishment of those bodies - in spite of
the fact that we pledged before the Council to set them
up and have abided by that pledge in order to achieve
security and stability in Abyei. This is an important
aspect to which we expect the Council to give
appropriate attention, bearing in mind the refusal of the
Government of South Sudan to cooperate in that
matter.

As the Council will have noted, the Government
of South Sudan has gone beyond creating obstacles and
fabricating crises. As we have reported to the Council
in several communications, the Government of South
Sudan is now involved in a dangerous attempt to
escalate the situation in the govemorates of Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile by providing direct financial
and military support, including weapons, to the popular
movement in those governorates. The situation has
even reached the point where the Government of South
Sudan has sponsored the establishment of the so-called
Revolutionary Front, following meetings hosted in the
Southern Sudan cities of Yei and Juba under the
leadership of Darfur rebel movements working
alongside the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North. That coalition issued a public declaration
announcing its goal of toppling the Government of the
Sudan through armed action. We are fully aware that
many influential parties and countries on the Council
have sufficient evidence to prove the involvement of
the Government of South Sudan in supporting that
rebellion. Has not the time come for the Council to
issue a strong message, given that the maintenance of
11-62803
international stability and security is at the heart of its
mandate?

All of this has been taking place while the
Government of the Sudan has continued to maintain its
firm position, repeatedly reiterating its choice of
dialogue as the sole option for resolving all the
pending issues between the Republic of the Sudan and
the Republic of South Sudan. That continues to be our
position. We also stress the need to develop relations of
cooperation and integration between our two countries,
rather than engaging in hostile acts and arguments.

The Government of the Sudan continues to show
its good intentions aimed at maintaining excellent ties
with South Sudan, reflecting the fraternal relations
between our countries. The most vivid example of that
is the fact that, since the independence of South Sudan,
we have continued to allow the export of oil through
our territory and ports, without demanding any
payment. Everyone is aware that international law
guarantees the right of the Government of the Sudan to
impose transport, transit and storage fees in that
regard. However, we have not raised this issue and
have facilitated exports since 9 July. Is that not proof
of the good intentions of the Republic of the Sudan and
its desire to establish excellent ties with South Sudan?
What have we gained in return for that? Our
recompense was the exporting of rebellion and
weapons and an attack on the territorial integrity of our
country.

The aggression and violations committed by the
Government of South Sudan have not ceased. I
mentioned the most recent of those in my statement
yesterday afternoon, namely, the treacherous act of
military aggression perpetrated by the armed forces of
the Government of South Sudan inside Sudanese
territory, namely, in the area of Jawa, which is near
Lake Abyad in Southern Kordofan governorate.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for circulating our
complaint among the members of the Council. We hope
that the Security Council will look into this and the
series of previous complaints that we have submitted to
the Council, providing a detailed record and
indisputable evidence of the involvement of the
Government of South Sudan in efforts to violate
Sudanese territory and undermine peace and stability in
the Sudan, especially in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states.
11-62803
We also hope that the Council will assume its
natural role and responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations by sending a strong and urgent
message to the Government of South Sudan that it must
immediately cease all actions that could undermine
stability and security and do not serve the aspirations
of the peoples of the two countries to live in peace and

stability.

In truth, in order to establish, build and maintain
peace, we need the good offices of the Security
Council. The entire operation is now focused only on
peacekeeping. However, efforts to make and build
peace require strong messages to be sent to those who
have committed wrongs and violations; they should not
enjoy impunity, for that would lead to instability. I trust
that everybody here knows who is at fault.

The report before the Council affirms in section
VI, pertaining to the status of the deployment of
UNISFA, indicates that approximately 3,000 troops
have been deployed out of the overall authorized
number of 4,200 troops. That means that 68 per cent of
UNISFA's troops have been deployed five months after
the issuance of the mission's mandate. Undoubtedly, as
stated in the report, the record speed for deployment
could not have been possible without the cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan and its desire to
facilitate the task of UNISFA.

In line with that commitment, we have come a
long way in our ongoing negotiations with the United
Nations towards signing a status of forces agreement.
We anticipate fulfilling the requirements of
deployment, including of the civilian component, very
soon. In the same spirit, we have dealt with all visa
requests submitted through the special UNISFA liaison
office in Khartoum.

In closing, with regard to expanding the mandate
of UNISFA to include support for the Border
Monitoring Support Mechanism between the Republics
of the Sudan and South Sudan, we have examined the
relevant draft document that was submitted to the
Security Council. On that basis, we would like to
remind the Council and the members of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations that the original terms of
reference for the new mandate should be the agreement
signed between the Government of the Sudan and the
Government of South Sudan on 30 July in Addis
Ababa. That agreement stipulates in paragraphs 4, 5, 6,
7 and 8 the nature and quality of support that the two
parties have requested of the United Nations by virtue
of that agreement regarding the mission's tasks and
capabilities relevant to border monitoring support
between the two countries.

We hope that the Government of South Sudan
will reconsider its erroneous positions, immediately
halt its flagrant violations, come to its senses and grasp
the importance of positive engagement with the
Government of the Sudan in a constructive dialogue,
resolve all outstanding issues and create more space to
build civilized, neighbourly ties that would serve the
interests of the two States and the two fraternal
peoples. I say "fraternal peoples", because that is my
true feeling. It is also the genuine feeling of my
Government. I said as much here when the
independence of the State of South Sudan was
declared. It is our hope that the other party shares our
sentiments.

