Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for the
initiative to hold this important meeting. This is part of
the momentum we see at the international level and the
efforts being made by a number of parties that seek to
counter terrorism.

Syria was the first to denounce this terrorism, even
before others, after long delay, saw the danger it posed.
We have sought to address it and counter it before it
could spread. We were also the first to confront it on
the ground.

Terrorist acts by foreign fighters who fight the
wars of others, especially in Syria, are a violation of
the age-old tolerance of the Syrian people. Such acts
by terrorists run amok target infrastructure, civilians
and their means of survival, armed forces, schools,
hospitals, mosques, churches, historical monuments,
workplaces and homes. They have also attacked
diplomatic missions, humanitarian workers and
humanitarian convoys.

Those crimes could not have taken place without
the support that foreign terrorist groups receive
from certain Governments that are members of our
international Organization. Those countries provide
media and diplomatic cover, training, financing and
safe haven. Airports today serve as places of reception
for such criminals, who are sent from those countries
into Syrian territory and who also come across their
borders.

In a letter from my Government dated 28 August
and addressed to the Secretary-General and to
the President of the Security Council, my country
welcomed resolution 2178 (2014), concerning the fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and all persons and entities linked to Al-Qaida and ISIL
operating in Iraq and Syria, while always respecting
national sovereignty and international law. We adopted
that position because that resolution was perfectly in
line with Syria's position with regard to terrorism in all
its forms. We also pointed to our willingness to combat
terrorism through a regional or international coalition,
supported internationally, or through agreements or
bilateral cooperation. We are combating the terrorist
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and the Al-Nusra Front, as well as other terrorist groups
that the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities has not cited in its list because
of opposition from a number of countries. For example,
Islamic Front is not on that list.

Syria is firmly pursuing this war against
terrorism in all its forms, in which we have been
engaged for a number of years, and we support any
sincere international effort to combat terrorism in all
its form and in all its names. But this must be done
while respecting the lives of innocent civilians, while
respecting national sovereignty and in accordance with
international law. We affirm here that the participation
of Israel in the coalition against Daesh undermines the
credibility of the coalition, does the fact that Israel shot
down a Syrian plane that was only doing its national
duty in bombing Daesh and Al-Nusra sites. These are
groups that attacked the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force and kidnapped its personnel. Those
acts show the alliance between Israel and terrorist
organizations attached to Al-Qaida and other terrorist
groups.

We believe that the United Nations is the main forum
for bolstering efforts aimed at combating terrorism
in order to ensure international peace and security.
Success in our efforts against terrorism requires that we
distance ourselves from anything that can undermine
the credibility of the role of the United Nations, such
as politicization of this struggle by finding pretexts
for committing terrorist acts and dividing terrorists
into good terrorists and bad terrorists, distinguishing
moderate terrorism from extremist terrorism. Terrorism
is terrorism. In this struggle against terrorism we cannot
conceive of a coalition that includes the countries that
are the primary supporters of terrorism and terrorists,
that provide them with refuge and money. Some
countries - Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia - have
been the main ports of call for terrorists going to Iraq
and Syria.

My country reaffirms its support for resolution
2178 (2014), adopted today by the Council. We also
stress that military strikes will not achieve their goals
against terrorism unless they are carried out in respect
for international law and in coordination with the
countries concerned. Measures must be taken to get
countries that are supporting international terrorism to
stop those practices, which threaten international peace
and security.
