Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation is pleased to be able to speak in
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan.

I should like to begin by saying that Costa Rica gives
its unqualified support to the efforts of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan to achieve a peaceful
negotiated solution to the conflict afflicting that country.

In particular, my delegation supports the efforts of
Mr. Holl, the Head of the Special Mission, to begin direct
high-level talks between the various parties to the conflict
by means of a political meeting. My delegation urges the
parties, the Supreme Council for the Defence of
Afghanistan and the Taliban, to participate in them
actively and in good faith. My delegation is pleased by
reports that the three leaders of the factions of the
Supreme Council - General Dostum, Commander
Massoud and Mr. Khalili - are willing to take part
personally in the talks. Costa Rica urges the political
leader of the Taliban, Mr. Mullah Rabbani, to participate
personally in the meeting.

Costa Rica realizes that it is necessary to promote
negotiations among the parties to the conflict, and
considers that the sponsorship of the United Nations is
indispensable in that regard, as is the friendly pressure of
the States that have influence over them. Either by means
of a group of friendly countries or by means of an
international conference, it is necessary to focus the
pressure of the international community on the parties to
the conflict to lead them to accept a peaceful negotiated
solution to the conflict. This might be a way to enable
Afghanistan to return to the path of peace, respect for
human rights and democracy. This would put an end to
the constant frustrations that have to date characterized
the situation in Afghanistan.

My delegation would also like to reiterate the
obligation of the parties to the conflict to respect
international humanitarian law customarily applied to
internal armed conflicts and to respect the human rights
of civilians in areas under military control. The human
rights of women and children are of particular concern for
Costa Rica. They deserve preferential treatment, and any
acts of discrimination against them, such as those that
have been reported, deserve the unanimous condemnation
of the international community. In this connection, the
parties to the conflict must be aware that as long as they
continue to perpetrate such acts, they will be politically
rejected by the international community.

My delegation would also like to express its concern
about the situation of refugees and displaced persons. In
this connection, we appreciate the humanitarian work of
the United Nations agencies, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other non-governmental
organizations. My delegation must express its concern
about the activities of some of the parties to the conflict,
which are undermining the activities of those

 

organizations by impeding their work or detaining their
staff.

Costa Rica is also deeply concerned about the transfer
of arms and explosive materials, both to Afghanistan and
through it to third States. In this connection, my delegation
appeals to States that have influence on the parties to halt
this flow of arms and to stress to them the need to reach a
peaceful solution. Costa Rica is also concerned about the
transfer of drugs, as well as of artistic and cultural treasures
that are the patrimony not only of the Afghan people but of
humanity out of the territory of Afghanistan in order to
finance military efforts. This trade is not only illegal but
immoral.

