Mr. Lovald (Norway): At the outset, I, too,
would like to associate myself with remarks made by
other delegations over the very tragic loss of life in
Grozny following an act of terrorism.

Allow me first, on behalf of the Government of
Norway, to express our support for the Government of
Timor-Leste, which has made significant achievements
in the reconstruction, development and creation of a
new nation.

We welcome the report of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor. The United Nations
has played a crucial role in the extraordinary political
progress made by a newly independent, post-conflict
Timor-Leste. However, we must not risk setbacks as a
result of premature exit and we need a continued, but
modified international presence, as suggested by the
Secretary-General, to consolidate the achievements
made.

One achievement Norway would like to highlight
today is that the role of women has been enhanced in
Timor-Leste. According to a report from the Inter-
Parliamentary Union, Timor-Leste is number 22 on the
ranking of countries with the highest percentage of
women in national parliaments. It is fair to say that the
work of the United Nations and of the Government to
promote gender equality in Timor-Leste has been
impressive.

Norway has followed the process of prosecution
and trial of those accused of serious crimes and calls
for a continued fight against impunity. Furthermore, we
are pleased with the work of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and we look
forward to its final report, to be presented later this
year

In addition to United Nations assistance, bilateral
development assistance will also be critical in the years
to come. The overall goals for Norwegian support to
Timor-Leste are to assist the new State in its efforts to
establish sustainable democratic institutions, to
promote human rights and to combat poverty through
development of a sustainable national economy.
Norway remains a firm supporter of Timor-Leste and
will attend the donors meeting in Dili from 17 to 19
May.

Lastly, Norway would like to express its gratitude
to Kamalesh Sharma, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his tireless efforts in fulfilling
his tasks in Timor-Leste. The contribution of the
Special Representative and that of the men and women
serving with him have been nothing less than
outstanding, and we commend them for the progress
made.

