Mr. Siddiq (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure, as we enter a new Hijri year
and look forward to a new Gregorian year, to greet all
the peace-loving peoples and States of the world. I also
wish to congratulate the President for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
for organizing this meeting on the Sudan at this critical
and important time.

I also wish to assure the Council that we
appreciate, understand and commend the role of the
United States of America and other international
partners in helping the parties to the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). It is our hope
that their role will continue to be constructive and
positive, which will help us face and overcome the
challenges of the final phase of the CPA and lead to
permanent peace and stability in my country. I wish to
assure the Council of the commitment of the
Government of the Sudan to implementing its

obligations, including the referendum on self-
determination for Southern Sudan and the reaching of a
final settlement on Abyei, in the hope that we will hold
a referendum on Abyei as well. It is also our hope that
our deliberations today will narrow the differences and
viewpoints and that a settlement will be reached on all
other pending issues.

Through the periodic reports submitted by the
Government of the Sudan on the implementation of the
CPA over the past five years, as well as the reports of
the Secretary-General and the Assessment and
Evaluation Commission, the Council has seen how far
we have come and what we have achieved via the
mechanisms established by the CPA. We have shown
our commitment to implementing all the provisions of
the Agreement and to fulfilling its main objective of
peace, which is why we now seek effective and
sustainable solutions to all pending issues so that the
brotherly relations that should obtain between the two
parties after the end of the referendum, regardless of its
results, shall come to pass.

It is worth noting that the Council has no doubt
followed the referendum voter registration process and
seen that it take place in a very smooth and transparent
manner in the Sudan and in many countries of the
diaspora. We will provide the Council with the final
status of registration after the Referendum Commission
completes its evaluation. The ease with which the
registration took place, despite some violations here
and there, should prove the commitment of the parties
to conducting the referendum and respecting its results.

I am delighted to say that the support and
assistance that the Referendum Commission received
during the voter registration process will continue. We
wish to assure the Council that our financial support
for the Commission will not stop and that financing
will not be an obstacle to the holding of the
referendum. I wish to assure the Council that visas
have been approved by the Commission and that the
information just provided by Mr. Alain Le Roy should
be updated.

As a cardinal pillar of the CPA and one to which
we are committed, the referendum should not be
considered to be an end in itself; rather, it is a means
that should lead us to sustainable peace, stability and
security. We are eager to see continued and intensified
negotiations between the parties so that we can realize
that objective.

As the Council knows, and as has been said
before, the settlement of the issue ofAbyei is foremost
among the pending issues, and we are intensifying our
efforts with our partners, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM), to reach a settlement acceptable to
the parties that will take into consideration the
essential issues of citizenship and peaceful coexistence
among the tribes of the region. It goes without saying
that the settlement will not simply draw land borders or
allocate wealth and resources. It will be a settlement
between two of the major ethnic groups in the region,
the Misseriya and Dinka Ngok tribes. The region has
been a bridge connecting the North and South of the
country throughout history through such coexistence
and interaction between the tribes. That is why we
must adopt a comprehensive approach in addressing it,
apply wise practices and think positively in order to
achieve lasting peace and stability.

The Council might be aware of the fact that two
high-level meetings have been held in the past few
weeks between the partners at the level of the President
of the Republic and the first Vice-President, with the
participation and support of former President Thabo
Mbeki, Chairman of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel. Despite all these meetings, we
have not yet reached a final solution that would
ultimately satisfy the people of the region.

However, we must note the danger of any of the
parties taking unilateral measures or decisions with
respect to this conflict, as that could push the situation
into an explosive confrontation, which none of us wish
for. While we commend the Security Council, the
European Union, the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development and the African Union for closely
following the case of Abyei, we call on each and every
one to pursue their efforts to reach a satisfactory
settlement through negotiations. The high-level
negotiations between the two parties are our main
guarantee that this region will not become a battlefield
or an area of future confrontation.

Our emphasis on settling the pre-referendum
issues, such as Abyei, border demarcation and the total
withdrawal of SPLM. forces south of the 1956 borders,
has not distracted us from dealing with post-
referendum issues such as wealth, citizenship, security,
water, foreign debt and assets, and international
agreements and instruments.

As the Council is aware, since last year we have
engaged in workshops and meetings with our partners,
the most recent of which was held in Juba on
13 December. I personally attended that meeting. These
meetings will be resumed in Khartoum on
18 December in order to resolve all the issues that the
two parties have identified as priorities to be settled
before the referendum.

We will also continue to consider the remaining
issues in order to settle them before the end of the
transitional period on 8 July 2011. At these meetings,
we have discussed several issues in detail and made
several proposals aimed at resolving these issues. We
have also continued our efforts with our partners in the
SPLM. to achieve final settlements. We do so based on
our belief in the inevitability of integration between the
North and the South, regardless of whether there is
unity or secession.

We note our agreement of 15 November
regarding the framework agreement reached under the
commendable mediation of the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel, headed by Mr. Thabo
Mbeki. The salient feature of that agreement is to
ensure that there is no return to war but that other
strategic options are adopted to strengthen confidence
and lay a solid foundation for optimal relations
between the North and the South, as determined by the
common factors that bring them together irrespective
of the result of the referendum. Mr. Le Roy's
comments regarding the protection of the oil-producing
areas by joint units indicate that we are indeed moving
in the right direction.

We firmly believe that the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is the primary responsibility of the two
parties. However, given the importance and delicacy of
the current stage of negotiations and the complicated,
interrelated and cross-cutting nature of the issues, a
role must be played by influential countries, the
international partners and the international community,
in particular the Security Council, in order to build
confidence between the parties and not sow seeds of
suspicion and doubt between them.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement was indeed
a historic achievement. It was not an easy achievement,
and we should not squander it today in its final stages
of implementation. We recall the difficult negotiations
and the patience, dedication and wisdom that led us to
accept the right of the people of Southern Sudan to
self-determination. We sacrificed so much for the
Agreement, and it is therefore incumbent on us to
preserve it as an achievement of which we are proud,
as it put an end to war and conflict between the people
of my country. In addition, we must seek to fulfil all
the provisions of the Agreement in a way that will
realize its main objectives.

Regarding the situation in Darfur, 1 would like to
assure the Council that the Government of the Sudan,
which considers a comprehensive political settlement
to be its main strategic objective, continues to insist on
continuing the negotiating process in order to achieve
peace and stability for all parties. The Council has
followed the position of the Government throughout all
the negotiating rounds taking place in Doha, Qatar. At
this time and in this Chamber, we wish to express our
deep gratitude to Qatar and to commend the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Mr. Djibrill Bassole. We hope that, during this
month, we will reach a comprehensive framework
agreement for peace in Darfur that will be open for
signature to all the other movements when they accept
peace and renounce war. We also thank all the
countries of the region that have supported that
mediation effort.

We hope that the Security Council will take more
robust and firm action against the leaders of some of
the rebel movements that continue to espouse the
military option and to reject the political settlement,
especially as set out in resolution 1679 (2006), in
which the Council affirmed its willingness to take firm
and effective measures against all those who work to
obstruct peace. Four years have passed since the
adoption of that resolution, and the Council has yet to
send a strong message to those who refuse to renounce
war and join the peace process in Doha. We heard just
now, in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/28),
encouraging signals that we hope will be a step in the
right direction.

We must note that the security situation in Darfur
has seen noticeable progress in terms of stability,
security and the humanitarian aspect, despite some
violations and irresponsible military actions, the
abduction of and attacks against humanitarian workers
and some members of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). These
robberies and provocative, disruptive acts have forced
the Sudanese Armed Forces to intervene to put an end
to some of these violations, which targeted innocent
civilians and imposed fines on them.

We must also note that some rebel movements
recently moved some of their forces to Southern
Sudan. We have informed our partners of this and are
ready to work together to ensure that such acts are
stopped so that the relationship between the parties will
not be affected.

Despite all that, the humanitarian situation is
considerably stable. We are cooperating fully with our
brothers from specialized United Nations programmes
and agencies in order to deliver assistance to those who
need it in Darfur.

In that context, we must also refer to the
coordination between the Government of the Sudan
and UNAMID, undertaken through the Tripartite
Mechanism, which includes the Government of the
Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union. That
coordination has led to improvements in the
deployment of UNAMID which, although it has not
reached its full capacity, has greatly improved the
security situation, facilitated the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and served to reassure those
civilians who opted to return to their homes through
voluntary repatriation programmes.

As part of those efforts to strengthen security,
stability and development in Darfur, on 16 September,
the Government adopted a comprehensive integrated
strategy for peace and stability in Darfur, of which the
Council was duly informed. We are working to
implement it in coordination with UNAMID,
international partners and the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel. The strategy represents a
parallel national effort that is intended to complement,
not replace, the Doha forum. One of its goals is to
achieve a comprehensive political settlement and to
strengthen security through preventive measures in
coordination with UNAMID. It also aims to implement
short- and long-term development projects to lay the
necessary groundwork for displaced persons to
voluntarily return to their homes and resume normal
lives. The strategy places priority on providing justice
and combating impunity in Darfur through all possible
forums and mechanisms, including national
reconciliation and compensation.

Another goal of the strategy is to restructure
humanitarian operations, given that humanitarian relief
is a temporary solution and should not constitute a

final settlement or become a way of life. The State has
provided large sums of money to support the strategy
in order to develop the infrastructure of Darfur. Those
resources will serve encourage donors and attract
regional and international support to realize the
strategy's goals.

Before I conclude, allow me to mention that the
Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement is steadily moving
forward. In that regard, we must commend the State of
Kuwait, which recently hosted a conference on the
reconstruction of Eastern Sudan, as well as the
countries and organizations that participated. We also
wish to thank all the donors that made pledges that
exceeded $3 billion to support construction projects in
Eastern Sudan. This is a model of regional, bilateral
and international cooperation that should be adopted in
similar situations.

I wish to reiterate my gratitude for the initiative
to convene this meeting. I hope that our deliberations
today will help both parties to address the pending
issues in a peaceful and seamless manner that satisfies
the requirements for peaceful coexistence, integration
and communication between Northern and Southern
Sudan, whether the choice is made for unity or
secession.

