Mr. Churkin (Russia) (spoke in Russian): We
would like to thank Mr. Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-Genral, for presenting the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/254) on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation in
this meeting ofthe Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Dacic'.
We share his assessment. We have listened carefully to
Mr. Thaci.
We expect that the results achieved during the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina conducted
under European Union mediation will lead to a genuine
improvement in the situation of the Serb population of
Kosovo. We back Serbia's efforts in this very complex
process. The demands for guarantees ofa normal life in
the province are fullyjustified. The dialogue addresses
only a few aspects of the normalization of relations
between Serbia and the province and has no bearing on
the issue of the status of Kosovo, which remains open.

The only legal basis for a settlement of this issue
continues to be resolution 1244 (1999). The Council
remains the only body with the authority to take the
relevant decisions. The international community
and, first and foremost, the United Nations should
not diminish the attention paid to events in Kosovo.
Belgrade and Pristina's agreement has not removed the
main problems in the province. Furthermore, the most
difficult phase remains - the practical implementation
of the agreement. We believe that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo must
actively involve itself in the process. What must not be
lost from sight are all the other aspects of the mandate
granted to UNMIK under resolution 1244 (1999),
which must be fully implemented. The United Nations
presence has a significant potential for resolving issues
that exist in such fields as the rule oflaw, the protection
of minorities, the forging of intercommunal dialogue
and, of course, the protection of Orthodox sites. For
this reason, we are against a reduction in UNMIK's
mandate; faced with so many problems, there is a need
to expand the political component of the Mission.

The situation in the province, especially in the north,
remains tense. That is demonstrated in the Secretary-
General's report, with a growing number of cases of
grenade explosions in areas of mixed populations
in the north and the increase in ethnically motivated
incidents in the west of Kosovo. Also of note is the
letter circulated in the Security Council by the Head
of Serb Department on Kosovo and Metohija regarding
the low level of return of internally displaced persons
in Kosovo. Regrettably, the numerous cases of Kosovo
Serbs' property being put up for sale and their forced
displacement outside the province continue to receive
little attention. All of this bears witness to serious
problems in the field of inter-ethnic tolerance. The size
of major Serb enclaves is gradually decreasing. Smaller
ones are essentially dying out.

The tensions relating to Orthodox churches and
cemeteries can be seen in the fact that at the beginning
of the year there was a wave of vandalism. There
was also an unacceptable situation around the World
Heritage site of the Visoki Decani Serbian Orthodox
Monastery. The disdain shown by the local authorities
for laws passed to uphold the rights of national
minorities and the preservation of Serbian cultural
heritage is clear. Messages addressed to Pristina
regarding the unacceptability of all this have shown
themselves to be inadequate to restore genuine order
in the province. Lengthy and persistent efforts will be
needed by the international community. Of concern
here are the European Union and NATO plans to reduce
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
and Kosovo Force missions active in the province on
the basis of United Nations Security Council decisions.

We are concerned by the complete lack of
information regarding the course of investigations by
EULEX into the allegations by the Council of Europe's
Special Rapporteur, Mr. Marty, regarding the illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. Prosecutor
Williamson's Special Investigative Task Force was set
up in January 2011. Since the beginning of last year, it
has been fully staffed and should work to produce real
results.

The stabilization ofKosovo lies far ahead. Problems
in the province, both current and long-term, can only be
resolved by strictly political means. We expect that all
international presences will unswervingly follow the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

