Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The delegation of
Botswana attaches great importance to the question of
transparency in the work of the Security Council. We
therefore welcomed the procedures instituted last year
providing for regular consultations between the members of
the Security Council and countries contributing troops to
United Nations peace-keeping operations as a significant
development in the process towards such transparency. The
participation of troop contributors in the exchange of views
regarding any peace-keeping operation has opened up the
work of the Council and made it more responsive and
accountable to the interests of the troop contributors. This
consultative mechanism has contributed significantly to the
improved relations between members of the Council and
troop-contributing countries, and it will, hopefully, lead to
efficiency and effectiveness in peace-keeping operations.

The issues raised in the proposal of Argentina and
33 other States - to whom we owe a debt of
gratitude - are not completely new. They have been
discussed by the Council on previous occasions.
Regrettably, some members of the Council remain
opposed to the proposed establishment of a subsidiary
organ of the Security Council to formalize the procedures
set out in the Council presidential statement of 4
November 1994. We have no doubts about the usefulness
of the existing mechanism for consultations between
members of the Security Council and countries
contributing troops to United Nations peace-keeping
operations. As a matter of fact, it has afforded troop-
contributing countries the opportunity to put their views
across regarding decisions that may have a bearing on
their contingents. But we do not think this mechanism
does any justice to the spirit of Article 44 of the Charter.

Article 44 provides for the participation of troop-
contributing countries

"in the decisions of the Security Council concerning
the employment of contingents".

The existing mechanism, however, does not give troop-
contributing countries the full opportunity to "participate
in the decisions of the Security Council", as foreseen in
Article 44. The establishment of a more formal
mechanism such as the one proposed by the 34 co-
signatories, we believe, would enhance the level of
participation of troop-contributing countries in Council
decisions, particularly because the chairman of the
mechanism would be required to submit written reports to
the Council on the views expressed by participants at
each meeting, as is the practice with other subsidiary
bodies of other United Nations organs.

The co-sponsors of this initiative do not intend to
usurp the powers bestowed by the Charter on the Security
Council in matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security. The proposal to establish
a formal mechanism is only intended to improve the
representative character of the decision- making process
in the Security Council. The interest that Member States
of the United Nations have shown in the work of the
Security Council in recent years should be viewed as a
positive development. The Security Council derives its
authority and legitimacy from the general membership of
the United Nations that are not members of the Security

 

Council. We believe it is only fair that they should make a
contribution to the work of the Council if it is to act
effectively on their behalf in accordance with Article 24 (1)
of the Charter.

