At the outset, let me extend our deepest condolences to our Afghan friends - the people and the Government of Afghanistan - in the wake of the unprecedented flash floods that affected nearly 3,000 families and took dozens of lives. We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her observations on and assessments of the situation in Afghanistan. We believe that UNAMA has an important role to play in coordinating the international assistance pledged to the country. The Russian Federation supports the mandate and activities of the Mission. We also thank the Head of the MOBY Group, Mr. Saad Mohseni, for his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Adela Raz, for her statement. We have carefully studied the recent report of the Secretary-General on the activities and efforts of the United Nations in Afghanistan (S/2020/809). The country is now at a critical juncture, and the long-held desire of its people to seize the opportunity to achieve sustainable peace is evident. It is high time to focus all efforts on promoting national reconciliation that will lead to the end of a protracted war and the revival of a peaceful, united and independent Afghanistan that is free of terrorism and drug crime. Let me reaffirm once again Russia's commitment to Afghanistan. We will continue to support the inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. An inclusive political settlement, which involves representatives of all parties, ethnic and religious minorities, sociopolitical groups and women, is at the heart of our efforts. As a friend and partner of Afghanistan, Russia has always stood and will stand ready to facilitate negotiations. We wish to enable Afghan parties to find an agreement that is acceptable to all and achieve a sustainable peace. This is the goal of our efforts within the troika plus Pakistan and our own interaction with all Afghan sides. The swift start of intra-Afghan negotiations remains our highest priority. We note the recent progress made in terms of the release of prisoners. We do hope that all remaining hurdles will be removed in the coming days and that no further delays of the prompt launch of inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations will take place. Otherwise, this fragile peace process will simply be put in jeopardy. We strongly believe that Security Council members should once again speak with one voice on the importance of speeding up the start of the talks. Against this backdrop, the security situation in Afghanistan remains volatile. We are seriously concerned about the continued presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. Major acts of terrorism occur regularly in various Afghan cities, including Kabul. This is clear evidence that ISIL is still very strong in the northern and eastern parts of the country. It is too premature to celebrate its defeat in the region: we are worried about ISIL's sleeper cells in north-eastern Afghanistan and the group's diversifying methods and channels for recruiting civilians to its ranks, especially Afghan youth. ISIL represents a real threat to the security of Afghanistan and its neighbours, the rest of Central Asia and Russia's southern regions. We strongly believe that this problem should not be underestimated. Another challenge is the drug problem in Afghanistan, which is a threat that remains of serious concern for the country as well as for the region and the world as a whole. Drug cultivation, production, trade and trafficking are sources of significant financial support for terrorism. We are concerned about the delays in the submission of the annual Afghanistan Opium Survey by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). We do expect all the obstacles to be overcome. The problem must be completely eradicated. We are ready to fulfil our obligations by assisting the collective efforts against this threat, including through our active participation in the UNODC, as well as the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. Russia continues to provide training for narcotics squads from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the countries of Central Asia, as well as regular assistance under the auspices of UNODC's global Paris Pact initiative. Afghanistan needs the full support and attention of the international community, especially against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic. We truly believe that actors from the region can and should play a substantive role in promoting the peace process. Their cooperation and assistance are critical to Afghanistan's peace, stability and sustainable development.
