Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I have the
honour to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation group in New
York.

Israel's military occupation of Arab lands,
flagrant violations of international law and denial of
the national rights and aspirations of the Palestinian
people remain at the heart of unrest in the region.
Prospects for peace and justice in the region are
damaged by Israel's colonial and discriminatory
policies in Arab occupied land. Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to approve settlement plans in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, construct an
apartheid wall, restrict Palestinian access to places of
worship, disregard acts of violence by extremist
settlers against civilian Palestinians, deny the free
movement of people and goods, and further confiscate
Palestinian homes and lands. Such illegalities have
become part of a daily cycle of oppression and
aggression against the Palestinian people that
systematically undermine prospects for the two-State
solution and destabilize the region.

Similarly, Israeli practices in East Jerusalem -
including settlement construction, excavations under
the Al-Aqsa mosque, the depopulation of Jerusalem's
indigenous Palestinian citizens, in addition to the
illegal appropriation of Palestinian properties, the
isolation of Jerusalem from its natural Palestinian
environment, and the alteration of the city's
demographic composition and character - are more
alarming than ever before. These illegal Israeli practices
pose a challenge to the international community. The
United Nations therefore has a special responsibility to
pressure Israel to put an end to these aggressions and
respect international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
The United Nations also has a responsibility to
assist the Palestinian people in realizing their right to
self-determination, sovereignty and independence in
their own State in the territory occupied since 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and in finding a just
solution for the plight of the Palestinian refugees, in
line with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

The plight of thousands of Palestinian political
prisoners in Israeli prisons represents a question of
missing justice. They are victims of systematic
inhuman practices perpetuated through the enactment
and application of Israeli laws. Those political
prisoners are deprived of the basic human rights
guaranteed by international law, such as the rights to
education, medical treatment and communication with
the outside world, and subject to administrative
detention without charges or trial. Therefore, it is now
time for international action to advocate their cause so
that they may enjoy freedom, justice and dignity in
their homeland.

We affirm that the international consensus to
realize a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle
East conflict requires the enforcement of international
law and the implementation of legitimate international
resolutions. Therefore, acknowledgement of and full
support for Palestinian State-building efforts, and
meeting and maintaining our obligations and political
and financial commitments to the Palestinian Authority,
are commendable actions at this significant juncture.

I wish to reaffirm the full support and solidarity
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation with the
Palestinian people in their endeavour to regain their
legitimate and inalienable national rights, including the
rights of return and self-determination, and the
establishment of the independent Palestinian State on
its national soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

In conclusion, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation joins the international community in
reaffirming that all measures and actions taken or to be
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal,
physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, have no legal effect. The
Organization of Islamic Cooperation demands that
Israel abide fully and immediately by resolution 497
(1981) and, in implementation also of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967.

