Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to be back in the
Security Council today and to have this opportunity to
discuss the work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General (8/2008/586), which
provides an account of developments between mid-
March and the middle of August. At the same time,
significant events have taken place since the issuance
of the report, most importantly the devastating series of
hurricanes that struck the country from mid-August to
early September and the nomination and confirmation
of the new Government. Those events mean that we
stand simultaneously today at a time of challenge and a
time of hope.

With regard to the first of those events, the toll of
the sequence of hurricanes and storms that struck Haiti
has been reported through a number of grim statistics.
Over 800,000 Haitians have lost their homes or have
been directly affected. There has been massive
destruction of roads and bridges and large-scale
destruction of crops. But those figures cannot truly
convey the level of devastation that is involved or the
depth of suffering that it has entailed for an already
desperately poor population that has now lost what
little it had.

I have now twice visited the city of Gonaives,
which was particularly affected, and those two trips
have left me with a personal and abiding sense of the
scale of human tragedy that is involved: the homes that
have been destroyed; the families that have been
uprooted and no longer have a place to call their own;
the lives that have been changed forever.

The Mission gave priority to supporting the
response to the catastrophe over the past month by
undertaking evacuations, providing emergency medical
care, supporting urgent efforts to shore up collapsing
infrastructure and helping to bring critical relief
supplies to those who need them, all in collaboration
with national authorities and the United Nations
country team.

Those efforts made a crucial difference in the
early days and weeks, buying time for the normal
humanitarian mechanisms to gather momentum. I have
brought with me some photographs, which I hope will
08-54062
be distributed to members of the Council, to help
convey the scale of the calamity and the activities of
MINUSTAH troops in response. I would also like to
place on record my deep appreciation for the courage,
dedication and professionalism shown by our civilian
police and military personnel. I am proud of them and
grateful to those Member States which have made them
available.

Today, the United Nations agencies, particularly
the World Food Programme (WFP), are providing
large-scale assistance, while our troops continue to
provide vital logistical and security assistance. Some
700,000 people have now received emergency food and
relief supplies throughout the country. But it should be
noted that even though there is now a relatively
smoothly running process to attend to immediate
needs, we also need a clear programme to meet longer-
term reconstruction requirements. I will return to that
point later.

Alongside those huge challenges, this is also, as I
said, a time of hope based on a new political
beginning. The need to respond to the catastrophic
problems posed by the hurricanes helped to unblock a
political stand-off that had lasted for nearly five
months and to generate a new and urgently needed
sense of solidarity. The lengthy and difficult
confirmation process for a new Government was
concluded on 5 September. Since then, the parliament
has shown a fresh level of interest in working with the
executive branch, having passed emergency legislation
enabling greater flexibility to provide relief funds, and
having adopted a supplementary budget as required
under the Constitution.

On the side of the Government too, there has
been a concerted effort to reach out. President Preval
visited Gona'ives last Thursday. There have also been
joint visits by the Prime Minister and parliamentarians
to the regions and systematic engagement of
parliamentarians in relief efforts. Furthermore, civil
society and the private sector have been working
alongside elected representatives to assist victims of
the hurricanes, and the Government is energetically
pursuing a policy of communication to inform and
engage the public.

This new approach of solidarity and outreach is
already facilitating concrete results, and it brings a
renewed possibility for progress. But at the same time,
08-54062
it remains extremely fragile and will undoubtedly be
tested in the months ahead.

Historic tendencies towards political
confrontation and conflict could easily re-emerge in the
context of the forthcoming elections for one third of the
Senate. They could also be sparked by discussion of a
number of potentially divisive topics that are under
consideration, including the appropriate security
structure for Haiti and the question of constitutional
reform. Moreover, the suffering created by global
economic trends and greatly exacerbated by the
hurricanes has created a potential reservoir of serious
discontent that can be manipulated for political reasons.

In that uncertain environment, it is incumbent
above all on the Haitian leadership to make every
effort to maintain and build on the new tendency
towards constructive collaboration. At the same time,
the international community can make an important
contribution, not only through political support, but
also by helping the new Government to deliver what
the country needs, thereby enhancing its credibility. A
joint effort will be required to help ensure that the
country stays on the right path towards stability and
economic recovery.

The report before the Council summarizes a
number of areas where progress must be made in order
to consolidate stability as requested by the Security
Council. The consolidation plan, which builds on the
initial outline provided in the Secretary-General's
previous report (S/2008/202), draws on extensive
discussion with the Haitian authorities and is based on
national reform plans. It suggests that stability will
require progress in several areas: first, the political and
institutional situation; secondly, extension of State
authority, including border management; thirdly,
strengthening of the security sector; fourthly,
enhancement of justice and corrections; and fifthly,
economic and social development. I would like to
briefly discuss each of those areas, focusing in
particular on what MINUSTAH has accomplished and
on the challenges that lie ahead.

With regard to the political situation,
MINUSTAH is working with the national authorities to
prepare for the senatorial elections, which were
originally supposed to take place last November. Those
preparations have been greatly complicated by the
confusion generated by the hurricanes. It will probably
take four to five months to complete the necessary
3
technical steps once a date has been set by the
authorities. However, it is important for that process to
advance. While it may lead to a potentially more
volatile environment in the short term, as I mentioned
earlier, it can, in the medium term, help to create a
more stable and normal institutional environment,
which can in turn make it easier for the leadership to
address other difficult political issues.

Meanwhile, further progress must be made in
strengthening the State. Since the adoption of
resolution 1780 (2007) last October, MINUSTAH has
sought to assist the Haitian authorities in developing a
comprehensive approach to border management.
Officials at the senior and expert levels have shown
interest in advancing in that area, which is critical for
the State's financial and physical security, although it
will be a challenging task. In addition, MINUSTAH
has continued to focus on local governance and has
played a significant role in facilitating the ability of the
State to respond to the needs of the regions. However,
much remains to be done in terms of capacity-building,
while Haiti's overall vision for the arrangements for
local governance still has not taken final shape.

Furthermore, a concerted effort is required to
improve the capabilities of the national administration
and of key ministries. MINUSTAH has made a
contribution in those ministries that are most relevant
to its mandate, including in particular the Ministry of
Justice and the Ministry of the Interior, which has
responsibility for local government. However, a more
general, systematic and coordinated effort is needed. It
will require further definition of a national programme
in that regard, and extensive bilateral assistance.

In the area of security, MINUSTAH troops and
police continue to play an essential role. That is clear
from the Secretary-General's report, which highlights
their engagement in controlling the violence in April.
In the last month, the military and police have shown
themselves to be just as critical in responding to
natural disasters as they were to man-made threats.

The country will continue to face a variety of
threats in the coming months - attempts by gangs to
reconstitute themselves; criminality, including in
particular kidnapping; and the risk of civil unrest - all
of which could be exacerbated by the socio-economic
situation and exploited for political reasons. We
therefore believe that the continued presence for the
coming 12 months of international troops and formed
police, with their current strength and tasking, will be
essential to help the Haitian authorities respond in all
of those areas.

At the same time, we will be proceeding with our
efforts to strengthen Haiti's own security capability.
The development of the Haitian National Police
represents a particularly visible example of institution-
building in the country, with Haitian National Police
officers present throughout the capital and the country.
Of course, they are not always in a position to
accomplish everything they would like. They are still a
young and modestly equipped force. There are areas
where their skills could be improved and where their
observance of professional standards must be
strengthened, but they carry themselves with a new
pride, and I believe they will, in due course, become a
stronger, more effective service to provide adequate
security for their people.

Following the blueprint laid out in the Haitian
National Police Reform Plan, MINUSTAH will be
pursuing its efforts in the coming year to address
residual problems - including through the ongoing
vetting process - and to strengthen their skills and
institutional capabilities, while working with bilateral
donors to ensure the provision of necessary equipment
and infrastructure.

The enhancement of police must be
complemented by the strengthening of other rule-of-
law institutions. Again, clear programmes for reform
processes in both areas have been prepared and
adopted by the Government and significant advances
have taken place, including during the past five
months, notwithstanding the difficult political context.
With regard to the justice system, the School for
Magistrates is operational once again and a small class
of magistrates has begun training courses. The Conseil
Superieur du Pouvoir Judiciaire, which will be the
main supervisory body, is taking shape.

In corrections, efforts are under way to expand
prison facilities, although painfully slowly in view of
the appalling state of the penitentiary system.
Corrections staffing has been increased by about 50 per
cent with the graduation of a class of 227 cadets, the
first to be trained in almost a decade. Those are both
long-term processes, but they are crucial to the
country's stability. We will continue to work closely
with the new Government to promote progress in those
08-54062
areas and to engage bilateral partners, whose support is
indispensable.

Finally, it is vital that progress be made in
addressing the socio-economic situation. Development
is not, of course, the business of peacekeeping
operations, although it is our job to create an
environment conducive to economic and social
development. The point I wish to stress here is that our
efforts cannot and will not be successful unless there is
some prospect of tangible improvement in the daily
lives of the Haitian people. The factors that created
asense of desperation in the spring - the rise in
prices, the absence of employment, the lack of basic
services - continue and have in fact been hugely
exacerbated by the natural disasters that have struck
the country. A poor, hungry and desperate population is
simply not compatible with stability. It is vital that
donors and agencies build upon the remarkable efforts
they made to respond in April and again in September,
and seek to lay the foundation for a substantial
recovery that might make such emergency response
unnecessary in the future.

The convening of a long-deferred discussion of
the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper might offer an
opportunity to advance such longer-term planning and
to launch its urgently needed implementation. It will
also be essential that any such discussion take into
account the vast extent of the damage created by the
hurricanes and explore how an exceptional, large-scale
effort might be launched to help Haiti recreate a basic
infrastructure. Without such an effort, without a major
reconstruction plan, Haiti cannot hope to truly begin
the process of recovery.

I know that this is a difficult time globally, with
enormous demands on a finite number of resources, but
I would like to note that even a major reconstruction
effort for Haiti would not entail a huge expenditure in
global terms and could be extraordinarily good value in
safeguarding the investment the Council has made to
date and in pre-empting future costs associated with
renewed instability and uncontrolled population
movements.

To conclude, I would like to close by making
three more general points regarding the plans to
consolidate the stabilization process in Haiti. First, as
08-54062
stressed in the Secretary-General's report, the timelines
for all of these areas are subject to change. It is
essential that we evaluate our progress not just by the
calendar, but according to effective achievement of the
objectives. If we disengage before they are completed,
we run the risk of undermining everything that we have
achieved.

A second, related point is that progress in each of
the dimensions of stability is interlinked. Political
cooperation is a prerequisite for reform of the State or
economic development, yet it must in turn be
reinforced by enhancement of the country's institutions
and improvement in the socio-economic situation. We
must seek to support progress in each of those areas,
which are co-dependent and mutually reinforcing. We
must try to advance in all of them if we are to advance
in any.

Thirdly, the consolidation of stability depends on
the engagement of three sets of actors: the Haitian
leadership and people, which must work together to
make decisions, set priorities and put them into effect;
MINUSTAH and the United Nations system, which
must support the implementation of those plans on the
ground; and the wider international community, whose
assistance and resources are indispensable to turn those
plans into reality. None of us can truly deliver on our
own. If we are going to be successful, we must work
together and assume our respective responsibilities in a
closely coordinated partnership.

Notwithstanding the setbacks that have taken
place and the scope of the challenges that lie ahead,
this remains a time of hope for Haiti. If we stay the
course, if we pursue a broad approach and if we all
remain engaged in an effective partnership, I am
convinced that we can succeed and that Haiti can
emerge from its troubled past towards a better future.

