Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank the Russian Mission
for arranging this public meeting. I also wish to thank
Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Costa for their detailed
briefings.

We are glad to note that with the support and
assistance from the international community the
Afghan Transitional Administration, headed by
President Karzai, has made unremitting efforts to reach
the goals set in the Bonn Agreement. Afghanistan is
now preparing for the Constitutional Loya Jirga, to be
held this October. We hope that the new Constitution
will serve to reinforce ethnic unity, social justice, rule
of law and national stability.

At the present time, security is still an issue of
concern in some places in Afghanistan, as the recent
suicide bombing attacks against the International
Security Assistance Force has clearly shown. The
international community should adopt peaceful
measures to assist the Transitional Administration in its
efforts to build the army and police forces and
complete the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration at an early date.

We would also like to urge the various parties in
Afghanistan to demonstrate good faith in pursuing
national reconciliation and thus contribute to peace in
and the reconstruction of their country.

Drugs are the enemy of the entire human race,
and the drug issue has been closely linked with such
organized transnational crimes as terrorism, money-
laundering and human trafficking. The drug problem in
Afghanistan has seriously affected the country's
stability and economic development and has become an
increasingly destabilizing factor in the region. Curbing
drug production and cracking down on drug smuggling
are common objectives for Afghanistan and other
countries in the region, as well as for the entire
international community.

The Chinese Government appreciates the
measures adopted by the Transitional Administration to
root out the drug problem and the positive role played
by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, the Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Kingdom and France in this regard.

We favour taking timely action to formulate an
international strategy against the Afghan drug threat
and promote international cooperation in related areas
under the leadership of the United Nations. In order to
sever the source of drugs and effectively resolve the
drug issue, efforts should be made to develop substitute
crops and improve the rural economic and social
environment so that farmers will earn income through
legal means and free themselves from their dependence
on drug production. The international community
should increase its input in and funding for assistance
to the Transitional Administration in policy-making.

During the recent visit of Vice-President
Shaharani to China, the two sides signed a number of
agreements, including one on economic and technical
cooperation. We are now speeding up construction of
the Parwan irrigation project and Kabul public hospital
project. China will continue to cooperate with the
various parties and work together with them for peace
and reconstruction in Afghanistan.

Finally, I once again thank the Council President
and colleagues for the kind and encouraging words that
they have addressed to me.

