Mr. Effah-Apenteng (Economic Community of West African States): I wish to join previous speakers
in congratulating the sister Republic of Guinea on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

I wish to make a few remarks on behalf of my
Minister, the Honourable Hackman Owusu-Agyemang,
who is unable to be here. In his absence, he has
requested me to bring to the members of the Council
greetings from the President of the Republic of Ghana
and current Chairman of ECOWAS, His Excellency
Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor, who has expressed his
confidence in this workshop and hopes that it will
propose measures that will assist in curbing the menace
of the illegal flow of small arms and light weapons, as
well as the rising phenomenon of mercenaries and
private armies in the West African subregion.

I wish to commend the organizers of this
workshop for the appropriateness of the topic,
considering the conflict situations in the West African
subregion and the very relevant objectives of this
workshop.

Although the issue of the proliferation of and the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is a global
problem, we in West Africa have cause to be more
concerned about it because of the havoc that the use of
these weapons has caused to lives and property in the
subregion.

It is sad to observe that, of the 500 million light
weapons believed to be in circulation worldwide, as
many as 30 million are projected to be in use in Africa,
with as many as 8 million in West Africa alone. From
the Horn of Africa, via Sudan and straight through
Central Africa to Angola, half a continent has suffered
from conflicts that influence each other and are
facilitated by the proliferation of small arms and the
phenomenon of mercenaries. Parts of West Africa, with
Liberia, Sierra Leone and, of late, C6te d'Ivoire as
examples, are following the same pattern. Over the past
decade alone, the use of small and light arms has
claimed more than 20 million victims in Africa, many
of whom have been civilians, women and children. An
estimated 2 million children have been killed, 5 million
people have been handicapped, 12 million have been
left without shelter and as many as 17 million have
been either displaced or rendered refugees. Africa also
accounts for approximately 300,000 child soldiers and
10,000 mercenaries, with dire implications for the
entire continent - especially for West Africa, with its
rising number of conflict situations.

It was in recognition of the enormous scope of
this problem that a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa was declared and signed by the heads of
State and Government of ECOWAS in October 1998.
The Moratorium was intended to serve as a coordinated
and sustainable regional approach to controlling the
illicit proliferation of small arms in West Africa. It was
extended for another three years in October 2001 and is
due for renewal again in November 2004.

An action plan adopted in March 1999 by
ECOWAS Ministers of Foreign Affairs and a code of
conduct adopted in December 1999 by ECOWAS heads
of State and Government are both designed to
encourage and promote the effective application of the
Moratorium through transparent, concerted efforts at
both the national and international levels. A
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development was similarly established as
the framework for the implementation of measures
associated with the Moratorium. ECOWAS member
States are also signatories to several other international
legal instruments designed to combat the illicit
proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons, as well as the phenomenon of
mercenaries in the world.

Recent allegations of cross-border attacks by non-
State actors, a spate of organized crime and other
transborder criminality in the subregion underscore the
timeliness of today's meeting. As we discuss the
problems posed by the proliferation of small and light
weapons, it is important that we be duly cognizant of
the implications of the activities of individual weapons
retailers and that we recommend sanctions where they
violate the Moratorium and related international legal
instruments. We should also examine ways of ensuring
the increased participation of civil society groups and
of non-governmental organizations in this effort.
Furthermore, it may be worth considering whether
there are any potential advantages to be derived from
revising the Moratorium and making it a permanent
instrument.

I cannot conclude my statement without drawing
attention to the upsurge in the activities of mercenaries
and private armies in conflict situations in West Africa.
Like the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
mercenaries and private armies pose grave dangers to
the stability of the subregion. The rate at which armed
West African civilians are being recruited from one
conflict area to another to fight for whoever is ready to
engage their services has assumed alarming proportions
in recent years.

No single country in the subregion can escape the
consequences of the proliferation of weapons and of
the increased resort to the use of mercenaries and
private armies. Whether supportive or unsupportive of
any of the conflicts in the region, each country in West
Africa must come to terms with the problems of
refugee flows, the militarization of borders and refugee
camps, as well as cross-border crimes, including arms
trafficking - all of which have dire implications for
political stability and socio-economic development. It
is only through our concerted efforts and the support of
the international community that those problems can be
overcome. I trust that this workshop will result in the
formulation of appropriate recommendations to unite
us in our common fight against the spread of small
arms and light weapons and the phenomenon of
mercenaries and private armies.
I thank members for their attention. It is my wish
that the deliberations of this meeting will be very
fruitful.

