Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important open debate on the situation in the Middle East, which is becoming increasingly complex in the light of developments that constitute a threat to international peace and security. We would like to congratulate you on your able leadership of the Security Council during the month of January. We would also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their valuable briefings. In order to establish security and stability in the Middle East and in the world, we need joint political will and collective integrated action. We need to create the positive conditions that will ensure the success of political settlements. We need to refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of States and to ensure that States affected by conflicts can restore their sovereignty, security, stability and territorial integrity. The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its position in support of the right of the brotherly Palestinian people to establish an independent State along the lines of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and the relevant international resolutions. In that regard, we stress that just, comprehensive and durable peace in the region will be possible only if we resolve the Palestinian question and grant the Palestinian people all their legitimate rights, just like other peoples in theworld. To that end, the international community must spare no effort to reach a just and durable solution to that central question. The Kingdom of Bahrain emphasizes that terrorist acts committed by Houthi militias seek to hamper efforts to reach a political solution that preserves the unity and territorial integrity of Yemen and that fulfils the aspirations of the brotherly Yemeni people for security, stability and prosperity. The Kingdom of Bahrain strongly condemns the terrorist act of Houthi militias, supported by Iran, that targeted a mosque in Ma'rib governorate in the sisterly Republic of Yemen and killed and injured dozens of people. We express our sincere condolences to the families of the victims and we wish the injured a rapid recovery. That terrorist act is shameful and is inconsistent with human, ethical and religious values. The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the final communique adopted at the Libya conference held in Berlin, the Federal Republic of Germany. We welcome the agreement among participants regarding a comprehensive plan to resolve the crisis in Libya and their pledges not to interfere in the internal affairs of Libya and to disarm the armed groups and other binding commitments. We welcome all such commitments, which represent an important step towards a comprehensive political settlement in Libya. We commend the Federal Republic of Germany and the participating States as well as their pledge to restore security and stability in Libya. We hope for increased efforts in that regard and look forward to the implementation of the Skhirat Political Agreement, signed in 2015 in the Kingdom of Morocco. The Agreement is the political framework accepted by the international community and all the parties in Libya. It is therefore a strong foundation for fulfilling the aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people to achieve stability and security and for resolving the crisis while preserving the safety and territorial integrity of Libya, leading to an end to violence and the eradication of extremism and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. In conclusion, in order to achieve stability and security in the Middle East, we must be united and overcome existing and emerging challenges. The Kingdom of Bahrain will cooperate with the international community to resolve conflicts by peaceful means and to achieve security and stability in the region and worldwide.
