Mr. Windsor (Australia): On behalf of Australia,
I would like to congratulate China on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. I would also
like to congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria on taking up their vital
duties as elected members of this important body.

As the Secretary-General said, and as Australia
fully agrees, we are now at a critical juncture in
Afghanistan. What we need now is unity of effort,
greater attention to key priorities, and a new mindset
on the part of the international community and the
Government of Afghanistan. This imperative is
increasingly being recognized both in Afghanistan and
internationally. It is, of course, reflected in the renewed
commitment to an effective strategy articulated by
United States President Obama and by the International
Security and Assistance Force (ISAF) late last year,
and in the ongoing work that the international
community and the Afghan Government are doing
together to redefine their partnership so as to better
meet the pressing needs of the Afghan people.

The security situation inside Afghanistan
undoubtedly remains difficult and dangerous. The
levels of violence will likely increase further in the
coming year as the insurgency comes under increased
pressure from Afghan and ISAF operations. Recent
attacks, such as those in Khost and Kandahar - for
which we offer our condolences to all those affected -
are a reminder of the ongoing human cost of our
necessary efforts to build security and stability.

Australia has boosted its contribution to the
critical task of strengthening the Afghan security
capacity as a key focus of efforts to deny terrorists safe
haven in Afghanistan. We are committed to training the
Afghan National Army to a point at which it can take
on security in Uruzgan province, where our troops
have been serving alongside the Dutch, who have led
capably in that province for the last four years.
Australian police have also expanded their efforts to
train and advise Afghan police, including in Uruzgan
province. We will continue to expand our contribution
on the civilian side, with a particular emphasis on
building the capacity of the Afghan authorities to
deliver more effective governance and basic services.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/674) and his statement here today, and Special
Representative Kai Eide for his presentation. I join
those who have praised his leadership and the work he
and his staff have done under incredibly difficult
circumstances, as we all know. We, too, welcome
President Karzai's commitment to action that he set out
in his inauguration speech. The timely finalization of a
credible and competent new Cabinet will be an
important initial step towards ensuring that the new
Afghan Government realizes early, demonstrable

progress on its key priorities - improving governance,
including at local levels, addressing corruption,
delivering basic services, making progress with
reintegration and reconciliation efforts, and
strengthening the Afghan National Army and Police.

We agree with the Secretary-General's report that
the problems associated with the 2009 presidential
election very much demonstrate the need for the reform
of some key aspects of the electoral system. Lessons
need to be learned and shortcomings rectified, in
particular before the next parliamentary elections, in
order to secure Afghan and international support for
democratic processes in Afghanistan.

We all need to lift our game. Increased efforts on
the civilian side need to be well targeted and better
coordinated. The United Nations has an indispensable
role to play, and it can be further strengthened, but
other key players, including ISAF, also have an
important contribution to make to the improved
coordination of civilian effort. These international
coordination mechanisms have to ensure that the
necessary coordination actually happens in a regular,
effective and efficient manner and at all the levels it
needs to be to ensure there is an actual outcome on the
ground.

The actual mission strength of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) remains
a concern. We, too, were pleased to support the
enhanced package for UNAMA at the end of the year.
But if it would assist the Mission, we should look at
flexible arrangements, such as providing secondees or
liaison officers to make sure that the job required is
actually done. UNAMA's security needs also have to
be kept very clearly in mind if it is to continue to play
its indispensable role throughout the country.

Australia stands ready to work with the new
Afghan Government and the international community.
We look forward to the London Conference, and to the
subsequent one in Kabul in the spring, as a basis for a
renewed partnership between the Afghan Government
and the international community, and a renewed
commitment between the Afghan Government and its
people. We must all remain committed to this vitally
important effort to reclaim Afghanistan from violence
and extremism. Afghanistan has endured so much for
so long. We had a very difficult year last year together,
and we have an equally difficult one ahead. With the
right commitment and unity of purpose, we can provide
a better future in the years ahead.

