The President (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the situation in the Middle East,
with its serious ramifications for peace and
security, and underlines the need to intensify
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region.

"The Security Council stresses that there
can be no military solution to the problems of the
region and that negotiation is the only Viable way
to bring peace and prosperity to peoples
throughout the Middle East.

"The Security Council stresses that the
parties must respect their obligations under
previous agreements, including by putting an end
to Violence and all aspects of terrorism.

"The Security Council expresses grave
concern over the deteriorating humanitarian
situation and calls for the provision of emergency
assistance to the Palestinian people through the
temporary international mechanism, international
organizations and other official channels.
28

"The Security Council welcomes the
agreement between Israeli Prime Minister Ehud
Olmert and Palestinian Authority President
Mahmoud Abbas to establish a mutual ceasefire
in Gaza.

"The Security Council welcomes the steps
taken by both sides to maintain the ceasefire and
expresses its hope that it will lead to a sustained
period of calm. It calls on both sides, therefore, to
avoid any actions which could jeopardize further
progress. It reiterates its call for an end to all
aspects of terrorism and violence as set out in
previous statements and resolutions.

"The Security Council is mindful of the
need to encourage steps to increase confidence in
the peace process.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the Palestinian Authority Government to accept
the three Quartet principles.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
profound attachment to the vision of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security, as envisaged in
the Road Map.
the

"The Security Council underlines that
action by the international community cannot be
a substitute for determined measures by the
parties themselves.

"The Security Council encourages the
parties to engage in direct negotiations.

"The Security Council reaffirms the vital
role of the Quartet and looks forward to its
continued active engagement.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of, and the need to achieve, a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on all its relevant resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1515 (2003), the Madrid terms of reference and
the principle of land for peace."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/51.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
