Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
As we reiterate our congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Council this
month, we would also like to express our appreciation
to you for the holding of today's debate, which gives us
another opportunity to address the developments in the
situation in Kosovo. We would also like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier for presenting both clearly and
briefly the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/562) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We once again reiterate to him and
the staff of UNMIK our unwavering support for their
efforts on the ground in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).

Lastly, we welcome the presence in the Chamber
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and thank
him for his statement. We share his views, both in
terms of the prospects for dialogue with Kosovo and
with respect to resolution 1244 (1999). We note from
Mrs. Citaku's statement her acceptance of the offer of
dialogue made by the European Union.

On 9 September, the General Assembly adopted
its resolution 64/298 on Kosovo, sponsored by Serbia
and member States of the European Union. The text of
the resolution is historic, as it offers new prospects for
dialogue and cooperation between Pristina and
Belgrade, with a view to achieving lasting peace in the
Balkans region. We should like to commend the central
role played by the European Union in facilitating this
dialogue, so necessary to reconciliation between the
various communities living in Kosovo. Since dialogue
is so essential to any process of settling a crisis, we
urge all parties to take this new opportunity to jointly
seek solutions to the problems hindering peace,
security and stability in this region.

We welcome the latest developments in Kosovo,
in particular the recent implementation of the Strategic
Framework for Kosovo and the launch, this December,
of the common development plan of the United
Nations Kosovo team. Along these lines, the results of
the Reconstruction Implementation Commission, with
respect to cultural and religious heritage sites, seem to
be a genuine factor in effective cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina.

This progress does, unfortunately, present a
contrast to some of the realities on the ground. As the
report of the Secretary-General rightly points out,
reconciliation between the various communities in
Kosovo is confronting serious challenges. The situation
is worsened by escalating tensions in northern Kosovo.
We therefore call on all parties to refrain from taking
any unilateral action that could contribute to worsening
tensions and jeopardize the prospects for dialogue that
have emerged from General Assembly resolution
64/298.

The recent statements by Kosovar authorities
against the presence of UNMIK in northern Kosovo
seem very worrying. They could, in certain cases, have
an impact on the security situation for United Nations
staff, whose mission of neutrality is an integral part of
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo.
We would like to conclude by reiterating our
position, which is founded on respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia -
prerequisites for any constructive search for a
settlement of the question of Kosovo. We encourage
the parties to continue to address the outstanding issues
through dialogue and cooperation. Gabon believes that
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice (see A/64/881) should help to promote such
prospects.

