Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): My delegation
welcomes the interim report of the Secretary-General
and the additional information provided by Mr. Annabi
this morning. We also welcome to the Council Mr.
Xanana Gusmao, President of the National Council of
Timorese Resistance, and Mr. Ramos-Horta. We greatly
value their presence and the statements that they made
today.

We are at a point at which the territory is poised
to embark on the path to independence. The stage for
that event has been set by the promulgation of the
regulation on the election of the Constituent Assembly
and the process of civil registration, which is under
way. Today's debate provides us with an opportunity to
take stock of the situation regarding some unresolved
issues, as well as those issues that might affect the
course of events leading towards independence. We
want to acknowledge the progress made in the recent
round of talks between the Government of Indonesia,
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the East Timor Transitional
Administration.

On the registration of East Timorese refugees in
the camps, we note the resolve to clarify issues relating
to citizenship as a consequence of the choice to be
made by them. We also welcome the idea of creating a
special fund for the payment of pensions to former
Indonesian employees, and its inclusion in the joint
appeal for the comprehensive resolution of the
situation of East Timorese refugees, to be launched by
the United Nations and the Government of Indonesia.
Positive discussion has also taken place on the
establishment of an air link and postal services between
Indonesia and East Timor. The recent increase in the
number of East Timorese students studying in
Indonesian institutions augurs well for meaningful and
mutually beneficial relations between the two societies.

We are happy to learn about the campaign for the
dissemination of information to refugees on the
security and political situation in East Timor. We view
the decision to send a security assessment mission to
West Timor as a constructive one. In this regard, we
hope that the Government of Indonesia will extend full
cooperation to the team and take steps that will
facilitate an outcome conducive to the return of
humanitarian personnel. Meanwhile, security in the
camps must be improved through steps that the
Government of Indonesia can take. The great reduction
in number of refugee returns recently is of concern to
my delegation.

On the other hand, very important steps have also
been taken by the East Timorese side in the political
arena - I am referring to the intention that we heard
about today to disband the National Council of East
Timorese Resistance and have all political parties sign
up to certain principles to be followed in their future
endeavours.

We listened carefully to the points made by both
Mr. Gusmao and Mr. Ramos-Horta on justice and
reconciliation. We fully understand their sentiments.
Clearly, much more needs to be done to ensure that
there is justice which is seen and accepted as fair.
Justice should pave the path towards reconciliation,
and in reconciliation both Indonesia and East Timor
have an abiding, long-term interest.

Cooperation between the UNTAET serious crimes
unit and the authorities of Indonesia must be
reinforced. With regard to the recent sentencing in the
Atambua incident, we, like Mr. Ramos-Horta, hope that
we have not yet heard the last of it.

We welcome the preparatory steps taken towards
the holding of elections on 30 August this year. In this
regard, we would like to ask Mr. Annabi about the role
that even volunteers are understood to be playing in
assisting UNTAET. They could be undertaking other
tasks in aid of UNTAET in a cost-effective way, in
addition to monitoring elections.

As regards the post-independence scenario, we
welcome the setting-up by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General of the working group on post-
UNTAET planning and the integrated mission task
force. While the group continues its deliberations-
and we are happy to note that it is doing so in close
consultation with the local population - we believe
that there is a need to strike a balance between
international and local staff, not sacrificing efficiency.

We fully agree that the enormous investment
made by the international community in East Timor
should be protected. It is encouraging to note the good
progress made so far; however, much more is required
to be done to run the country after independence.

We fully appreciate the need for an international
peacekeeping presence in East Timor beyond
independence and believe that decisions will have to be
taken on the merits of the unfolding situation. More
and more, the affairs of the territory are going to be in
the hands of the East Timorese. The run-up to the
elections will be a crucial time and we wish the people
of East Timor all the best.

