Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Chinese presidency for having
chosen to include this issue on the Security Council's
agenda. I am struck by the number of Member States
that want to contribute to this discussion - clearly, we
all want to address it meaningfully.

We believe that it is first important to remind
ourselves why multilateralism matters and what it
means to our planet and its inhabitants. For us in
Canada, multilateralism of course leads us to think first
of the work of the Blue Helmets, who work to protect
civilians. We celebrate the fact that fewer people died
in the first decade of this century than in any decade
in the twentieth century. We think of the more than
80 million people in over 80 countries helped by the
World Food Programme each year. We also recall the
work of the International Civil Aviation Organization
on civil aviation, the work of the International Maritime
Organization on maritime routes, by the World Trade
Organization on the development of inclusive trade
and by the World Health Organization in helping to
eradicate smallpox - and hopefully also polio in the
near future. While the system is imperfect, most of us
believe it to be essential in resolving the challenges of
the present and the future. That is why we want not only
to maintain it but to improve it as well.

(spoke in English)

This multilateral architecture will always remain
a work in progress. There will be no day when we will
say: "This is it. It is all done; it is all perfect." This is
the nature of the beast. From its inception, the world
has always been changing. The difference in the last 25
to 50 years is that the speed of change has accelerated
and our multilateral institutions - like many other
institutions of the world - are, unsurprisingly, finding
it challenging to adapt fast enough. One thing is clear: it
is urgent that we build a more inclusive and sustainable
world. It is also clear that multilateral institutions are
essential to this construction. Let us go back to what
is essential for a moment. The Charter of the United
Nations obliges us to act in the best interest of all of
humankind, reaffirming

"faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small".

The Charter grounds our actions in a set of obligations
that Member States accept when they join and are
expected to carry out thereafter. Looking forward, the
challenge to multilateralism is fundamentally whether
we choose to live up to our obligations; whether we
each do our fair share; whether we fulfil the global
compacts we have agreed - on climate change and on
migration and refugees 4 and whether we implement
the Sustainable Development Goals.

Multilateralism is too often associated with
inefficient bureaucracy, disconnected from the reality
of the people it aims to assist. We cannot sweep these
criticisms under the carpet. We need to address the
trust deficit, both within the United Nations and in the
broader multilateral context by engaging and listening,
as well as being inclusive and open to compromise. We
need to commit to reforming the United Nations and
our own institutions to make them more transparent,
inclusive, effective and accountable.

Multilateralism is not about posturing or preaching.
It is not about adopting the same resolutions year after
year. It is about listening to each other, learning from
each other, finding solutions together and getting
things done for our people and our planet. Canada is
committed to helping build a better world where a rules-
based international order is inclusive and sustainable,
with its benefits are shared by all. That is one of the
reasons Canada is seeking a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council for the period 2021-2022.

Together we can renew and revitalize the
institutions that we have spent more than seven
decades building. They have contributed so much to
our global development and security. The foundation is
there 4 it is solid, yet let us never take it for granted.
That is why we absolutely need to work even harder
together to make them fit for purpose. Let us agree,
like my colleague from Hungary just said, that we may
have to accept getting out of our comfort zones to do
so. Let us find opportunities to work together in good
faith and partnership towards a safer, fairer and more
secure and sustainable world 4 a world where no one
is left behind.

