Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the protection of civilians

and for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on
behalf of NATO.

The protection of the civilian population is a
centrepiece of NATO's work, equally relevant to each
of our overarching core tasks, namely, collective
defence, cooperative security and crisis management.
NATO leaders have adopted a holistic approach on
the protection of civilians, recognizing that civilian
protection goes far beyond just high-intensity military
operations. For NATO, the protection agenda is all-
encompassing. It integrates the cross-cutting areas of
children and armed conflict, women and peace and
security, conflict-related sexual Violence, cultural
property protection and human trafficking.

Over the past decade, NATO and its partners have
elevated the commitment to protecting civilians and,
in line with the Council's guidance, has developed a
diverse and robust body of policies and doctrine in
the planning and conduct of operations and missions.
NATO's 2016 policy on the protection of civilians sets
out a coherent, consistent and integrated approach
on protection. Its guiding principles require that all
NATO-led operations and missions be conducted in
accordance with applicable international law. The
policy was developed together with all member nations
and 26 NATO partners, and in consultation with the
United Nations and other international organizations. It
is strengthened by a concrete action plan, implemented
by allies and partners and regularly reviewed by the
North Atlantic Council.

While the NATO-led missions and operations
change and evolve over time, our commitment to the
cross-cutting areas of protection remains steadfast.
For example, today NATO's mandate in Afghanistan
is limited solely to training, advising and assisting,
because NATO does not conduct combat operations,
as reflected in the NATO-Afghanistan status of forces
agreement, whose signing was noted by the Council.

We have incorporated lessons from the past into all
areas of our civilian protection mandate, while giving
specific attention to the protection of women and
children. NATO recognizes that the protection children
in conflict is of the utmost importance. Together with
the United Nations, we have developed practical, field-
oriented measures to address conflict-related violations
against children.

NATO's 2015 policy document entitled "Protection
of Children in Armed Conflict - the Way Forward"
provides additional guidance on integrating Security
Council resolutions into the alliance's military doctrine,
education, training and exercises. It includes standing
operating procedures for monitoring and reporting
violations against children in NATO military operations
on the ground. We are particularly proud of our efforts
in assisting the Afghan authorities in developing their
first child-protection policy. The policy aims to shield
children from the adverse effects of armed conflict, and
especially to prevent perpetrators of violence against
children in combat operations.
We are also constantly advancing our work on
efforts to better protect women and girls from conflict-
related sexual Violence. The long-term destructive
nature of conflict-related sexual violence, as well as
its grave effect on entire communities, continues to
pose significant threats to global peace and security.
In response, in June 2015, we developed military
guidelines on the prevention ofand response to conflict-
related sexual violence.

NATO allies have strongly committed to putting
the protection of civilians at the core of our operations
and missions in how they train soldiers, operate in the
field and interact with civilians in combat zones. While
standards and training alone are not the only answer,
they do ensure that personnel recognize the different
populations affected by conflict and are trained to
prevent, recognize and respond to violations. The
recognition that predeployment training is critical
to articulating those principles and translating them
into operational effect is key. NATO nations therefore
undertake mandatory predeployment training on
the protection of civilians and children and armed
conflict for personnel deployed to NATO-led missions
and operations.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that NATO's
commitment to civilian protection is indisputable.
NATO's policy on the protection of civilians
demonstrates the shared commitment of all NATO
allies to strengthening efforts to better protect civilian
populations. Reflecting on lessons learned, we will
continue to reinforce our collective protection mandate
by building up institutional capacity, training and
dedicating resources as needed. That is a vital part of
creating lasting cultural changes and guaranteeing the
rights of all citizens.

