Mr. Gettu: We thank the French Ambassador and
his delegation for taking the lead in organizing this
discussion. On behalf of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), I am grateful for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo today is a
different country from what it was 10 years ago. There
are many positive changes there, as well as some
persistent challenges. The Government has made good
progress in improving the overall security situation in
most parts of the country. In this, it has benefited from
the support of the international community, including
through the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Progress has also been made on
democratic governance. Since the 2006 election, efforts
have helped to strengthen the legislative branch,
including expanding the oversight capacity of the
national Parliament. On the economic front, important
reforms have been undertaken, contributing to higher
growth rates in recent years.

Major challenges remain, however, and it is
critical that we recognize this and orient ourselves and
our efforts to addressing them. To consolidate peace
and security, for example, effective institutions and
governance systems, including at the local level, are
needed. Managing conflict, reducing community
tensions and delivering basic services are also critical.
If this to work, state authority need to be more
effective and extended throughout the country.

For its part, UNDP is committed to continuing its
assistance to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with the overall objective of
expanding the opportunities and capabilities of the
Congolese people and enabling them to improve their
own lives and those of their families and communities.
To that end, UNDP supports efforts in all four of the
following areas: security and stabilization, electoral
processes, governance and institution-building, and
economic development.

Following the request of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in February 2010
and the adoption of resolution 1925 (2010) in May
2010, it remains critical to advance security and
stabilization by addressing the drivers of conflict
throughout the country, including in the western
provinces. To do this, the United Nations, including
UNDP, the World Bank and several key partners are
supporting the formulation of a new peace
consolidation programme. This will complement the
stabilization programme already under way in the

ll-34509
eastern region, the Stabilization and Reconstruction
Plan in Conflict-Affected Areas of Eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo (STAREC). UNDP is
supporting STAREC to achieve its objectives,
including to restore and strengthen State authority, to
facilitate return, reintegration and recovery and to
combat sexual violence.

With regard to the electoral process, it is clear
that this year's presidential and legislative elections
scheduled for 28 November will present the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with a major test.
Successful elections will be critical to sustaining
stability and peace and opening new opportunities to
advance human development. The Government's
ownership is commendable. Its commitment to
financing 60 per cent of the overall budget for the
electoral cycle 2007-2013, compared to 10 per cent in
2006, represents a significant advance.

The international community, including
MONUSCO, the United Nations and UNDP, are
helping, including through technical and capacity
development support to the new Independent National
Electoral Commission. Meeting the June deadline for
voter registration will be challenging and require
concerted effort. The timely adoption of the new
electoral law is also needed to comply with the
electoral calendar.

The Independent National Electoral Commission,
MONUSCO and UNDP will continue to collaborate
and help facilitate fair and credible elections. UNDP
stands ready to support provincial and local elections
in 2012 and 2013. We also recognize that such support
is not just about election day, and UNDP will work
throughout the electoral cycle to strengthen the
institutions needed to make elections fair and
ultimately meaningful, including with respect to human
rights, the rule of law and the participation of all
political parties.

In terms of economic development, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made important progress in maintaining
macroeconomic stability and increasing pro-poor
expenditures. To sustain high growth rates and ensure
that the benefits of growth reach poor and rural
populations and the marginalized, economic and
human development initiatives must be expanded,
along with the consolidation of peace and security at
both the central and local levels.
To be effective, decentralization, including the
free and fair elections of local leaders and the transfer
of resources to legitimate decentralized entities, will be
critical. Efforts must also be taken to grow and enable
a vibrant and job-intensive private sector. The
Government can help by establishing a transparent and
conducive business environment, removing
bureaucratic barriers and developing the competencies
of its civil administration. Social protection systems
can be a good and affordable investment in stability,
protecting the most vulnerable and building resilience
against economic shocks and downturns. The effective
management of the country's rich endowment of
natural resources will also require further attention
from the Government.

The year 2011 is critical for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Progress is needed on all
fronts. Luckily, the objectives are mutually supporting.
Successful general elections can help sustain and
accelerate development progress, as well as the
consolidation of peace and security. Expanding
security and State legitimacy can help make
development initiatives possible and effective.
Empowering women, including by ending sexual
violence, is not just an important objective in itself, but
also a critical investment with multiple proven
development benefits. Development progress, in turn,
is critical to generating the jobs and opportunities that
can lead ex-combatants away from violence and
conflict.

A secure and sustainably developing Democratic
Republic of the Congo will, in turn, contribute to a
stable and developing Great Lakes region and a more
peaceful Africa. To realize this objective, the sustained
engagement of international partners is essential, and
the political will and initiative of the Government will
be critical. UNDP looks forward to continuing to
strengthen our partnership with the Government -
which we view positively - the international
community and the rest of the United Nations system,
to simultaneously advance security and human
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
making 2011 a benchmark year in the lives of its
citizens.

