Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We appreciate Special
Representative Kubis's update on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. Kazakhstan
greatly values the efforts of the Mission and the United
Nations system to provide critical services to the people
of Iraq amid serious and challenging threats.

At the outset, we would like to commend the Iraqi
army and security forces for their dedication and
fearlessness in fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in western Mosul on a daily basis.
We salute the fighters who are defending Iraq under
the State's command and that have now become a
part of the country's armed forces under the Popular
Mobilization Commission Law. For Iraq's safety and
peaceful future, there can be no weapons outside the
Government's control.

Kazakhstan supports the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq. The international community
must reinforce Government efforts to enhance public
services and promote inclusive governance. We would
like to emphasize that long-term recovery must be
based on addressing the Government's role in providing
services and sound security arrangements for all
communities. It is equally essential to reduce corruption,
decentralize federal authority, promote national and
local reconciliation and bring the perpetrators of crimes
to justice. We therefore commend Prime Minister Al
Abadi for affirming his Government's commitment to
achieving those objectives by working with all Iraqis,
including women and young people. We also stress the
crucial importance for a peaceful future for Iraq of the
provincial and district council elections announced by
the Council of Ministers, as well as the parliamentary
elections scheduled for April 2018. We therefore support
all legitimate demands for electoral reform.

My country underscores the need for national unity
in Iraq. We believe that national reconciliation should
remain high on its political agenda, and the nationwide
discussions of the Historic Settlement Initiative of the
National Alliance, as well as the relations between
the federal Government and regions, are therefore
exceedingly important. We particularly emphasize
the importance of military cooperation between Iraq's
national and regional security forces and call on the
regions to stay committed to constructive dialogue
with Baghdad.

Kazakhstan underscores the importance of
protecting Iraqi civilians and providing full and
immediate humanitarian access to United Nations
agencies and their partners. We emphasize the need for
support for the return of internally displaced persons and
public safety in liberated areas. The recommendations
for reconstruction, the return of displaced persons and
the fair treatment of detainees must now be speedily
and effectively implemented. We support the statement
on 24 March by the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq
underscoring the responsibility of all parties to protect

civilians against the use of human shields and the
indiscriminate use of firepower, and we condemn ISIL
for using such methods.
We welcome the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 2347 (2017), which condemned the unlawful
destruction of cultural heritage and the looting and
smuggling of cultural property during armed conflicts,
notably by terrorist groups, and which should help to
facilitate the retrieval of artifacts smuggled out of Iraq
by ISIL.

All Member States, and Arab countries above all,
should affirm their commitment to a partnership in Iraq
that is aimed at rooting out terrorism and promoting
security, political, economic, cultural and educational
cooperation. We therefore endorse the outcome of the
Summit of the League of Arab States held in Jordan in
March, and the expressed will ofIraq's Arab counterparts
to fight ISIL and provide humanitarian, economic and
development assistance. Regional cooperation between
Iraq and Arab States is fundamental, and the Summit
statement affirmed that the stability and territorial
integrity of Iraq are cornerstones of Arab security.

Lastly, we must not hesitate to support the Special
Representative's engagement with all sectors and
communities in Iraqi society in order to advance an
inclusive political dialogue and improved delivery
of public services with the aim of achieving sound
statehood and national reconciliation in post-ISIL Iraq.
That, we hope, will result in a new vision and hope
for Iraq in accordance with the Historic Settlement
Initiative presented by the National Alliance.

