Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): The
resolution which this Council has just adopted, and of
which my Government was a co-sponsor, renews the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) for a further four months in parallel
with the mandate of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) peace-keeping force. My Government
welcomes the contribution by UNOMIG and by the CIS
peace-keeping force towards reinforcing the parties'
commitment to their obligations under the Cease-fire and
Separation of Forces Agreement signed last May. We also
welcome the satisfactory cooperation between UNOMIG
and the CIS peace-keeping force, and the exchange of
letters on their respective rules and responsibilities that
has now been concluded. My country is a contributor of
personnel to UNOMIG, and we are especially grateful to
the Chief Military Observer, Brigadier-General
Hvidegaard, and to the members of UNOMIG for their
work.

But my Government remains deeply concerned by
the unacceptably slow rate of return of refugees. The
Abkhaz authorities must cooperate fully with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in significantly accelerating the pace of
repatriation and in formalizing the position of those who
have already returned. This is an essential component in
the international humanitarian agencies' efforts to address
the human suffering both in Abkhazia and elsewhere
within the Republic of Georgia.

The overall aim of this Council's policy is to bring
about a viable and lasting settlement to the Georgian-
Abkhaz conflict while fully respecting the Republic of
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Brunner, with the
assistance of the Russian Federation and the participation

 

of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), has worked hard towards that end, and we
welcome his efforts. But we share the Secretary-General's
View and his concern that the political process is stalled.
United Nations action alone cannot resolve that situation.
UNOMIG's presence is a means to an end, not an end in
itself. It is contradictory that the Abkhaz authorities on the
one hand declare Abkhazia to be a sovereign State while at
the same time claiming to be ready to negotiate a political
settlement in accordance with the Council's past decisions.
That contradiction must be resolved in a manner that
respects Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Both
parties must now fully and unreservedly commit themselves
to making a genuine effort to settle their differences and to
cooperate with Mr. Brunner to that end.
By adopting the resolution before us, this Council has
committed itself to undertake a thorough review of all
aspects of the situation in Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia,
in four months' time, before the next expiration of
UNOMIG's mandate. It is essential that significant
progress, both in the political negotiations and also on the
return of refugees, be achieved by then.

