Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank all the briefers for their informative and
comprehensive briefings telling us that the situation
in Burundi remains relatively calm, which is a good
sign. We also noted that reports for the past year have
indicated relative peace. We hope that will continue.

As we look forward to the 2020 elections, we
welcome the initiative to assume national ownership
and financial responsibility for them. We note that there
is still work to be done, and urge the Government of
Burundi to work with the United Nations mechanisms
in the region. We concur with Mr. Chergui that the
2020 elections should be represent an impetus for unity
in Burundi. On that basis, I will make three pertinent
points today.

First, regional and subregional organizations
should be given adequate space to support Burundi. We
welcome the efforts of the African Union and the East
African Community (EAC), and note the final report
on the EAC-led inter-Burundian dialogue process
held at the Summit in Arusha earlier this year. In that
regard, Indonesia acknowledges the efforts of the
mediator, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, and
the facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa of the
United Republic of Tanzania, as well as the work of
the Special Envoy, former President Michel Kafando,
and the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

Secondly, Indonesia calls for increasing humanitarian
assistance to Burundi. We note with caution that
according to the report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, refugee
returns to Burundi will peak in 2019 at more than
100,000 returnees, compared to 58,262 returnees in
2018. The month of May was the peak of the return last
year. We learned that innovative cross-border projects
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund have improved
coexistence among returnees, refugees and host
communities in targeted areas. Yet it is heartbreaking
to hear that the Burundi regional refugee response plan
is among the lowest funded appeals in the world. I urge
countries to continue their support and deliver on their
commitments to Burundi.
Thirdly, we must ensure that there will be no
relapses in Burundi even beyond 2020. The role of
the Peacebuilding Commission is indeed crucial in
that regard, and we therefore welcome the PBC's
recommendations, which Ambassador Lauber
elaborated on and which include encouraging
Burundi to identify the kinds of assistance it needs
in preparing for the 2020 elections, fostering bilateral
and multilateral partners in order to create conditions
conducive to resuming suspended assistance, including
the return of refugees, and promoting reconciliation
and dialogue among all stakeholders in order to
reduce tensions. In that regard, the PBC will definitely
have a more important role to play in Burundi in the
future. The Security Council should be able to support
the PBC's role from a distance and help the work of
peacebuilding in Burundi to take place. In providing
that space, we will certainly strengthen and contribute
to our collective work in Burundi, the objective of
which is to prevent a relapse into conflict.

Indonesia reiterates our full support for the work
of the PBC and encourages partners and donors to
continue their commitments to the Peacebuilding
Fund. Peace is a luxury that is hard to obtain and even
more difficult to maintain. Indonesia looks forward
to working together with Burundi as partners and to
sharing our own experience.

