Ms. Mueller: With the end of 2019 approaching, I
am afraid that the humanitarian situation for the people
in many parts of Syria is worse than when the year
began. The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/949) provides updates about many concerning
developments. I would like to touch on a few of
these developments today and highlight the ongoing
humanitarian efforts aimed at assisting people in need.
I will also speak to the continued importance of cross-
border humanitarian operations, and I will conclude
by highlighting several trends that may increasingly
shape the humanitarian outlook in Syria during the
year ahead.

To begin with, in north-west Syria, the situation
remains alarming. Syrian Government forces and their
allies continue to shell and conduct air strikes on areas
under the control of non-State armed groups, including
listed terrorist entities, in Idlib and Aleppo. For their
part, non-State armed groups have escalated attacks
against areas controlled by Government forces in
southern Idlib and Aleppo.

Civilians on both sides of the front line suffer
the consequences. On 20 November, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) reported that a missile reportedly fired
from Government-held territory hit the Qah al-Qadim
camp in Idlib. At least 16 people were allegedly
killed, and 30 more were injured. The following day,
on 21 November, ground-based attacks on several
neighbourhoods of the Government-held city of Aleppo
reportedly killed seven children and injured 29 others.
Some 23 civilians were reportedly killed in little more
than 24 hours, with many more wounded.

Medical personnel and facilities have also suffered.
OHCHR confirmed that, on 4 and 6 November, a total
of four separate health-care facilities in Idlib were
affected by hostilities. At least three medical personnel
were reported injured, and medical activities were
interrupted. At the same time, the listed terrorist
group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham continues to harass and
intimidate health-care services providers and other
civilians in areas under its control.

Across north-west Syria, civilians live the
consequences of the continued violence. Humanitarian
networks report that hostilities have displaced up to
60,000 people in Idlib in recent weeks. Rain, cold and
other winter conditions have compounded hardship for
many displaced families and their host communities.

At the same time, the price of fuel required for
heating remains above the national average, owing to a
supply shortage and inflation linked to the depreciation
of the Syrian pound on the unofficial market. Earlier
this month, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs received reports of families in
Idlib burning tires, old clothes and other household
items to stay warm.

Humanitarian organizations are doing everything
possible to assist the most vulnerable. Partners
continue to provide food assistance to newly displaced
households, increase health-care services in areas that
are receiving an influx of internally displaced persons
and provide emergency protection services. In recent
months, the World Food Programme has increased the
number of people to be assisted via its cross-border
modalities to more than 1 million people per month.
Tens of thousands of people have received supplies,
services and support, including education materials,
non-food items, clean water, shelter, emergency
nutrition and winter supplies.

By some measures, the intensity of hostilities
remains below levels seen in the middle of the year,
when fighting was most acute in northern Hama and
southern Idlib. Nonetheless, the impact of current
hostilities in north-west Syria remains concerning. As
the Secretary-General continues to warn,

"A full-scale military offensive would result in a
devastating humanitarian cost for the 3 million
people living in the area. It must be avoided"
(S/2019/949, para. 51).

In this context, the internal United Nations Headquarters
board of inquiry established by the Secretary-General
continues its work to investigate a series of incidents
that have occurred in north-west Syria since September
2018 causing damage or destruction to civilian facilities.

In north-east Syria, the humanitarian situation
remains serious, even as hostilities have decreased
in recent weeks. After Turkey and allied non-State
armed groups launched Operation Peace Spring in the
area between Tall Abyad and Ra's Al-Ayn in Syria on
9 October, more than 200,000 people fled the area.
As of 26 November, 123,000 people had returned to
their areas of origin. More than 70,000 people remain
displaced from Al-Hasakah, Raqqa and Aleppo
governorates. Nearly 17,000 people have fled to Iraq.

Humanitarian organizations have mounted a
significant response so as to assist the hundreds of
thousands of people affected by hostilities in the north-
east. As the Secretary-General notes, humanitarian
organizations in the area have been very adaptive in order
to ensure that the necessary assistance reaches those
most in need. With approximately 1.8 million people in
need in north-east Syria, the task is considerable.

Rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access remains
essential for all facets of the ongoing humanitarian
response in the north-east. Assessments must be
facilitated in order to identify the most pressing needs
and vulnerable populations. Supply lines via the M4
highway and various border crossings must remain open
for humanitarian cargo. The delivery of humanitarian
assistance must be allowed without interference by the
parties. Finally, monitoring missions must be allowed to
confirm that needs are being met. We expect all parties
to the conflict to facilitate a sustained and scaled-up
coordinated response.

The situation in Al-Hol camp also requires
a dedicated and urgent response. As noted in the
Secretary-General's report, some 46,400 people
remain in the camp, 94 per cent of whom are women
and children. I join OHCHR in urging Governments
to immediately take back their nationals, who are the
most vulnerable. Many of those individuals, including
orphans and unaccompanied children, may require
further assistance, given the presence of potential
abuse and trauma. Ultimately, though, the best chance
they have of a better future is for their Governments
to respond.

As the Under-Secretary-General stressed in his
briefing last month, the humanitarian situation in
north-west and north-east Syria would be markedly
worse without the cross-border operation. The
aid provided through the modalities set out in the
relevant resolutions have staved off an even larger
humanitarian crisis inside Syria. Without the cross-
border operation, we would see an immediate end of
aid supporting millions of civilians. That would cause a
rapid increase in hunger and disease, resulting in death,
suffering and further displacement - including across
borders - for a vulnerable population that has already
suffered unspeakable tragedy as a result of almost nine
years of conflict. As the Secretary-General notes in his
latest report, he counts on

"Security Council members to ensure that the
United Nations is authorized to meet the needs of
all who need humanitarian assistance, including by
the swift renewal of the modalities set out in its
resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions"
(S/2019/949, para. 55).

In a letter to Council members yesterday, the
Emergency Relief Coordinator made clear the position
of the United Nations on the importance of maintaining
all four border crossings, including Tall Abyad. The
timely renewal of cross-border resolution is vital to
ensuring that lifesaving work in Syria continues.

In Rukban, efforts continue to assist the remaining
population until durable solutions can be found for
them. Despite repeated efforts, the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent have been unable to
return to the area since September to support voluntary
departures to shelters in Government-controlled areas.
Efforts continue in order to secure the necessary

agreements from all parties for a humanitarian mission
to proceed in a safe manner. We remain hopeful that
it will proceed in the weeks ahead. Many Rukban
residents express their desire to leave the area. At
least 640 people have left the camp for areas under the
Syrian Government through their own means since the
previous United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
mission. Others are expected to follow. Financial
constraints, however, prevent others from being able to
leave the camp without support.

In the meantime, I am encouraged that, earlier
this month, the Syrian Government permitted the
United Nations to conduct monitoring missions to
the two shelters in Horns where people from Rukban
pass through. We hope that such access will continue
in the weeks to come. Across the country, I urge all
parties - States and armed groups - to spare civilians
and civilian infrastructure and to facilitate humanitarian
activities without hindrance. For humanitarian reasons
and as a matter of international humanitarian law,
human suffering must be minimized.

Before the Security Council concludes its work
for the year, I would like to draw members' attention
to several trends that may become more significant
in 2020 for civilians living through the Syrian crisis.
Three of those deserve special consideration.

First, the scale of humanitarian needs in Syria will
remain vast. As members will have seen in the Global
Humanitarian Overview 2020, which was released
earlier this month, current estimates project that some
11 million people in Syria will need regular humanitarian
assistance. Five million of those are in acute need of
assistance. The United Nations estimates that the
overall financial requirements for the humanitarian
response in 2020 will be similar to the $3.3 billion
requested in 2019. Moreover, across the region, some
5.6 million Syrian refugees need assistance, more
than 70 per cent of whom live in poverty. The current
plan to assist that refugee population and their host
community remains considerable, with projected costs
of $5.2 billion. Financial support for both the response
in Syria and the wider region remains vital.

I am pleased to confirm that, earlier this month,
the Under-Secretary-General selected Syria to receive
a provisional allocation of $25 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund Underfunded Emergencies
Window. Those funds will be used to support the most
critical collective priorities within the humanitarian
response plan. Much more support is required to sustain
humanitarian operations in Syria and neighbouring
countries. We will count on donor generosity during the
year ahead to help humanitarians reach more people in
need with the most appropriate and effective assistance.

Secondly, the economic situation across Syria
stands to compound humanitarian needs. Syria's
currency has lost half of its value this year. The factors
behind recent economic shocks may be debated, but
basic indicators present a concerning economic outlook
for civilians in Syria - the cost ofliving grows, income
stagnates and currency loses value. We know that the
most vulnerable populations are the ones least able
to afford the increasing cost of living. Communities
struggle to respond to sudden emergencies if they
are just getting by. Families will adopt more extreme
measures to cope with chronic hardship. Humanitarian
organizations will seek more ways to ensure that the
poorest and those on the brink of poverty do not slip
into an even worse state. We need to ensure the life and
dignity of those in need, including by finding new ways
to restore essential and lifesaving services.

Thirdly and finally, insecurity continues to
endanger civilians across much of Syria, including
areas away from front lines. Earlier this month, for
example, OHCHR warned about the increasing number
of incidents in northern Syria involving improvised
explosive devices in marketplaces, residential
neighbourhoods and other populated areas. Some 49
incidents have been verified since late October, 43 of
which were in areas under the control of Turkish forces
and affiliated non-State armed groups. At least 78
civilians were killed, and more than 300 persons were
injured in those incidents.

Similarly, in south-western Syria, civilians face
persistent risks amid continued violence. OHCHR has
recorded growing instances of detentions, improvised
explosive attacks and assassination attempts against
both pro-Government and former opposition-linked
individuals. Such patterns of violence pose considerable
risks to civilians and their efforts to pursue a safe and
dignified life.

As this is the final scheduled humanitarian briefing
on Syria for this year, I would like to conclude with a
genuine wish that the year ahead will be a better one for
the people of Syria.

