Ms. Juul (Norway): Today's debate is a welcome
opportunity to focus our attention on the need for a
wider international partnership to better protect
children affected by armed conflict. Children are the
most vulnerable victims of any conflict. They deserve
our attention and our protection. Their rights must be
respected and their central role in peace and security
must be recognized.

We fully support efforts to further integrate the
problem of children and armed conflict in the peace
and security sector of the United Nations and the work
of the Security Council. We must also pay attention to
emerging challenges and new threats, as suggested by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in her strategic
framework. Norway stands ready to support her in this
and in her mission in general.

Norway welcomes the more comprehensive
framework of the Council in dealing with the problem
of children and armed conflict in line with resolution
1612 (2005) and its previous resolutions. The Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict has committed
itself to a work plan that includes consideration of
specific situations and regular reviews of all situations
of concern. The ministerial meeting called by France
earlier this year could serve as a model for ensuring
continuous engagement by all stakeholders.

Another significant development relates to the
system of monitoring and reporting on the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, as well as on other violations
and abuses committed against children in armed

conflict. Information should be provided on the
practices of all parties to armed conflicts - including
Government forces, paramilitary groups and non-State
armed groups.

Civil society and NGOs can play an important
role in the monitoring and reporting system. Norway
has already provided support to the monitoring and
reporting system through UNICEF. Norway encourages
a broad approach to monitoring and reporting. We
support the suggestion of the Secretary-General that
the Council expand its focus and give equal care and
attention to children affected by armed conflicts in all
situations of concern. This includes all the categories
of grave violations beyond the recruitment and use of
child soldiers as set out in resolution 1612 (2005).

Regrettably, the creation and implementation of
action plans by countries to end the practice of forced
recruitment and use of child soldiers is lagging behind.
We need to see more effective use of action plans.
While we are pleased to note that several countries
have expressed their commitment to developing such
plans, we also join in the call for those listed in the
report to follow up with concrete time-bound action
plans. As a member of the international community
Norway stands ready to consider ways of support.

We have witnessed serious setbacks affecting the
civilian population, including children in the Middle
East region. Civilians are affected by cluster munitions,
not only during conflict but also for a long time
afterwards. We must prevent cluster munitions from
becoming the humanitarian scourge that anti-personnel
landmines were before the Mine Ban Convention. With
that in mind, my Government has launched an
international initiative to ban cluster munitions.

There is reason for cautious optimism in
countries such as Uganda and Nepal. Norway
welcomes the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement
between the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and the
Government of Uganda. We hope that will become a
sustainable peace agreement that can put an end to the
suffering of large numbers of boys and girls abducted
and recruited as child soldiers. We call on the LRA to
release all women and children in captivity in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1325 (2000).

Norway has warmly welcomed the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Nepal. According
to the Peace Agreement, cantonment of armed
personnel will soon be initiated. Children under 18
years of age will be separated and transferred to transit
centres. UNICEF in Nepal, as lead agency in
addressing issues of children associated with armed
forces and armed groups, has already signalled its
readiness to assist. Norway stands ready to assist
UNICEF in that endeavour.

