Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset, Mr. President, to welcome you as
the new Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations and to thank you for
having convened this meeting to consider the report of
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to peacekeeping operations undertaken by
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
(AU), under a United Nations mandate (S/2008/813).

I am particularly pleased to welcome the presence
of the Secretary-General, the delegation from the
African Union, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa, and members of the AU-United Nations
panel. The presence of such distinguished individuals
guarantees open and fruitful discussions aimed at
ensuring better interaction between the African Union
and the United Nations to continue and strengthen
peace and security worldwide, in particular in Africa.

Today's debate follows the 16 April 2008 meeting
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council (see S/PV.5868). It serves to strengthen our belief in the
importance of close and constant relations between the
two organizations with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

It is clear that Africa is the region most affected
by crises and conflicts which are broad in their scope
and which thus pose a serious direct threat to
international peace and security. Unfortunately,
however, despite Africa's commitment to safeguarding
world peace, its action remains constrained by a
limited capacity to carry out by itself long-term
peacekeeping operations or operations in complex
crisis situations that require multifaceted intervention.

In its resolution 1809 (2008), the Security
Council was thus correct to endorse the Secretary-
General's proposal that a high-level panel of experts be
established to consider modalities for support to
peacekeeping operations undertaken by regional
organizations, in particular the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations when they undertake United Nations-
mandated peace operations. In our view, the report's
conclusions are clear-minded and relevant, and we
reiterate our thanks to the panel.

While we acknowledge that the Security Council
bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is clear today that
the complexity of conflicts and threats to peace
requires a collective response. In other words, the
United Nations must act together with other
international organizations.

Thus, the African Union and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) have
become engaged in conflict settlement - including in
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire - by
providing an initial response to crises before the United
Nations takes over. The lessons drawn from those
operations hopefully reflect the political commitment
of those organizations and, above all, the objective
difficulties they face in supporting long-term missions.
It should be noted that the African Union has
experienced some problems assuming leadership of
peacekeeping operations on the continent, and the
report very clearly indicates that. The handicap is not
insurmountable and requires first and foremost the
genuine political will of the United Nations and the
African Union to engage in open cooperation in
accordance with the regional arrangements recognized
under the United Nations Charter.

In the context of peacekeeping, because regional
and subregional organizations can be seen as
decentralized initiatives of the Security Council, it
would be useful to study and consider ways and means
of strengthening the African Union's institutional
capacities in peacekeeping and security, and to provide
it with the support necessary to establish the African
Peace and Security Architecture and to create a
standing capacity to respond rapidly to conflicts.

Improved interaction between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council is clearly essential to making their respective
peacemaking and peacekeeping activities more
effective. Ultimately, as I have said, the African Union
acts on behalf and in the name of the Security Council,
and a judicious division of labour needs to be
established between the two organizations.

While we recognize the importance of
peacekeeping activities, it is equally necessary to stress
prevention and mediation and to exploit the

09-2716]
comparative advantages of regional and subregional
organizations to that end. These have the advantage not
only of being able to grasp the extent of crises from the
outset, but also and above all of helping to avoid
ruinous spending on peacekeeping operations whose
outcome is uncertain. We must continue, in the
framework of effective partnership, to strengthen the
mediation and settlement capacities of regional
organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter.
In that regard, the establishment of a joint African
Union/United Nations mediation support team is
encouraging on several levels.

In conclusion, we welcome yet again the
recommendations contained in the report of the panel,
which represent an important phase in the reciprocal
efforts to strengthen the African Union's capacity to
meet the challenges facing the African continent and to
mobilize greater international support. We also
appreciate the panel's approach in consulting the
greatest possible number of actors within the United
Nations, the African Union, the regional economic
communities, the European Union and Member States,
and in presenting its report cautiously and thoughtfully.

Neither the Security Council nor the regional
organizations - the African Union in particular - can
shirk their responsibility for peacekeeping under the
relevant provisions of the Charter. They must pool their
efforts and define the framework of their partnership
and interventions. We wish once again to thank the
Chairman of the panel, Mr. Romano Prodi, and the
members of his team for their valuable contribution.
We encourage Mr. Prodi to remain available to lend his
experience and expertise to the process of reflection on
how to strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union.

Burkina Faso thanks the Libyan presidency of the
Council for its efforts to ensure the adoption of a
presidential statement at the conclusion of this debate.

