Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I join previous
speakers in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Keita for her comprehensive briefing on the situation
on the ground in South Sudan.

Like others, we are gravely concerned at the
persistent clashes between parties in South Sudan,
which are causing food insecurity in the country to
escalate and the number ofrefugees, internally displaced
persons and humanitarian-access incidents to increase.
We are worried that the humanitarian situation will get
even worse in the upcoming dry season as the economic
situation continues to deteriorate. We express hope that
the recent presidential decree calling for free movement
for humanitarian organizations in the country will be
instrumental in improving humanitarian access.

My country is concerned about the slow
implementation of the peace agreement in South
Sudan, since the agreement remains the only viable
option for achieving sustainable peace. We appreciate
the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development aimed at organizing the much-awaited
high-level revitalization forum, which is now
planned to be convened alongside the meeting of the
organization's Council of Ministers in mid-December.
At the same time, we need to ensure that the political
negotiations to resolve the conflict in South Sudan are
accompanied by efforts to address the complex causes
of conflict and implement comprehensive strategies for
the provision of international assistance in numerous
areas, such as, inter alia, sustainable economic
growth, education, health care, social services and
the protection of the agriculture and rural livelihood
sectors, including livestock.

Most of all, intercommunal reconciliation is
absolutely necessary. It can be fostered through joint
livelihood projects that build trust and confidence
among local populations. There can be no real progress
unless women and young people are fully engaged and
assume leadership in efforts to sustain peace at all
levels, from the highest echelons to grass-roots levels.

Lastly, Kazakhstan will work with others in
the regional and international community to foster
constructive understanding among the various parties
to the conflict, with a view to achieving the common
goal of peace and security in South Sudan.

