Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
would like to seize this opportunity to congratulate
you, Sir, and to wish you success in presiding over the
Security Council this month. I should also like to
extend my sincere thanks to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Syria, for his wise
conduct of the work of the Council last month.

Your prompt response to the request to convene
such an important meeting of the Security Council
reflects the growing international concern regarding the
tragic and serious developments taking place in the
occupied Palestinian territories due to the illegal acts
and measures taken by the Government of Israel in
violation of humanitarian and international law.

Massive efforts have been made by the Quartet
and the countries of the region in recent months to
contain the violence and to relaunch negotiations
between the Palestinians and Israelis with a view to
implementing the road map. Nevertheless, we have
noticed that the Government of Israel has on a daily
basis gradually escalated its hostile and systematic
campaign against the Palestinian people and their
national leadership. This campaign reflects Israel's
premeditated intention to jettison the road map, which
obligates it legally to withdraw from the occupied
Palestinian territories and to dismantle its illegal
settlements therein, in order to allow the Palestinians to
establish their independent State with al-Quds al-Sharif
as its capital. Otherwise, how could the world explain
the acts undertaken daily by the Government of Israel,
including blockade, deliberate killings, the arbitrary
arrest of hundreds of innocent Palestinians and its
unjustifiable and irresponsible destruction of
Palestinian national institutions and cities, as well as
public and private properties?

The Government of Israel has recently taken a
decision to deport the elected Palestinian President.
The United Arab Emirates condemns all attempts made
by Israel to weaken the Palestinian people and sow
discord among their factions through the decision to
deport their legitimately elected President, Mr. Yasser
Arafat, or to kill him, as recently declared by the
Deputy Prime Minister of Israel. Israel has already
exercised all forms of isolation, blockade and
humiliation against him. The United Arab Emirates
considers such provocative and criminal actions an
escalation of war, state terrorism and a declaration of a
new war against Palestinians that will only lead to the
destruction of all efforts made to reach peace, end
violence, implement the road map and achieve peace
and stability in the Middle East.

Therefore, we call upon the Quartet and the
Security Council to block this decision and to take the
necessary measures to free Israel to reverse it
unconditionally. We reiterate our full support for and
our solidarity with the Palestinian people and their
national leadership in their struggle against the
campaign initiated by Israel. We call upon the
international community to re-emphasize the following.

First, President Yasser Arafat is the legitimate
elected President of the Palestinian people. The
Government of Israel, as the occupying Power, must
ensure his safety, lift the curfew imposed on him and
stop all threats to kill him. The Government of Israel
must not make any attempt to deport the Palestinian
President or any other Palestinian citizen, and must
abide by international and humanitarian law, including
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

Secondly, the Government of Israel must be
ordered to immediately cease extrajudicial executions
and all acts of hostility against the Palestinian people
or their national leadership. The Israeli Government
must also fulfil its obligations under the road map
pursuant to the relevant international resolutions,
particularly resolutions 181 (1947), 242 (1967), 338
(973) and 1397 (2002).

Thirdly, and finally, additional political, moral
and financial support must be provided to the
Palestinian Authority and its new Prime Minister, in
order to enable him to form a Palestinian Government
capable of reconstructing the national infrastructure
and of responding to the growing needs of the
Palestinian people, needs resulting from being
subjected daily to Israeli occupation, siege and
violence.

