Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We commend and
most sincerely thank the presidency of the Security
Council, as well as the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, for
having this discussion, which gives us an opportunity
to get firsthand insights on very important aspects and
challenges of peacekeeping. The missions, represented
in this Chamber by their Force Commanders, evidence
the diversity of challenges that modern peacekeepers
face: long-lasting conflict, the challenges of protecting
civilians, and robust peacekeeping and peacekeeping
operations drawdown considerations.

For the Security Council, it is very important to
see how decisions taken in New York on specific
missions are implemented on the ground. We have
come to an understanding that, to deal with modern
security challenges, there is a need to adapt the
existing approaches and implement new strategies.
As the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (S/2015/446) states, United Nations
peace operations are not appropriate tools for military
counter-terrorism operations. In this regard, we
acknowledge that regional forces are better able to fight
them, as seen in the case of the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia successful combating
of Al-Shabaab. Therefore, we need multistakeholder
approaches and greater corporation with regional and
subregional organizations. The division of labour
and even outsourcing for some peacekeeping tasks
can be good incentives that will increase the overall
effectiveness of our peace operations.
It has been highlighted during open debates on
peacekeeping operations that we need more flexibility.
In this context, and having practical experience and
knowledge of the challenges of the current peacekeeping
operations, we would appreciate hearing the vision
of the Force Commanders on possibilities for greater
flexibility in United Nations peacekeeping, especially
on counter-terrorism issues.

With regard to drawdown considerations for
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) is widely acclaimed as a success story
in United Nations peacekeeping. Among the reasons
for the success of UNMIL are the massive show of
force, a clear and comprehensive mandate, a strong and
capable Force Command and well-balanced military-
police civilian components. An important point is that
UNMIL reports provided candid assessments of the
situations throughout the country. The experience of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia shows that the
strong political commitment of all stakeholders and
effective coordinated peacekeeping operations bring
real success in achieving peace.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that United
Nations Force Commanders' recommendations, based
on their rich experience and lessons learned, provide
important input for increasing the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and contribute
greatly to the success of our common efforts to keep
peace around the world.

