Mr. Zivalj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is my
honour and pleasure, Sir, to address the Security
Council under your presidency. Since this is the first
time I am making a statement before the Security
Council in my new capacity as Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
United Nations, allow me to express my gratitude to
the Security Council for all of its efforts to strengthen
peace and assist Bosnia and Herzegovina on its path to
full and consistent implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. I should like also to convey my
appreciation for the kind words of welcome expressed
to me and for the support for my future work in this
Organization, and to offer my unreserved cooperation
and state my preparedness to work closely with the
members of the Security Council.

Allow me also to express our appreciation to
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement, for all his
efforts and the work he has done in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I thank him for the comprehensive and
up-to-date briefing we have just heard.

In my statement, I would like to focus on two
issues which are crucial to the full and consistent
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement and, in
the long run, to the establishment of a stable,
democratic, multi-ethnic and multireligious State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it once was.

The first issue is the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which is stipulated by the
provisions of annex 7 of the Peace Agreement,
pursuant to which each and every internally displaced
person or refugee has the right to return to his or her
prewar home in safety and dignity. As pointed out in
Mr. Petritsch's report,

"progress has been made in the field of refugee
return," (S/2001/219, p. 3)
and 67,000 so-called minority returns were registered
in 2000 throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.

One the one hand, this is encouraging, but, on the
other, more than five years after the signing of the
Peace Agreement, the number of people still waiting to
return is incomparably larger. This might be the
consequence of many factors, ranging from fear for
personal safety to lack of job opportunities. But one
thing is certain: the return of all displaced persons and
refugees, in accordance with the Peace Agreement,
should be accelerated, or time will become a major
factor, and too many refugees and internally displaced
persons will simply accept the fact that ethnic
cleansing has been successfully completed. That is why
we should do everything in our power to accelerate
returns throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly to minority areas.

Secondly, the full deployment of the State Border
Service, established pursuant to the New York
Declaration, is of the utmost importance if we want to
be successful in combating the problems of drug
trafficking, trafficking in human beings, illegal
migration, corruption, smuggling and customs evasion.
With approximately 60 per cent of the State border
controlled, and only for a month, it is almost
impossible to effectively and successfully combat those
crimes. In this context, I would like to underline the
importance of the rapid and full establishment of the
State Border Service on all border crossings with
neighbouring countries. Given the transnational nature
of most of those crimes, this would contribute to
successfully combating them not only in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but in the region as a whole.

Finally, I would like to express our deep
appreciation to the High Representative, Mr. Petritsch,
and, indeed, to all those who are providing aid to
Bosnia and Herzegovina in support of peace and of the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, subsequent
declarations of the Peace Implementation Council, and
the New York Declaration.

