Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): While Italy aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union, I would also
like to add a few comments. The parliamentary
elections of 18 September represented another step in
the right direction towards a democratic, open and
sovereign Afghanistan whose future is shaped by the
will of the Afghan people themselves. My country
therefore commends the Afghan authorities for their
timely and proper organization of the balloting and the
millions of Afghans who courageously exercised their
democratic rights in such a challenging environment.

We also express our gratitude to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and particularly to Special Representative De Mistura
for this morning's very useful briefing, and especially
for his pivotal role in coordinating the numerous
initiatives aimed at providing international support to
these elections.
Although the process continues, we think that for
the elections to be credible, the Afghan electoral
institutions must be able to operate in a fully
independent, transparent and professional manner. It is
in the interest of Afghanistan to strengthen its electoral
institutions at all levels, and Italy is ready to work with
the Afghan Government and Parliament to ensure that
the lessons learned are fully taken into account in order
to reform and improve the electoral system as a whole.

Elections are part of a transition process that was
streamlined at the Kabul Conference as a monitored
and conditions-based strategy aimed towards Afghan
responsibility in security, governance and
development. The process must be founded on those
conditions, which must be met through a joint
sustainable effort. In this context, we deem it necessary
to establish a transition-enabled environment by
strengthening civilian cooperation and improving the
capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces.
Enhancing the training and mentoring of Afghan forces
is also part of the transition strategy.

This process also requires major endeavours in
the area of justice, rule of law and governance. Italy
remains convinced that development and governance
are interlinked and must evolve in parallel; otherwise,
real advancement will not be sustainable. Thus
supporting governance mechanisms will create the
conditions necessary to expand the sovereignty of
legitimate institutions and to respond to people's needs.

Italy has expanded the portion of its civilian
effort dedicated to capacity-building. We take part in
the European Union multilateral efforts and count on
the excellence of the Italian national school of public
administration to train Afghan diplomats and civil
servants and to provide assistance to Afghan
anti-corruption police.

In addition, my country is committed to fostering
the rule of law, the justice sector, the promotion of
human rights and the role of women in Afghanistan. To
live up to our commitment, we will continue our
long-standing effort, which so far has provided training
for 3,700 judges, prosecutors and officials and also
established in Kabul a gender unit comprised of nine
female prosecutors aimed at protecting women from
abuse.

While we will spare no effort to support the way
forward agreed upon at Kabul, we call upon the Afghan
authorities to take further steps in order to make
progress and ensure the practical realization of the
commitments made at the Conference. We also
encourage further efforts by the international
community to channel its funds through the Afghan
budget and support the Afghan national development
strategy; and by the Afghan authorities to establish a
set of checks and balances aimed at ensuring the
independence of key anti-corruption agencies.

My country confirms its commitment to ensuring
the highest level of Afghan ownership and it is already
channelling most of its funds through the Afghan
budget and supporting national programmes within the
framework of the aforementioned strategy.

Italy considers it essential to recognize that in the
framework of the Kabul process, reintegration and
possibly reconciliation are necessary. We believe that
those who renounce violence and terrorism and pledge
to respect the Constitution should be given the chance
to participate in the reconstruction of their own
country.

However, to be acceptable to the Afghans and to
our public opinion at home, those endeavours must
remain within the red lines set at the London
Conference. We should all play a consistent diplomatic
role to bring regional actors to the side of Afghanistan.
More than ever, we remain persuaded that regional
cooperation is essential to stabilize the country. It will
encourage better coordination of the existing
international and regional initiatives under the aegis of
the United Nations.

