Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, as you
preside over the Council. We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Valdes for his
very substantive briefing on developments in the
settlement of the situation in Haiti and the activities of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We welcome the efforts and overall
work of the Mission he heads in the implementation of
its important mandate.

Russia has consistently supported the efforts of
the Transitional Government of Haiti to end the
violence perpetrated by illegal armed gangs. We
believe that a comprehensive and effective solution to
that problem will be promoted by the prompt
establishment of the national commission on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

We welcome MINUSTAH'S efforts to assist the
Transitional Government in restoring law and order
and in launching a comprehensive national dialogue
and a process of national reconciliation open to all
political forces in Haiti. It is important further to
pursue work in those areas.

The Haitian authorities, working with
MINUSTAH and the Organization of American States,
must immediately undertake all necessary measures to
prepare for the holding in 2005 of free and fair
elections. We welcome the fact that work in that area is
under way, and it must be continued.

The restoration of legality must be pursued in that
country with due respect for the rule of law. We call on
all Haitian parties strictly to respect human rights and
to refrain from violence as a means of achieving their
political ends. We note the steps taken by the
Transitional Government to release unjustifiably
detained persons. We anticipate the prompt release of
all who have not been charged and expect that those
who are genuinely guilty of breaking the law will be
brought to justice.

It is important to develop long-term and
coordinated economic, financial and technical
assistance for Haiti, to be provided by the specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, international
financial institutions, regional organizations and donor
countries. A clear priority in that regard is the speedy
disbursement to Haiti of funds pledged at the
international donors' conference held in July 2004.

We anticipate that the deployment of
MINUSTAH's military and police contingents will be
sped up, so as to bring their numbers up to the strength
authorized by the Security Council. I would like to take
this opportunity to inform the Council of Russia's
decision to provide MINUSTAH with a team of
civilian police officers.

The challenge for both the people of Haiti and the
international community is to take into account the
lessons of the past and prevent a resurgence of
instability in Haiti that would negate the many years of
what, frankly, has been a costly joint effort to
normalize life in that country.

