Mr. J essen-Petersen: Allow me first to thank the
members of the Security Council for their observations
and their very strong statements of support for the
ongoing process in Kosovo and in the region.

I also would like to express my appreciation for
the statements expressing support for the Secretary-
General's recommendations to launch the
comprehensive review this summer. I fully agree with
those many statements underlining that such a review
must indeed be comprehensive, thorough and
objective, and I can only say here that, obviously, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) will support that exercise so that we
can achieve the objective, which is one we all share.

I would also like to welcome the many statements
that rightly have underlined that the situation in
Kosovo is a very complex one. It is not a situation that
can described in black and white; it is full of nuances.
That is exactly why the Secretary-General's report and,
I would underline, my own technical assessment try to
present what one member of the Council referred to as
a mixed picture.

But I want to assure the Security Council that I
know that the leaders of Kosovo have heard their
statements today loud and clear. They have heard, first,
that they need to make further demonstrable progress
in order to move forward. They have heard, secondly,
that they need to redouble and intensify their efforts to
address, in particular, the shortcomings that we all
recognize and that I also referred to in my opening
remarks, notably in the areas of return and freedom of
movement, and overall to improve the conditions and
the protection of minorities. Thirdly, I can assure the
Council that the leaders in Kosovo have heard, loud
and clear, that the outcome of the comprehensive
review is not a foregone conclusion. I assure the
Council because I know that, for the leaders and
citizens of Kosovo, the implementation of standards is
not only a requirement for moving forward on the
process leading us into status discussions. It is much
more; above all, for the political parties and citizens of
Kosovo, standards implementation is, equally and
maybe even more importantly, a matter of building up
a European society that is democratic and multi-ethnic
and where the minorities are protected and the
religious and cultural sites of importance to the
minorities are preserved and protected.

I would, with your permission, Sir, say a few
words in response to the first and second statements of
my friend Mr. Covic. I do feel that the statements may
not always have reflected the fact that we are dealing
with a very complex situation in which there are no
blacks and whites. I thought it might be helpful if I
were to add a couple of points, so that maybe we can
get more than one side on some of the important issues.
Out of respect for the Council's time, however, let me
just cite three or four examples.

First of all, Mr. Covic mentioned as an example
of freedom of movement being respected on the
Kosovo Serb side that one Albanian Resident, a judge
in northern Mitrovica, goes to work every day. I think
that is good. Let me just say here - and the statistics
are clear - that 10 per cent of all public servants are
minorities, and the large majority of those are Kosovo
Serbs. The large majority of those minority public
servants move to work every day.

Secondly, Mr. Covic expressed concern over the
quality of democracy in a place where the minority -
the Kosovo Serbs - risks being outvoted. I would say
that I find that the most important aspect of democracy
is indeed that one participates, exercises the rights of a
democracy and votes. I think we should worry about
voting before we start worrying about being outvoted.
Furthermore, as I have discussed many times with
Belgrade, I still regret that the Kosovo Serbs did not
participate in the elections, because if they had
participated at the level they did during the last
elections, Kosovo Serbs would today have the second
largest political party in Kosovo, and the risk of being
outvoted would not have been there.

Thirdly, on the International Telecommunication
Union, I know this is a matter that was raised here in
the Council in February. Let me just say very briefly
that UNMIK has acted, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and on the basis of
absolutely unambiguous advice from the Legal Adviser
of the Secretary-General, to seek an independent code
for Kosovo on an interim basis. We are doing that for
purely economic purposes. The very weak economy of
Kosovo loses approximately €50 million on an annual
basis because all the profits of telephone
communications today go to quarters outside Kosovo.

The fourth point I want to make is on the Kosovo
Forum. I want to reassure Mr. Covic and the members
of the Council that the moment that the Kosovo Serbs
are encouraged to take their seats in the democratic
institutions, they will, of course, be invited to join the
Forum, but we cannot invite them into the Forum as
along as they are not members of the Assembly,
because we have invited the political parties
represented in the Assembly.

I also want to make the very evident point that,
when it comes to preparing for status discussions, that
is the responsibility of the institutions in Kosovo. It is
not the responsibility of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. My mandate is clear. My
mandate is to facilitate the process, but status
preparations must be the exclusive responsibilities of
the authorities and the political parties in Kosovo, and
will indeed be so.

Finally, Mr. Covic said that there had been no
response to the invitations for dialogue from President
Tadic and Prime Minister Kostunica. As I said in my
opening statement, I very much welcome those
invitations. Mr. Covic's statement is not entirely
correct. The invitation from President Tadic was a
public one and Mr. Rugova has publicly confirmed that
he is looking forward to meeting him. The Prime
Minister wrote the letter of invitation eventually,
inviting Prime Minister Kosumi. Prime Minister
Kosumi responded in a letter welcoming the dialogue
and I believe that they will meet shortly.

Let me conclude by thanking you, Sir, for
presiding over this Council meeting, which I believe
will go down in history as a very important one that
will move forward the process in the western Balkans,
in Kosovo in particular; that will move the region and
Kosovo closer towards normalization and stabilization;
and that will allow all the States in the region, and
Kosovo too, to focus all their efforts on what must be
the goal of everybody in the region: European
integration.

