Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join other Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Foreign Minister
of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremic'; and the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni, to the Council
Chamber today and to thank them for their statements.
I would like to commend, in particular, the important
work of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in promoting stability and reconciliation in
Kosovo and to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, for his continued
leadership and hard work.

The United Kingdom's support for Kosovo's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity is
unwavering. Since the Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2010/169), we are pleased that four more
United Nations Member States have recognized
Kosovo, bringing the total to 68. I would also like to
recognize Kosovo's second anniversary of
independence, which took place this February.

We are pleased to note that progress has
continued in Kosovo over recent months. Following
local elections, the Kosovo Government established
four of the six new Kosovo Serb majority
municipalities envisaged in former United Nations
Special Envoy Ahtisaari's Comprehensive Proposal for
the Kosovo Status Settlement (S/2007/168/Add.1). The
remaining two municipalities are due to be established
later this year after municipal and mayoral elections in
Partesh/Partes on 20 June and North Mitrovica in the
autumn. This demonstrates a real commitment by the
Kosovo Government to improve the everyday lives of
minority communities. We encourage the residents of
Partesh/Partes and North Mitrovica to take part in these
elections and to embrace the advantages that
decentralization will offer local communities. This
includes greater access to public services, more control
over the resources provided to them by the Pristina
Government, and a stronger voice to make their
legitimate concerns heard by Kosovo's decision-
making institutions and the international organizations
assisting their development.
We note the Secretary-General's finding that
there has been no increase in the number of ethnically-
motivated Violent incidents in Kosovo. Given that the
last reporting period saw a decrease in the number of
security incidents, we are pleased to see that this
positive trend has continued. Moreover, it helps create
the right atmosphere for the transition of the Kosovo
Force to a deterrent presence.

It is important, however, that Kosovo take further
steps to improve its standards in governance and rule
of law. This is essential if Kosovo is to match the
progress towards European integration made by its
neighbours. The United Kingdom supports efforts to
help Kosovars of all communities to rebuild and return
to their pre-conflict homes.

The ability of all communities in Kosovo to live
in safety and dignity is of paramount importance. The
recent incidence in Zallq/Zac was serious and should
be condemned. There is no place in Kosovo for
violence. All sides have committed themselves to this,
and we look to Pristina to honour this commitment and
to others to take a measured response to the incident.

We strongly encourage deeper cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina on practical issues and
echo the Secretary-General's call for flexibility and
pragmatism in finding solutions. This can only be to
the benefit of all communities in Kosovo. It is also
important for all parties to continue addressing the
wrongs of the past in order to promote reconciliation
and to improve regional relations. In that vein, the
United Kingdom commends recent cooperation on
missing persons, which has led to the discovery of a
mass grave in Serbia. We also welcome the Serbian
Parliament's recent resolution condemning the
Srebrenica massacre. These are both positive steps.

The United Kingdom strongly supports Serbia's
goal of European Union membership. We encourage
Serbia to devote its full resources to making progress
along this path. Continued disagreement over status
issues will only serve as a distraction from achieving
this important strategic objective.

The United Kingdom supports the valuable work
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) is doing in Kosovo. It is important
that Belgrade and Pristina continue to cooperate
closely with EULEX so that the rule of law, higher
standards of governance and justice can be delivered to
all of Kosovo's communities. Steps to enable the full
functioning of the court in Mitrovica would be a clear
demonstration of that cooperation.

UNMIK also continues to do useful work in
Kosovo, particularly in support of minority
communities. It is important, however, to keep
UNMIK's size and resources under close review to
ensure that they are commensurate with the scale of its
responsibilities.

Kosovo has established its position as a viable,
independent State with European Union support for its
European perspective. The United Kingdom remains
committed to working with Kosovo, Serbia and the
wider international community in promoting stability,
reconciliation, regional cooperation and economic
progress so that Kosovo can advance towards a
European Union perspective in parallel with its
neighbours.

