Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We would like
to begin by congratulating Peru on its presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We also thank
the briefers for their insightful views on the subject.
We welcome the opportunity afforded by this open
debate to further deliberate on the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime, including transnational
organized crime.

We are pleased by the continued evolution of
attention to the subject, including its consideration
in various Security Council resolutions, such as
resolutions 2195 (2014) and 2462 (2019). Based on my
country's experience, South Africa has always held
the view that the link between transnational organized
crime and international terrorism is context specific.
However, we support Peru's call in its draft resolution
on the topic, which is currently under negotiation, for
a comprehensive, up-to-date study of the interlinkages
of those threats to be conducted by the United Nations.
As Peru has proposed, the study should take place
with the contributions of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the other entities mentioned in the draft resolution.

We are of the view that a study of that nature and its
concluding report would provide Member States with a
solid basis for further refining our responses to those
complex challenges, based on a common understanding
of their global threat profile. We firmly believe that the
study would also provide a comprehensive picture of
the deficiencies that exist in dealing with those threats.
While we feel it is important to expand our understanding
of those challenges, we are nevertheless acutely aware
of their severity and the adverse impact they have on
States' resources intended to maintain peace, security
and stability and pursue socioeconomic development.

Those involved in transnational organized crime
and acts of terrorism appear to be resilient, strategic
and adept in executing their operations globally,
including targeting areas with weak law enforcement,
endemic corruption and a lack of resources to detect
their activities. The ubiquity of the threats of terrorism
and organized crime, including transnational organized
crime, therefore necessarily demands a collaborative,
multilateral response from us. In that regard, we
applaud the One United Nations approach to address
those common challenges.

As I conclude my remarks, allow me to offer
some general observations on how we might jointly
be able to improve our common efforts to address
international terrorism and organized crime and their
complex interlinkages.

First, we believe that it is greatly important that our
efforts to understand those complex challenges be rooted
in engaging with the local communities and individuals
in the affected areas, whose first-hand perspectives and
understanding of the conditions that perpetuate crime
and terrorism are absolutely invaluable in ultimately
understanding and addressing the threats.
Secondly, it is equally important that counter-
terrorism and deradicalization programmes be
community-led and -driven and representative of the
population that is affected by those challenges. Ideally,
they should also incorporate religious and community
leadership in challenging the poisonous ideologies and
narratives and in offering alternatives.

Those views are guided, of course, by certain
fundamental principles that underpin South Africa's
approach to counter-terrorism.

First, we firmly believe in the importance of
addressing the socioeconomic conditions that breed
terrorism and organized crime.

Secondly, we are convinced of the importance
of ensuring that international counter-terrorism
efforts be coordinated by the United Nations, as the
most appropriate and representative structure for
coordinating our actions in that regard.

Thirdly, we believe in the critical importance of
ensuring that counter-terror efforts be conducted in
accordance with international human rights law and
humanitarian law and do not result in unnecessary
casualties, which can further deepen resentment and
hatred and, ultimately, perpetuate a cycle of terrorism.

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming South
Africa's steadfast commitment to fighting the
scourge of terrorism and organized crime and its
interlinkages, where they exist, in all their various
forms and manifestations.

