Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing a debate on the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. My comments supplement
those that our colleague, the representative of
Germany, will make on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union, with which my delegation aligns
itself.

Belgium has been closely involved in the initial
work of the Peacebuilding Commission because we
believe in the Commission and will continue to do so. I
shall limit my statement to a few brief comments.

It should be recalled that the Peacebuilding
Commission is multidimensional in nature. It stands at
the intersection of questions relating to such concepts
as security, good governance, justice, the rule of law,
reconstruction and development. That is because it has
two parents: the Security Council and the General
Assembly. Its multidimensional nature is reflected in
the Commission's primary task: to make use of the
various existing reconstruction and development plans
and strategies to promote the use of an integrated
approach taking account of the specific needs of fragile
States and the potential threats to peace and stability.
The goal is not a package of limited, short-term
measures, but comprehensive medium-term and long-
term support enabling us to provide guidance to all
bilateral and multilateral actors both within the United
Nations system and outside it - as well, of course, as
in the country itself.

But such an integrated approach must not exist
only in the abstract: it must specifically and concretely
identify the risks, priorities, shortcomings and
weaknesses that require specific attention.

It is essentially the quality and credibility of this
approach that will convince donors to support it by
working together and by being actively involved,
including in financial terms. The Commission, the

Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund should not be substitutes for current donors but
should inform them and guide them, as appropriate, in
order to supplement their action. Here, of course, it is
vital that all players, beginning with the country
concerned, and including civil society and the private
sector, be fully involved in the design of these
strategies.

I would like to conclude with some more
practical considerations. The work of the
Peacebuilding Commission takes place, first and
foremost, in the country-specific meetings, which
could benefit from informal discussions on specific
aspects of the action to be taken in a given country
with regard to peacebuilding. More sustained work
could also be enhanced by relevant documents
produced by various players, but above all by the
Peacebuilding Support Office. We too, as the Security
Council, can support the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission by creating more regular and more
systematic interaction with the Commission - for
example, through briefings to the Council by the
Chairs of the country-specific meetings. Beyond the
request for general comments, we could ask the
Peacebuilding Commission for guidelines on specific
peacebuilding issues, and we could do so in a timely
way, so that the Commission's views could be usefully
integrated into our own work.

