Mr. Holliday (United States of America):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for organizing
today's meeting on this important issue of small arms
and light weapons. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Oshima of Japan for his effort in drafting
the presidential statement we will adopt later today and
to welcome Ms. Kawaguchi. Of course, thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Abe for his comments on the
report of the Secretary-General.

With the words from recent debates on how to
address the effects of conflicts around the world still
echoing in this Chamber, we are faced with the reality
that the instruments used to carry out such conflicts -
particularly small arms and light weapons - continue
to require our immediate and undivided attention. The
destabilizing accumulation of and illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons has proved a major
obstacle to peace, to economic development and to
efforts to rebuild war-torn societies. Terrorists groups,
insurgents and drug traffickers continue to acquire
arms primarily through illegal diversion, theft and
smuggling, rather than through legitimate transfers.

The United States believes that small steps by
individual countries and collective steps by regional
and subregional organizations will go a long way
towards establishing the norms and practices that will
diminish the illicit proliferation of these weapons. Only
two weeks ago, Member States, including the United
States, gathered at the United Nations for the second
session of the Open-ended Working Group to discuss a
draft international instrument for the timely and
reliable identification and tracing of illicit small arms
and light weapons. This was done under the able
stewardship of Ambassador Anton Thalmann of
Switzerland. The United States believes that such an
instrument should be practical and effective, enabling
the timely and reliable identification and tracing of
illicit small arms and light weapons, and should not
interfere with already existing commitments in other
forums. We look forward to the final two-week session
and to the conclusion of negotiations in June.

With July's Biennial Meeting of States and the
2006 review conference of the United Nations
Programme of Action before us, we have the
opportunity to pursue and implement innovative and
effective ways to assist those States in need of
technical or financial assistance to implement the
provisions to which we all agreed in the 2001
Programme of Action.

The United States welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of his
recommendations to the Council (8/2005/69). In his
report, the Secretary-General outlined several areas for
Member States to consider in attempting to reduce the
illicit proliferation of these weapons. We believe that
large dividends in threat reduction can be achieved
with a relatively modest investment. We welcome the
Secretary-General's attention to the destruction of
these weapons and to selected improvements to storage
facilities, particularly within disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
peacekeeping operations. We also urge States to focus
on these activities in connection with their own surplus
and obsolete weapons. Such preventive activities are
relatively inexpensive and can generally be
accomplished using locally available infrastructure and
personnel.

With a more focused approach to mitigate the
threat posed by the proliferation of man-portable air
defence systems (MANPADs) to undesirable end-users,
the United States has expanded its assistance
programme to safeguard and eliminate those dangerous
weapons. Since the inception of our small-arms and
light-weapons destruction programme, we have
provided assistance for the destruction of over 700,000
small arms and light weapons and disabled over 10,000
MANPADs, in addition to over 75 million rounds of
ammunition, in 15 countries.

In addition to these bilateral efforts, we continue
to actively participate in regional and international
efforts, such as those of the Organization of American
States (OAS), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Wassenaar
Arrangement and other forums.

Effective export and import controls and their
enforcement are, as the Secretary-General highlighted
in his report, the keystone to any successful effort to
mitigate the problems of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. Unfortunately, in many countries
few, if any, laws exist to regulate the import and export
of these weapons. In places where such laws exist,
enforcement is often weak. Any export-control system
should contain reliable and meaningful mechanisms for
the licensing of the production and transfer of small
arms and light weapons. Countries should exercise due
diligence in authenticating end-user certificates to
ensure that exported arms are destined for legitimate
end-users. In addition, purchasing countries should
make sure that their import system is transparent and
should provide maximum cooperation with the officials
of exporting countries in certifying legitimate
shipments. Unregulated arms brokers and inadequate
enforcement of arms embargoes imposed by Council
resolutions are additional causes of weapons getting to
the black market.

Ultimately, a simple one-size-fits-all solution is
unlikely to be effective in dealing with this complex
problem. Given the close links between terrorism and
organized crime, the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons has the potential to affect any country in the
world at any time; the threat is not limited solely to
regions of conflict, instability or poverty. Focused
efforts to identify and curb the sources and methods of
the illicit trade through robust export controls, law
enforcement measures and efforts to expeditiously
destroy excess stocks and safeguard Government
stocks from theft are among the best ways to attack the
problem.

In conclusion, the United States will continue to
offer its assistance for small-arms and light-weapons
destruction and stockpile management and security,
export controls and law-enforcement training. We
encourage other States that are in a position to do so to
render financial and technical assistance to further our
mutual goal to reduce the illicit spread of small arms
and light weapons and to reduce the danger that these
pose to our citizens, peacekeeping forces and soldiers
around the world.

