Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Laj, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS); Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide; and
Ambassador Seck, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, for their briefings.

Despite the fact that there have been three years
of conflict, the situation in South Sudan remains
complex and volatile. Its effects are manifested at
different levels. In the area of security, armed clashes
among the parties continue, in violation of the cessation
of hostilities agreements. Those clashes have kept
UNMISS headquarters and the civilian settlements
right in the line of fire. Examples of this would be
Malakal in February and Juba in July. Similarly, the
political crisis has limited the implementation of the
peace agreement of August 2015, owing to the lack ofa
structural approach to the conflict, which leads to the
exile of some of the parties to the agreement and a lack
of inclusivity in the political process, which calls into
question the legitimacy of the transition institutions.
Added to that is the dire economic situation, which is a
result of the fall in oil prices.

We are also concerned at the continuing violations
of human rights, including sexual and gender-based
Violence, the continued recruitment of children, and,
more recently, the incendiary pronouncements filled
with hatred and incitement to violence among the
various ethnic groups living in South Sudan, which
could result in genocide, according to the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Adama Dieng.

Similarly, the humanitarian crisis facing that
country, as manifested by the existence of more than
2.6 million internally displaced persons, including more
than 1 million refugees in neighbouring countries, was
aggravated by the incidents of violence in Juba during
the month of July. At least 4.8 million South Sudanese
are food-insecure, while in the last three years severe
acute malnutrition among children under five years of
age has increased by more than 150 per cent.

Faced with that dramatic reality, we are convinced
of the fundamental role played by UNMISS, particularly
with regard to the protection of civilians, its support for
the political process and the creation of conditions for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We must also
bear in mind the adverse conditions under which the
Mission operates on the ground, including logistical,
operational and political challenges. We hope that
those problems can be resolved promptly within the
framework of the technical support group working with
UNMISS and the Transitional Government of National
Unity, and not the Salva Kiir regime, as described
by the Panel of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) in its recent interim
report (S/20l6/963).

In addition, we welcome the opportunity to
encourage the Mission to take all necessary means to
improve the security and protection situation inside
the civilian camps in Bentiu, which are the biggest
in South Sudan, with 103,494 internally displaced
persons, and have the highest number of distressing
incidents, like those recorded in Malakal and Juba. We
believe that it would be possible to introduce some of
the positive practices implemented in other areas, such
as the establishment of a zone free of arms around
the perimeter.

We reiterate that it is not possible to achieve a
military solution to the conflict afflicting the country
and that we must combine efforts so as to revitalize the
political process. We therefore decisively renew our full
backing for all efforts and initiatives in that direction
that could help the former President of Botswana,
Festus Mogae, at the helm of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, working with the former
President of Mali, Mr. Alpha Konare, who is the High
Representative of the African Union for South Sudan,
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
for Eastern Africa.

We agree with the Secretary-General on the need to
elaborate a clear political strategy to address the conflict
in South Sudan and the region in a comprehensive way
and to recognize the need to prevent the situation on
the ground from escalating. That strategy should be
marked by national ownership and include aspects such
as the agreement to and effective implementation of a
cessation of hostilities, including the demilitarization
of the main cities of the country, given the fact that the
dry season is coming soon and the troops will then have
a greater ability to deploy on the ground. There is also a
need to follow up on the necessity of reaching a solution
to the political conflict and of adopting effective
measures on disarmament and quartering the troops.

A solution needs to take into account the need
to put into practice reconciliation initiatives and
confidence-building measures between the parties
in conflict, in order to prevent another escalation
and the commission of mass atrocities, so that an
inclusive dialogue can be fostered in which all voices,
including dissenting ones, can be heard and taken
into consideration. On the other hand, we consider of
paramount importance the effective application of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan, including its provisions on matters of security
and transitional justice, for the purpose of ensuring,
among other things, that people will be held accountable,
thereby breaking the prevailing cycle of impunity. That
is the only framework for putting an end to the crisis and
for reaching a lasting and sustainable peace in South
Sudan. We also believe that such an approach serves to
promote measures for the prevention and mitigation of
local conflicts and for fostering initiatives that aim at
reconciliation and the creation of a favourable climate
for the existence of a culture of peace in the country,
particularly at the intercommunal level.

In regard to the Regional Protection Force, we
reaffirm that the activities of the Force ought to have
the proper consent of the host State and be fully in
accordance with the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations. We are of the opinion that the Transitional
Government of National Unity is advancing in that
direction, as is reflected in its recent communication to
the Council. Our delegation believes that the Security
Council ought to act with caution, but with full
determination, in its handling of the crisis.

In that regard, we wish to report that we will be
circulating a brief on a draft press statement on the
situation in South Sudan. We hope that we can count on
the support of member States ofthis body in such times
of vital importance and that the Council will maintain
its unity, so that it can have a positive influence that
contributes to reaching a peaceful resolution to the
conflict that afflicts that brotherly African country.

Finally, I wish to ask a follow-up question of
Mr. Dieng. Could he provide us with more detailed
information on the plan of action to prevent the
commission of criminal atrocities in South Sudan and
on any measures being taken in the Mission at the
base level in order to resist the propagation of hate
speech, incitements to Violence and interethnic strife
in the country?

