The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, for their reports and informative
and comprehensive briefings. Japan is committed
to the fight against impunity and to supporting the
international criminal tribunals.

Japan welcomes the conclusion of the judicial
activities of the ICTY through the delivery of

judgemets in the cases Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic' and
Prosecutor v. Jadranko Prlic' et al. Japan hopes that
those judgements will help bring justice to the region.
We appreciate the efforts of the Tribunal to deliver
those judgements in line with the projected timeline,
despite serious staff attrition. We commend the strong
leadership of President Agius.

After 24 years ofwork, the ICTY will be closing in
a few weeks. Japan wishes to recognize the legacy ofthe
Tribunal and expresses appreciation to the contribution
made by the Tribunal to help Victims see justice. The
report submitted by the ICTY (S/2017/1001, annex 11)
contains many valuable and practical lessons learned,
which the Council could consider going forward. The
most important takeaway lesson that the ICTY teaches
us is that delivering justice heavily depends on the
cooperation rendered by Member States. In resolution
827 (1993), which established the ICTY, the Council
decided that all States shall cooperate fully with the
Tribunal. Despite the fact that the ICTY required the
cooperation from Member States in various areas,
such as in the execution of arrest warrants, access to
evidence and apprehending fugitives, securing such
cooperation was always a challenge. In hindsight, the
Council might have acted more proactively to address
those challenges by discharging its responsibility as the
organ that created the ICTY.

Let me now turn to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are very pleased
to hear the steady progress in judicial activities. As in
the case of the ICTY, the full cooperation of Member
States with the Mechanism is required in order to
deliver justice. We would like to call upon all States
to cooperate fully with the Mechanism. In addition,
arresting the remaining fugitives is a priority for the
Mechanism. We welcome the Prosecutor's efforts to
intensify his actions in that regard and hope it will lead
to arrests as soon as possible.

Before concluding, let me express Japan's
appreciation for the dedicated work done by the ICTY
and its staff in the fight against impunity. The ICTY
has had a positive impact on the strengthening of
the rule of law in the international community. The
establishment of the ICTY also helped to spur the
creation of other international and hybrid tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court, which is
the first-ever permanent international criminal court.
We reiterate our strong commitment to the promotion
of the rule of law and the advancement of justice in the
international community through supporting the work
of the tribunals.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

