Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his very
informative, detailed and nuanced briefing on his
recent travels to Chad and the Sudan. I would also like
to thank him and his team for having undertaken this
mission. My thanks, of course, are also extended to the
Permanent Representative of Chad for being here and
for what he said.

I would like briefly to make a few comments
after having listened to the statement made by
Mr. Holmes. First of all, on Chad, the humanitarian and
security situation in the country remains very
precarious, in spite of some improvements that were
encouraging and were pointed out by Mr. Holmes. That
is why Belgium earnestly supports the assumption of
the activities of the European-led military force in
Chad and the Central African Republic (EUFOR) by a
United Nations peacekeeping mission and awaits the
proposals of the Secretary-General in his report to be
issued soon.

Belgium is in favour of a rapid and effective
insertion of MINURCAT II in Chad and also in the
Central African Republic and for the speeded up
normalization of relations between Chad and the
Sudan. These developments could certainly have a
positive impact on the situation the east of the country.

Regarding his trip to the Sudan, I would like to
make the following comment. My delegation notes that
the substance of the message made by Mr. Holmes has,
unfortunately, not really changed. In spite of
statements and promises, the humanitarian situation is
not improving. Violence against the civilian population
continues to grow every day, and we have just heard
that since the beginning of 2008 more than 300,000
additional persons have been displaced following
indiscriminate attacks by the Sudanese forces
supported by allied militias and rebel movements. The
Permanent Representative of France has just referred to
this as well.

This situation is in striking contrast to the efforts
stated to relaunch the peace process and to speed up
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Belgium
deplores the fact that the unilateral ceasefire
proclaimed by the President of the Sudan has not had
any effect in the field, either from the Government side
or the rebel movements, which on both sides continue

their military strategies in direct contradiction to their
oral commitments.

We call once again on all the parties, not only to
work sincerely towards a rapid ceasefire and end of
hostilities but, above all, to give absolute priority to the
protection of the civilian population. In this context,
we welcome the extension by the Government of the
Sudan of the moratorium on the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance to Darfur until the end of
2010. At the same time, however, we call upon the
Government to implement this document, concretely
and systematically, so that humanitarian organizations
can really carry out their work effectively.

Belgium would like to reiterate its request to the
Sudanese authorities to cooperate fully with the United
Nations and to implement all of their commitments to
expedite the deployment of UNAMID so that its
mandate to protect civilians can be fully implemented.

Finally, as regards the situation in southern
Sudan, we agree with Mr. Holmes to the effect that the
resolution of security questions, among others, around
the town of Abyei, is a basic condition in order to make
progress in a significant manner in the humanitarian
sphere. Furthermore, the population is still waiting
impatiently for the peace dividends, for example, in
terms of infrastructure and social services.

Finally, I would like to express my delegation's
greatest appreciation for the humanitarian work done
by the United Nations and non-governmental
organization staff in Chad and the Sudan under
extremely difficult circumstances.

