Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to begin this statement by thanking the Secretary-
General for his presence today and for the briefing that
he gave us on his recent visit to Myanmar. My
delegation is particularly grateful for the good offices
efforts that the Secretary-General has been making in
Myanmar, which proceed from his personal concern to
help improve the political, economic and social
situation in that country - a concern that is shared by
a good part of the international community. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Myanmar for
his statement to the Council today. We appreciated its
forward-looking content - at least, that is our hope.

The Secretary-General's recent visit to Myanmar,
which was his second in a little more than a year,
occurred at an opportune time. Indeed, the trip not only
enabled the Secretary-General to assess the state of
rebuilding following Cyclone Nargis, but also took
place in the context of the preparations for the general
elections to be held in 2010.

With regard to reconstruction efforts and
humanitarian assistance, we welcome the fact that
progress has been made, in particular as a result of the
cooperation among the Government of Myanmar, the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations through the Tripartite Core Group and the
support of donors in the international community. The
work of reconstruction has not yet concluded, and
efforts to that end must continue.

In the political context, the scene is different and
much more complex, and there are many challenges.
Myanmar is preparing for its first elections in 20 years,
and my delegation believes that many issues must still
be resolved if they are to be transparent and fully
inclusive of those of all political persuasions in
Myanmar.

The forthcoming elections must be aimed at
facilitating Myanmar's peaceful transition towards
democracy and national reconciliation, placing priority
on strengthening the rule of law and protecting human
rights. In that connection, the elections must have the
support not only of the Government, which bears
primary responsibility for organizing them, but also of
all registered political parties and of those rebel groups
that have demonstrated a readiness to lay down their

weapons. We hope that the Government will create the
conditions necessary to engage in a genuine dialogue
with all ethnic groups and minorities in order to
achieve full national reconciliation. This means that all
political prisoners, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
must be released as soon as possible. Their
participation in the elections will guarantee the
credibility of the process and thus its legitimacy. It
would therefore have been preferable for Senior
General Than Shwe to have allowed the Secretary-
General to visit the emblematic Ms. Suu Kyi, who has
once again been arrested under conditions which have
not yet been fully clarified and is now subject to a new
trial.

The Government of Myanmar now has an
opportunity to strengthen the process of national
reconciliation - thus making it possible for the
population to enjoy their civil and political rights,
building peace and laying the basis for the country's
future economic development. That objective should be
pursued with the support of the United Nations through
the good offices of the Secretary-General, but also with
the support of States in the region, in particular States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, who play a particularly relevant role given
their close relations with the Government of Myanmar.

The constant flow of refugees from Myanmar to
Thailand reflects the lack of guaranteed protection for
the civilian population, as well as the repeated
violations of human rights in Myanmar. We therefore
urge all regional actors to take necessary measures to
ensure that the more than 100,000 refugees have
adequate protection and shelter.

We are also concerned with the situation of child
soldiers. While we recognize the efforts of the
Government in Myanmar in that regard, we feel that
they have been insufficient. We urge the Government
to ensure the rights of those minors and to cooperate
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict on measures
to demobilize all child solders and reintegrate them
into civilian life with their families.

The message sent by the Secretary-General to the
people and the Government of Myanmar during his
visit was clear. The United Nations and the
international community are looking to the present and
the future of an independent and sovereign Myanmar
and will spare no necessary effort towards dialogue and

cooperation, in order to guarantee the country's
political, economic and social development on the path
to peace.

