Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by thanking Portugal for calling for
today's debate. Ensuring that the Security Council
adopts the most efficient working methods is essential

to the continuing effectiveness of this body. The
Council has a responsibility to ensure that it is
equipped to deal with all matters of international peace
and security as effectively as possible. The United
Kingdom treats this obligation seriously and fully
supports the ongoing process to seek out new ways to
improve efficiency, transparency and effectiveness.

The United Kingdom has made some important
contributions to this process over the last year, in
particular those aimed at strengthening its focus on
conflict prevention. I am pleased that we have helped
to embed the horizon-scanning sessions into the
Council's programme of work as a regular item. The
United Kingdom has promoted more informal sessions
to stimulate debate on various challenges facing the
United Nations, particularly around peacekeeping.

We have also made more use during our
presidency of video technology to get real-time updates
from the various front lines where the United Nations
operates. We are pleased that that has now become
standard practice. Several special representatives have
themselves commented to us that they welcome the
fact that they can now keep the Council informed and
updated without having to take days out of their
schedule to travel to New York. We are also
encouraging more opportunities for the Council to hear
expert and specialized advice, for instance from the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Military Staff
Committee.

We should continue to support those practices and
find new ways in which to evolve and adapt. If we see
something that does not work as well as it could, we
should not be afraid of addressing it. And if we see an
opportunity to make a positive change to how we work,
we should consider how best to embrace it. We should
continue, for instance, to welcome more ways to
increase the transparency of the Council, provided that
this is balanced against the need for it to work
effectively. We support more open sessions with
different formats, such as Arria-style, or informal,
briefings if that helps to increase understanding,
awareness and debate.
The Council should always be on the lookout to
find new ways of opening up its work to non-members.
We should also be ready to fully use existing
opportunities to demonstrate the openness and
transparency of our operations. We very much regret,
for example, the fact that the position of some Council
members prevents the wider circulation of reports from
panels of experts working for the Council's subsidiary
bodies. Experts' reports should be published as a
matter of course.

Equally, however, we should be clear that many
discussions must be held without record, behind closed
doors, among the 15 members of the Council. To
suggest otherwise is not serious.

The Security Council's dialogue with regional
bodies needs to continue and to become more strategic.
Regional organizations can bring added value to the
Council's deliberations with local knowledge and
expertise, as has been shown this year in the Council's
interactions with the Arab League and the African
Union.

It is also important that the Council is flexible
when considering how new technology can aid our
work. Social media networks have played a significant
role in some of the momentous events in the Middle
East in the past year, including in Libya, Egypt and
Syria. These networks spread news, pictures and ideas
directly into society at a speed unimaginable even just
a few years ago. The situations develop quite literally
before our eyes, and the Council needs to consider how
that affects our ability to stay on the front foot.
Ensuring a robust online digital presence, including by
supporting live broadcasts of Council meetings on the
Internet, is part of the answer. Using videoconference
technology more regularly to get on-the-ground
assessments also helps in this regard.

But we must all be ready to accept that the
Council may need to address issues more quickly and
act faster. Twenty-four-hour news coverage, social
media networks and the ubiquity of mobile telephones
mean that "wait and see" will become a less and less
acceptable position if the Security Council is to remain
at the forefront of international efforts to maintain
peace and security. This is an ongoing process. The
Security Council needs to be prepared to evolve
continually if it is to operate as effectively and
transparently as possible.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm the United
Kingdom's commitment to participate in this important
process.

