Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to express our utmost appreciation to Venezuela for
organizing this wrap-up session. Malaysia continues to
believe that such meetings provide an important platform
for delegations to place on record their impressions and
reflections on the Security Council's work.

I join previous speakers, Mr. President, in
congratulating you and the entire Venezuelan delegation
for guiding the Council through what has proved to be
an extremely intense and productive month of February.
Under your presidency, the Council has covered a broad
range of issues and questions concerning specific

situations in countries and regions, as well as thematic
issues. The summing up of your presidency clearly
captured how skilfully you have steered the Council to
address those issues.

On that note, we appreciate Venezuela's initiative
to convene a debate (see S/PV.7620) on working
methods with a focus on the work of the sanctions
committees. We believe that the outcome of the debate
in note S/2016/170, adopted by the Council under
your leadership, lays down important guidelines that
will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Council's subsidiary bodies. In addition, the open
debate (see S/PV.7621) on respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations was an
important opportunity for the Council and the wider
membership to take stock of our collective performance,
in particular in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

We are also pleased to have participated in the open
debate (see S/PV.7629) last Tuesday on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture. We continue to believe
that the strength of the architecture is anchored in
the Peacebuilding Commission and its advocacy and
convening role, as well as in its proven capacity to act
relatively quickly and flexibly. Those are important
features that must be preserved and strengthened in the
review's outcome.

1 also appreciate your efforts, Sir, in organizing
informal discussions on the issue of the selection of the
Secretary-General. In that regard, I note and welcome
the President of the General Assembly's proactive
initiative of organizing hearings for the aspiring
candidates beginning in mid-April. We are of the view
that the Council should support such initiatives, and
also contribute to making the process more transparent
and inclusive.

The Council and the wider membership remain
seized of numerous challenges and threats to
international peace and security. Throughout this
month, we discussed the work ofa number of subsidiary
bodies, namely, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006); the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning Somalia and
Eritrea; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South
Sudan; and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).

My delegation welcomes the adoptions of resolution
2266 (2016), on Yemen sanctions. We reaffirm our full
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
and his efforts. We also urge the parties in conflict to
put aside their differences in order to achieve a new
ceasefire. Prolonged conflict will only exacerbate
the already dire humanitarian situation. Indeed, the
consequences of the security and political vacuum have
been exploited by the terrorist groups.

In addition to the monthly discussions on the
situation in Palestine, the Council benefited from
additional discussions, specifically on international
protection for the Palestinian people and on the situation
of children in the occupied Palestinian territories. In
that regard, my delegation welcomes and supports the
initiative undertaken by France to revive the Middle
East process. We believe that such an initiative,
aimed at contributing to the peaceful settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, is long overdue.

Later this afternoon, we will continue to respond to
the situation in Syria. It is my delegation's fervent hope
that this time the cessation of hostilities will be adhered
to by all the parties to the conflict, and allow for some
meaningful respite from the fighting. We reiterate the
call on all the parties to engage constructively in the
United Nations-led dialogue and consultations with a
View to achieving a positive outcome, especially for the
Syrian civilians, women and children who have borne
the brunt of the hostilities.

The Council undertook a visit to Burundi last
month, and a few days ago the Secretary- General was in
the country. Since yesterday, a five-member high-level
African Union delegation has been in consultations with
the Government and other partners and stakeholders in
the country. In the light of such sustained attention and
offers of engagement and support from a wide range
of international actors, we would urge all Burundian
stakeholders to seize the opportunity and engage
constructively with all partners with a view to creating
the necessary conditions for dialogue and for the return
to peace, security and stability.

Very briefly, on Guinea-Bissau, Malaysia is
pleased that the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau has
been extended. We fully support the mission's role
and function in ensuring that the country stays the
course towards national reconciliation, strengthening
governance and achieving security and stability.

Before concluding, I would like to note that the
Council has before it a number of important issues still
to be discussed, and decisions to take, before we close
the chapter for this month. In that regard, I would like
to take this opportunity to stress how vital it is for the
Council to be united in addressing the plight of the
victims of conflict, terrorism and other challenges to
international peace and security around the world. As
such, we must draw deeply on our reserves of goodwill,
flexibility and a spirit of constructiveness so that the
Council as a whole can continue to effectively discharge
its responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. We remain committed to doing our part.

Finally, I wish Ambassador Gaspar Martins of
Angola and his team the very best for their presidency
in March. We look forward to it.

