Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the Dominican Republic for convening
this open debate on addressing the impacts of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security. The Secretary-General has said that climate
change is the defining issue of our time and that we are
presently at a defining moment. That is why this debate
is so timely.

Climate-related disasters affect all countries, rich
and poor alike. We are witnessing the effects of extreme
weather conditions across the world, from the Caribbean
to the Pacific. In the past year, immense distress
and suffering caused by heavy rains, flooding, fires,
earthquakes and drought have struck the inhabitants
of different regions of world, including the Americas,
South-East Asia and South Asia, among others.

Apart from the tragic loss of life caused by such
extreme climactic changes and the massive financial
costs that such disasters entail, greater sensitivity and
proactivity are needed to prevent conflicts that all too
frequently ensue as national and regional stability
are affected due to a lack of access to food and clean
water and their inevitable impact on the movement
of peoples, sometimes leading to both forced and
protracted displacement.

Suffice it to recall how tensions increase because
of the seasonal phenomenon of transhumance, as
discord between farmers and pastoralists vying for
limited or diminishing resources is aggravated, and in
some instances becomes a further factor that causes
instability. In the Lake Chad basin, for example, which
has long provided a source of life in the desert for
millions of people, we are faced, because of ongoing
regional conflicts and the threat of extremist expansion,
with refugees and internally displaced populations
struggling to find water, to say nothing of the impact
on fishing, further compounding poverty and leaving
already extremely vulnerable populations in even more
desperate conditions.

If indeed extreme climate disasters are
indiscriminate, such examples show that the poorest
pay the highest cost. According to recent studies, those
in poorer countries are five times more likely to be
displaced by extreme weather than their counterparts
in wealthier nations. We must act urgently.
Immediate action is needed not only to prevent
the manifold consequences of rising temperatures
in our common home, but also to hold off peace and
security concerns from preventable climate disasters.
Those actions are part of the ecological conversion that
Pope Francis is strongly encouraging the international
community, and each one of us, to undergo.

This open debate is an opportunity to take a hard
look at some of these problems and offer ambitious,
coherent and action-oriented solutions that show respect
for the planet and concern for the integral development
of all. Speaking to diplomats accredited to the Holy See
at the start of this new year, Pope Francis expressed his
hope for a more decisive commitment on the part of
States to strengthen cooperation to urgently combat the
worrisome phenomenon of global warming.

In that regard, the support of the international
community is urgent for favouring the development
of infrastructure, the growth of prospects for future
generations and the emancipation of the most vulnerable
sectors of society, lest they be forced to fight for food
and wage war for water because of our failure to act.

