Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Government of Canada, I congratulate the Jordanian
presidency for organizing this important debate today.
Canada is pleased to participate in the discussion and
has joined the growing number of countries concerned
about the issue of violent extremism. It is undoubtedly
one of the main threats to global security.

(spoke in English)

Canada is among many other nations concerned
with the reality in which our citizens, including our
young people, can be radicalized to violence or decide
to travel abroad to participate in terrorist activities.
I would like to outline how Canada is tackling this
challenge. At the same time, I would like to note that
we are participating in today's meeting to learn from
other nations, as sharing information and best practices
is crucial in this respect.

Addressing violent extremism is a challenge that
demands comprehensive action on many fronts and
across Government departments. First, it demands
strong legislative measures to strengthen our national
security. Indeed, we recently took an important step
forward in this regard by introducing the anti-terrorism
act. This legislation will address terrorism on a number
of fronts, including creating a new offense of advocating
or promoting terrorism generally, and providing for
the ability to remove terrorist propaganda from our
domestic web servers.

Secondly, and more germane to our discussions
today, the challenge of violent extremism demands
concerted and sustained efforts at all levels to build
resilience within communities. This is an area in which
I am proud to say that Canada is actively engaged.
In fact, prevention is a key component of Canada's
counter-terrorism strategy.
Canada believes strongly in the importance
of preventing individuals - including our young
people 4 from radicalizing to violence before they
cross the line into terrorist criminal activity. Young
people are both potential recruits and interveners in the
radicalization process. It is therefore critical that they
be meaningfully engaged so that they can be part of the
solution.

How is Canada working to achieve just that? First,
much important work is being done by numerous
Government departments and agencies to empower and
educate youth. We work in partnership with communities
to build mutual trust and understanding - a foundation
from which we can collectively take action to prevent
radicalization at home and in the broader global
community. Broadly speaking, our efforts are anchored
by research, community outreach and meaningful
engagement and by building a tailored, whole-of-
government intervention.

Canada's development assistance also supports
efforts to ensure safe and secure environments
for children and youth so that they can contribute
meaningfully to society. That includes efforts to create
opportunities for youth-at-risk to find alternatives to
violence and crime and become engaged as positive
members of their societies.

Domestically, our work with leaders through the
Cross-Cultural Roundtable on Security helps us to
engage with communities across Canada and to initiate
frank and open discussions around the conditions
conducive to the spread of violent extremism.

Our efforts are paying off in a number of large
cities across Canada where communities have begun to
identify points of intervention and local community-
driven action plans. In a series of workshops called
Deepening the Dialogue, we use first-hand experiences
to engage with young people. The approach challenges
the audience to reflect on radicalization leading to
Violence in the context of their own communities. We
work with them to identify opportunities for individual
and community interventions and resources before an
individual crosses the threshold to violent extremism.
We are convinced that such exercises will do much to
strengthen the resilience of communities.
(spoke in French)

Preventing violent radicalization is a collective
responsibility. Citizens, families, religious leaders,
police, the Government and, of course, communities all
have a role to play.

While the primary responsibility for responding
to violent extremism lies with the individual States,
the United Nations plays a crucial role in facilitating
and promoting coordination and coherence in the
implementation of various tools and strategies at
national, regional and international levels and in
assisting Member States.

We encourage States to support multilateral
efforts in the fight against terrorism, such as the
Hedayah Centre, which was established by the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. It is the first international
centre dedicated to training, dialogue, research and
collaboration in the fight against violent extremism.
Canada welcomed the launch of the Hedayah Centre
and is pleased to support its work.

As mentioned in my opening remarks, Canada is
here to share its experience and to listen and learn from
others. We recognize that every nation has a particular
experience, but we all share common basic principles.
We must ensure that the lines of communication are
open and that the international community works
together on all fronts. It is the only way to effectively
deal with such a threat. With a significant commitment,
young people can be a powerful force to help create a
more peaceful and secure world.

(spoke in English)

Canada has benefited greatly from hearing the
perspectives of the Member States participating in
today's debate. I again thank the Jordanian presidency
for the convening of this meeting.

