Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): At the outset, the
delegation of Indonesia would like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his extremely
important, yet enormously distressing, report to the
Council, dated 27 November 1995, concerning recent
gross violations of international humanitarian law in the
areas of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most.
We also wish to pay tribute to the personnel of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
United Nations peace forces, the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for their invaluable
contributions in providing information on those crimes.

The draft resolution before the Council today
represents the latest in a series of resolutions and
statements by the Council on the shocking atrocities
committed by the Bosnian Serbs in the area surrounding
Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most. The draft
resolution is necessary in View of the persistent and
stubborn refusal of the Bosnian Serb party to comply with
the decisions of the Security Council despite repeated and
unequivocal calls by the international community.

The present draft resolution not only reaffirms
Security Council resolution 1019 (1995) but also provides
a most comprehensive and incisive elaboration of the
Council's views on the question of the violation of
international humanitarian law by the Bosnian Serbs. The
Council's consideration of the draft resolution acquires
greater meaning and urgency against the backdrop of the
recent signing of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is our view that if
this Agreement is to lead to a lasting peace, a thorough

 

and complete investigation of the atrocities which have
been committed by the Bosnian Serbs is imperative so that
appropriate sanctions against the perpetrators of such
blatantly horrendous acts of terror and violence can be
imposed.

The report by the Secretary-General chronicles some
of the most heinous acts committed against humanity since
the Second World War. The accounts of summary
executions, rape, mass expulsions, arbitrary detention,
forced labour and large-scale disappearances provided in
the report have only compounded our deepest fears
regarding the depth and scope of suffering inflicted upon so
many defenceless people. Even more appalling is the fact
that these abhorrent acts were committed in a calculated
manner, constituting an inherent aspect of the strategy of
the aggressors. This is poignantly reflected in the summary
execution of a large number of men, particularly in the area
of Srebrenica, by the Bosnian Serbs and their paramilitary
forces. Indonesia is equally concerned that there has been
little progress in determining the fate of the missing
persons.

The Indonesian delegation deems it most unfortunate
that some quarters have chosen to cast doubts on the
accuracy of the reports which have been submitted by the
Secretary-General. We find such attempts, including the
deliberate misrepresentation of facts, to go beyond the
realm of comprehension, and they are hence totally lacking
in credibility. The veracity of such claims can only be
confirmed if the Bosnian Serbs comply with the demands
of the international community to fully cooperate and
provide access to sites where mass killings are suspected to
have taken place so that a complete investigation can begin.
The refusal of the Bosnian Serbs to allow access raises
serious doubts about their claims of innocence.

We therefore fully associate ourselves with the
demands contained in the draft resolution that the Bosnian
Serb party give forthwith to representatives of UNHCR, the
ICRC and other international agencies unconditional access
to persons displaced and to persons detained or reported
missing, as well as to areas where atrocities have taken
place. We further deem it significant that the draft
resolution contains various elements which reflect the
steadfast commitment of the Council to the principle of
individual accountability for acts committed in violation of
international humanitarian law. In this regard, we would
like to reaffirm the importance which we attach to the
cooperation of the parties concerned, in particular the
Bosnian Serbs, with the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia in the discharge of its duties. We would
also like to underline the call contained in the draft
resolution for the parties concerned to fully cooperate
with the efforts of the United Nations, humanitarian
agencies and non- governmental organizations to create the
necessary conditions for the repatriation and return of
refugees and displaced persons in safety and dignity.

For these reasons, the Indonesian delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

