Mr. Lelong (Haiti): First of all, I would like to assure
you, Mr. President, that I will try to be brief and to respect
your time limits. I would like to congratulate you on having
convened this public meeting, which, by allowing for the
participation of countries that are not members of the
Security Council, enriches its work.

The question before us today is that of a search for
ways and means to protect civilians affected by armed
conflicts, to guarantee in the most effective manner possible
their security wherever it is threatened. This question has
been debated at length by previous speakers. I therefore do
not intend to make a speech, but rather to make a few brief
comments based on the recent experience of my country
and on the contribution of the international community, for
which we shall always be grateful.

The management of actions and initiatives aimed at
definitely resolving crises so that there is no possibility of
their resumption would be the optimal option for protecting
civilians. This is a pious wish and a challenge that is
difficult to address as a whole, and I shall therefore take up
certain aspects of the specific case of Haiti.

As all are aware, my country was not the victim of a
civil war, but rather the situation of crisis that it has faced
has numerous characteristics that are generally typical of a
war situation, such as massive migrations of population
and violations of human rights, a population held hostage
and polarized and a ruined economy.

The international community responded through
political, diplomatic and humanitarian actions and through
coercive measures whose effectiveness was often called
into question, in particular the economic sanctions.
Perceived by the captive population as an expression of
the support of the international community, economic
sanctions as applied in Haiti turned out to be a burden for
the poor and an advantage for the de facto authorities and
their supporters, and thus did not yield the expected
results. There was an embargo on gasoline, but the streets
were full of vehicles; a suspension of commercial flights,
but heavy nighttime aviation activity. There came the
institutionalization of smuggling through a porous border,
a sharp rise in prices of commodities, a spiralling cost of
living and considerable enrichment of the economic elite.

These brief observations on economic sanctions
allow us specifically to make comments regarding the
nature of sanctions when it has been decided to apply
them. We believe that sanctions must be, and are
supposed to be, not against a society but against a group
of individuals; that is, that they must be carefully
targeted. They must be applied with better planning and
a reliable system of assessment. They must be properly
formulated, of limited duration and based on specific
criteria. They must take into account progress made. And
the United Nations system itself must have a reliable
source of information regarding the impact of sanctions
on each individual situation in which sanctions are
imposed.

Once again I emphasize that when a decision has
been taken to resort to economic sanctions, they must be
imposed firmly and transparently, strictly applied and
supported by a credible decision. In the case of Haiti at
least, such an approach, by all indications, would have
resulted in much less suffering.

A second group of comments relates to some of the
operational defects, which improved with time and as
measures were taken. I would emphasize here, without
wanting to be too critical, an occasional lack of
understanding in the implementation of adopted policies;
a pernicious role played by local personnel; supporters of
those in power being recruited by the international
organizations; a perceived lack of sensitivity on the part
of those who were in charge of certain political and
diplomatic aspects; and perhaps too frequent personnel

 

turnover. The result has sometimes been a lack of
coordination and of efficiency.

A third point would be the question of how to avoid
the massive flow of arms to the country despite all
prohibitions. Is it enough simply to protest these atrocities
fuelled by industries that are showing renewed vigour in the
international markets? Is it enough to condemn those who
- out of apparent madness, forever seeking either to take
power or maintain it - mutilate, rape or kill thousands of
innocent people, or cripple them either with machetes or -
as if this might be more modern - with modern weapons?
Should we not condemn all the links of the chain? Here is
a highly complex and challenging problem.

A fourth aspect is that the maintenance of peace and
security and the protection of civilians is based not only on
political and diplomatic initiatives and on the sometimes
opportune application of economic sanctions, but also on
sustained efforts for development. Although in Haiti one
can see an evolution towards the standard approach of
separation of activities, there is also a need to integrate
the work of the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and other international actors in order to
move action beyond humanitarian assistance towards the
areas of economic and social development.

Given these tragedies, the international community
has an obligation to make a firm commitment, avoiding
any kind of manipulation. The history of murders and of
massacres is doubtless also the history of silence and of
complicity. It is highly possible that several chapters of
modern history would have been different if certain
genocides had not benefited from so much complicity.

