The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council in October, I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Mr. Jean-Maurice Ripert, Permanent
Representative of France, for his service as President
of the Security Council for the month of September
2007. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Ripert
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council was briefed on
1 October on the recent attack on African Union
peacekeepers in Haskanita, South Darfur, Sudan,
reportedly committed by a rebel group. The
Council condemns this murderous attack and
demands that no effort be spared so that the
perpetrators be identified and brought to justice.

"The Security Council deplores the loss of
life and injuries that resulted from this attack, and
the

conveys its sympathy to the Governments,
families and colleagues of those killed and
injured.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) and commends the dedication of its
personnel and expresses its appreciation for those
countries which contribute troops to AMIS.

"The Security Council recalls the demand in
resolution 1769 (2007) on all parties for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and attacks on
AMIS, civilians and humanitarian agencies. The
Council insists that all parties in the Sudan
comply with this demand and cooperate fully
with the deployment of the United Nations Light
and Heavy Support Packages to AMIS, and with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

"The Security Council deplores the fact that
this attack took place on the eve of the peace
talks starting on 27 October in Tripoli, under the
chairmanship of the United Nations and the
African Union. The Council underlines that any
attempt to undermine the peace process is
unacceptable."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
07-52572

