Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Victor Da Silva
Angelo, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), for
his introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/359).

The security situation in MINURCAT's area of
operation continues to deteriorate as a result of
banditry and rebel activity. Unfortunately, that has
direct repercussions on the humanitarian situation in
eastern Chad and in the North-East of the Central
African Republic. Many refugees and internally
displaced persons are still in great need of
humanitarian assistance. Also disturbing are the results
of the activities of armed groups and bandits during the
period under consideration. They have caused
significant loss of human life and have endangered the
lives of humanitarian personnel and restricted their
movement, resulting in a negative impact on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need.

We welcome the positive developments in the
implementation of the 13 August 2007 agreement
between the Government of Chad and the political
opposition. In particular, we welcome the consensus
reached on the legislative framework for the elections
and modalities for the establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission. We are also
pleased to note that the census is moving ahead, which
will ultimately make it possible to determine the
electoral districts and to hold elections.

The leader of our revolution and the President of
the African Union, Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi, has
reiterated his concern about re-establishing peace in
eastern Chad, the Central African Republic and Darfur.
Libya believes that it is possible to end conflict
through comprehensive political solutions in the
region, thereby strengthening international peace and
security. We would therefore like to see rebel groups in
Chad sit down with the Government in order to
implement the Sirte agreement of October 2007. Libya
would also like to see all Chadian opposition groups
join in a national reconciliation effort. In that regard,
we welcome the agreement signed in Tripoli between
the Chadian Government and three opposition groups.

Libya also continues to support the political
process in the Central African Republic to safeguard
the achievements of the political talks held in
December 2008. In that connection, we refer to the
latest positive results in Libya's mediation efforts,
which led to the signing of an agreement between the
Government of the Central African Republic and armed
groups headed by Mr. Abdoulaye Miskine that brought
this group back into the political process.

We would also like to reiterate the importance of
strengthening peace efforts in the Central African
Republic. We welcome the efforts made by the
Government, local stakeholders, the Peacebuilding
Commission and international and regional actors. We
hope that the international community will extend its
support to peace and development projects as they are
an important factor in consolidating stability and
peace.

Libya is aware of the direct impact of the
relationship between the Governments of Chad and the
Sudan on the security and humanitarian situation in
eastern Chad and Darfur. We therefore welcome the
mediation efforts of the Government of Qatar and its
cooperation with the leader of our revolution and the
President of the African Union, Colonel Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, to ensure that the agreements signed
between the parties are implemented in order to
ultimately normalize relations between the countries.

With regard to MINURCAT's deployment to
eastern Chad and the north-eastern part of the Central
African Republic, we are pleased to note the efforts of
Mr. Angelo and all the Mission's personnel, who are
working in such dangerous circumstances. We express
our concern over the fact that not all of the Mission's
staff have been deployed. We hope that that will be
done quickly, so as to resolve problems regarding the
lack of materiel and personnel and to equip the Mission
to effectively carry out its mandate.

We hope that MINURCAT will also be deployed
to areas of tension in the north-eastern part of the
Central African Republic. In that regard, we welcome
the positive role played by the Detachement inte'gre' de
securite (DIS) in improving security in refugee camps
and main towns in eastern Chad despite the difficult
circumstances. Those conditions are difficult both due
to the lack of security and want of equipment. We hope
that DIS will be strengthened and its deployment
accelerated.

We welcome the workplan annexed to the report
of the Secretary-General, entitled "Benchmarks,
indicators of progress and key activities: 2009-2011".
We appreciate the need for and importance of
developing such benchmarks at all levels - military,
humanitarian and political. Having said that, however,
we do not support the imposition of a time frame, even
if one should be established, because timing should be
based on practical forecasts. Otherwise, that would
send an erroneous message to the various political
parties, refugees and the internally displaced.
We do need to be realistic. Progress may be
achieved soon or delayed for some reason, and that
might make some people particularly optimistic and
others particularly pessimistic. That is why we believe
that it would be wiser to confine ourselves to objective
benchmarks and indicators of progress that are not
associated with a timetable.

In other words, we should ensure that the
benchmarks envisaged are associated with genuinely
realistic indicators of progress. All of that will depend
on the political resolve of all parties concerned and the
provision of assistance by the international community
to the peace process and the ongoing mediation efforts.
It should not be subject to time factors, since it is plain
that they have not been very effective in many long-
standing conflicts.

