Mr. Lucas (Angola) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Uruguay on your guidance of the work of the Council
this month.

(spoke in English)

In our view, more than these formal wrap-up
sessions by Security Council members - in which
we repeat much of what was said in consultations,
briefings, debates and open debates - we consider that
the interactive dialogues that the President and Council
members hold with the wider membership of the United
Nations are a more useful tool for the Council's work.

We shall highlight and briefly touch upon the
African issues considered this month - namely, the
Security Council missions to Burundi, Mali, cote
d'Ivoire, Libya, the West African region, the Sudan
and Somalia - and on two important moments of the
Uruguayan presidency: the debate on the protection of
civilians (see S/PV.7606) and the one on the Middle
East (see S/PV.7610).

Less than a year ago, the Security Council
conducted a mission to Burundi, which was viewed
then as a success story for a country that had emerged
from armed conflict and was on its way to consolidating
peace, national reconciliation and economic and social
reconstruction. This month, however, the reasons for
visiting the country were quite different. Burundi
has been plunged into escalating violence, and our
expectation is that this mission by the Security Council
will make some meaningful contribution to easing
tensions in Burundi and facilitating a return to inclusive
negotiations in the pursuit of a national consensus
towards a better and peaceful future for the country.
We thank the French Ambassador for the thorough
information he provided to the Council on the Security
Council mission (see S/PV.7615).

In Mali, with regard to the implementation of
the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement signed
in May 2015, the commitment of the parties to the
Peace Agreement and the progress made so far in its
implementation - despite weaknesses, difficulties and
serious threats such as the presence of terrorists and
international criminal network - Mali deserves credit
for the fact that the attainment of durable peace in the
country is possible.

The peaceful manner in whichjust and fair elections
took place in Cote d'Ivoire and the virtuous cycle in which
the country is apparently engaged are further instances
of the substantial changes taking place. In spite of that,
concerns remain on the importance of implementing,
with renewed determination, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, the
reform of the security sector and State institutions, and
the deepening of national reconciliation, against the
backdrop of the steady drawdown of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

The work, mediation and good offices of the
United Nations Office for West Africa have played
an important role in stabilizing the region. However,
acts of terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime are serious threats to West Africa's
security, while terrorists are a destabilizing force in the
north of Mali and the Sahel region as a whole. Boko
Haram continues to spread terror, death and destruction
in the Lake Chad Basin region, requiring the combined
efforts of the international community to combat and
defeat them.

The situation in Libya has reached an impasse. The
constitution of the Government of national consensus,
as foreseen in the Peace Agreement, has not yet become
a reality, delaying much-needed concerted efforts to
combat the growing terrorist threat, mainly from the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

As usual, discussions related to the Sudan revealed
significant differences among members of the Council,
making it difficult to reach an agreement on a press
statement that, still pending, will take stock of the latest
Security Council meeting. The situation on the ground
remains a matter of great concern, especially with
respect to the ongoing rejection by the rebel groups of
dialogue on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and the efforts of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, and to the humanitarian
and human rights situations.
With regard to Somalia, during the meeting held
yesterday (S/PV.7614), it was stressed that it is important
for all Somali actors to focus on national priorities:
the organization of elections in 2016, the fight against
the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, and the strengthening
of Somali security forces. There are challenges that
will require the continuous and strong engagement of
the international community and commitment of the
Security Council.

In the debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/PV.7606), the wider membership of the
United Nations expressed its views on that critical issue.
The conclusion drawn from the debate was that, despite
the establishment by the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, of a robust normative
framework on the protection of civilians, embodied in
several resolutions and presidential statements, and
the strengthening of the protection of civilians and
human rights mandates in peacekeeping missions,
no improvement has been seen on the ground. More
civilians continue to be abused, and human rights are
violated before the very eyes of peacekeeping missions.

In the open debate on the Middle East (S/PV.7610),
there was general agreement that the most pressing
issue in the region is to defeat radical extremist groups
in order to facilitate a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. It is also absolutely necessary that we avoid a
scenario in which ISIL consolidates an extremist rogue
State in parts of Syria and Iraq as a breeding ground for
terrorists. Political, diplomatic, military and economic
cooperation must be intensified to start providing, in
a short period of time, the tangible rewards of peace
and stability to the peoples of the regions, who are
increasingly desperate and disillusioned by the policy
of double standards and inaction in the face of such
catastrophic political, economic and humanitarian
conditions.

