Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to organize this open
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which is a timely issue. The meeting
allows us to consider together the actions aimed at
preventing non-State actors from accessing weapons
of mass destruction. We also thank Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General; Mr. Kim Won-soo, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs; and Mr. James
Min, Vice-President of DHL, whose excellent briefings
have enabled us to clarify our work and enrich
our discussions.

Resolution 2325 (2016), just adopted unanimously,
provides an ideal framework - if it is fully
implemented - to effectively combat the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and, above all, access
by non-State actors to those weapons. Paragraph 27
of resolution 2325 (2016) seems particularly relevant
in that regard, in that it requests the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
various sanctions and counter-terrorism committees
to reinforce their cooperation. This can be done
through information-sharing, coordinating State
visits pursuant to their specific mandates, technical
assistance activities and in all other cases with scope
for cooperation. In any case, it remains more crucial
today than ever to make a comprehensive inventory of
all sources of weapons of mass destruction throughout
the world in order to systematically secure or destroy
them. Important measures have certainly already been
taken, but we must recognize that there remains much
to be done in this domain.

The comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) undertaken
this year was therefore particularly timely in that
it allowed Member States, relevant international
and regional organizations, and also civil society to
refocus their actions and strategies on a more global,
coordinated and coherent approach so as to sustainably
address the various challenges faced by international
peace and security. Recommendations contained in the
report of the review have led to the proposal by Member
States of concrete, practical and appropriate measures
that, if properly applied, could greatly contribute to the
resolution's implementation.

Senegal believes that, in an interdependent world
where our interests are closely linked, strengthening
cooperation in areas such as border control, monitoring
financial flows and online networks, and legal assistance
are more crucial than ever to the development of an
appropriate strategy to prevent and combat proliferation
if we wish to avoid weapons of mass destruction falling
into the wrong hands, as noted earlier. This requires a
synergy of efforts of all actors involved and the sharing
of experiences.

Analysis of data concerning the African continent
shows continued progress in the implementation
of measures established in resolution 1540 (2004),
particularly in relation to developing appropriation
legislation and the presentation of implementation
reports. In this context, it is important to recall the
political commitment of the African Union in support
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
African States. This commitment has led notably to
the organization of a review and assistance conference
on the resolution's implementation, in partnership with
the 1540 Committee, held in Addis Ababa in April. It
is important to continue such cooperation initiatives
between the Committee and African countries,
most of whom having benefitted from its support in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).

Furthermore, with regard to this aspect of
international cooperation and assistance, we encourage
Member States with the ability to do so to help train
national focal points, and we take this opportunity to
thank Morocco for its willingness to organize training
for African national contact points. In this vein, my
delegation is pleased to highlight the regional approach
adopted by the Committee in its programme of work.
This was evident at the first interparliamentary meeting
held in Abidjan in February on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which was attended by
more than 70 African legislators from 18 States and
where Senegal had the honour of representing the
1540 Committee.

The meeting provided an opportunity to consider
the main aspects related to the prevention of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in Africa
and to reflect on ways to strengthen national legal
frameworks established to implement the resolution.
This type of initiative should be replicated throughout
all regions of the world, given the vital role that
parliamentarians play in developing and adopting
relevant legal frameworks to prevent nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, especially terrorists.

We must also pursue efforts in areas such as the
improvement of assistance procedures; an inventory
and analysis of assistance requirements; and dialogue
on assistance with interested international, regional and
subregional organizations and even non-governmental
organizations and civil society. This requires the
strengthening of the capacities of the Committee
and its experts in order to allow them to adequately
carry out assistance activities in countries who have
expressed need. Similarly, the Security Council should
consider ways to strengthen the systems for early
warning and prevention of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors, including
by strengthening coordination between members,
monitoring the implentation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) and analysing proliferation risks.

We also reaffirm the need to create a sustainable
mechanism to improve interaction and coordation
among those who request and those who provide
assistance, as noted previously, in order to avoid
duplication and identify best practices in assistance
in order to maximize their benefits. The immediate
challenge therefore consists of better coordinating
existing tools in order to limit the possibility of
non-State actors engaging in proliferation activities.

I reiterate Senegal's willingness and commitment
to spare no effort in the fight against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. My country has taken
measures to meet its obligations under resolution
1540 (2004), including the establishment of a national
coordination mechanism to detect the activities of
non-State actors in order to promote cooperation
among relevant national actors and human and
technical capacity-building programmes of the national
commission for nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and the authority entrusted with radiological
protection and nuclear safety, which are tasked with
ensuring the implementation of national policy in
those fields and whose missions revolve around the
three essential axes of regulation, monitoring and
public information.

Senegal, having signed and ratified nine conventions
on nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, has
deemed it necessary to set up a national commission in
charge of monitoring these agreements and all issues
related to them. The national commission allows us
to stop treating these issues in a fragmented way and
to manage them in accordance with our international
commitments. It also authorizes the regular monitoring
of these agreements and relations with international
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization. The national commission brings
together all ministerial departments concerned with
these activities and assists the competent authorities
in formulating, monitoring and implementing national
policy on nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

In conclusion, Senegal will continue to fulfil
its obligations and observe its commitments on this
matter. We are convinced that through cooperation
and mutual efforts, shared experiences and expertise,
we will be able to better understand these threats and
thereby develop coherent, holistic and global strategies
to address them effectively.

