Let me begin by congratulating Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on having organized this debate. I also wish to express my delegation's appreciation for the presentations made by Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves; the Deputy Secretary- General of the United Nations, Amina Mohammed; the President of the Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Munir Akram; the Chief Executive Officer of the African Union Development Agency, Ibrahim Mayaki; and the Vice Chancellor of the University of the West Indies, Sir Hilary Beckles. I will touch on three elements central to this debate. First, how can the Security Council best contribute to overcoming the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic? In that regard, it is important to recall that, although the Security Council, by adopting resolution 2532 (2020), on COVID-19, joined the global efforts to combat the pandemic, it took four months for it to do so. Several calls had to be made by the Secretary-General and States Members of the United Nations, including a joint communique by 172 countries - Ecuador had the honour of being one of its initial proponents - before the Council finally devised a series of measures relevant to the efforts to mitigate and combat the coronavirus pandemic. But the Security Council can make up for lost time if it focuses on promoting and ensuring the effective implementation of the resolution, and, if possible, extending it so that the general cessation of hostilities in all situations as well as the humanitarian pause can last indefinitely, until the end of this global health crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic has proved to be a vector of insecurity, exacerbating conditions on the ground not only in conflict zones but throughout the world, owing both to growing social unrest and violent extremism, including by terrorist groups. Secondly, climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time because it affects the ability of all countries to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong institutions. Rising global temperatures, loss of biodiversity, desertification and drought, rising sea levels and natural disasters are harming well-being, livelihoods and ecosystems. Their adverse effects lead to food insecurity, unemployment, inequality and social tensions, with devastating humanitarian consequences. Combating climate change requires the increased provision of means of implementation - adequate financial resources, capacity-building and technology transfer - to developing countries. Impacts on ecosystems, overexploitation and the illegal trade in wildlife can amplify the transmission of zoonotic and infectious diseases, which brings me to my third, and final, point: prevention as a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding. Peace and security are not isolated elements but, rather, the result of efforts to counteract, and in particular to prevent, the root causes of conflict. That requires capacity-building as well as early-warning mechanisms based on the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. The Security Council has the responsibility to support such prevention mechanisms. It must also promote and implement resolutions 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security. Finally, in coordination with the Economic and Social Council, it should take account of the economic dimensions of armed conflicts and promote initiatives aimed at ensuring stable contexts for the involvement of civil society, academia and the private sector, so that the fabric of society in crisis areas can be rebuilt and made stronger and societies become more resilient.
