Mr. Mladenovic' (Yugoslavia): I, too, would like
to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bernard Kouchner for his briefing.

The issue of Kosovo and Metohija is of the
greatest State importance for the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. In fact, it is more than that. It is one of the
issues that concerns the fate of my country. As the
Council contemplates how to address this issue, I will
limit my statement to bringing to its attention only
what the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia deems to be
ofthe utmost importance.

First, the new Government of my country fully
subscribes to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and considers it the main and only basis for a just and
lasting solution.

Secondly, the profound democratic changes that
have taken place in Yugoslavia have ensured the full-
fledged participation of the legitimate representatives
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), which cannot be achieved without the active
participation of my Government.

Thirdly, at this juncture it is of the utmost
importance to proceed urgently to a comprehensive and
consistent implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). In implementing resolution
1244 (1999) the following priorities are of special
significance.

The first priority is the creation of a secure
environment and the return of all those who fled
Kosovo and Metohija. Interdependent as they are, these
two prerequisites constitute the key to preserving the
multi-ethnic character of Kosovo and Metohija and to
normalizing the situation in the province.

The second priority is to conclude an agreement
on the status of the international presence in Kosovo
and Metohija. The problems relating to the status of the
members of that presence would thereby be regulated,
and the necessary conditions would be created for all-
round cooperation between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force.
My country is ready to commence dialogue and
cooperation with the representatives of the
international community.

The third priority is a just solution to every
detainee case and the clarification of the fate of
missing persons. This would strengthen confidence and
promote reconciliation.
The fourth priority is the forthcoming holding of
elections in the Yugoslav constituent Republic of
Serbia, as well as in the territory of Kosovo and
Metohija.

The fifth priority is the return of a limited
contingent of the Yugoslav army and police to Kosovo
and Metohija.

The sixth priority is a resolution of the status of
para-diplomatic representative offices in Kosovo and
Metohija, in accordance with the Vienna Convention
and with respect for the sovereignty of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

In the opinion of my delegation, these priorities
and other provisions of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) are the basic issues that will determine the
future course of events.

My delegation is also aware that resolution 1244
(1999) contains provisions to address other issues,
including political negotiations on the final status of
Kosovo and Metohija. We consider it premature to
address these issues now, with basic problems still
unresolved. Indeed, notwithstanding its will and
readiness to take up the issues, the Government of my
country is of the opinion that in the present
circumstances of an extremely bad security situation
and the lack of conditions for a mass return of
displaced persons to Kosovo and Metohija, those issues
would be difficult to deal with. As experience has
shown, proper andjust solutions are difficult to achieve
if major political problems are addressed in a
simplified and hasty manner and without respect for
different interests.

It is for that reason that President Vojislav
Kostunica and the new, democratically elected
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia call
on the international community to approach the
question of Kosovo and Metohija in a thorough and
prudent manner, and in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). Similarly, in the quest
for the best possible solution, it would be very useful to
ensure broad cooperation with the international
community and other interested parties and States.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia attaches the
utmost importance to its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, which is one of the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). In saying so, we are
ready to work towards achieving substantial autonomy
for Kosovo and Metohija, and we will do so. That
would provide for a peaceful and prosperous life for all
its residents - Serbs, Albanians and others alike.
Every other solution outside Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) is fraught with unforeseeable
consequences not only for Kosovo and Metohija and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, but also for the
region as a whole. The strengthening of democratic
processes in all countries of the region, the promotion
of regional cooperation and the ever-greater prospects
of joining the current processes of integration in
Europe will, in the opinion of my delegation, help
create a better atmosphere in the region and facilitate
the quest for solutions to existing problems.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its new
leadership are open to cooperation and negotiation on
all problems. They are willing to address outstanding
issues through dialogue, in an atmosphere of openness,
tolerance and good-neighbourliness and with full
respect for vital interests of all. To that end, they are
determined to preserve democracy in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and, in that context, to work
for a peaceful and prosperous Kosovo and Metohija.

