Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): The rapidly
deteriorating political and military situation in Afghanistan
is a source of deep concern to Indonesia. The threat of a
full-scale civil war once again looms on the horizon. We
are dismayed by the danger of the fragmentation of the
country without any prospects for peace and stability.
Following the takeover of Kabul, reports attest to
intensified hostilities and a large number of casualties.
What is particularly disturbing is the determination of the
parties to pursue military confrontation rather than a
negotiated settlement. The people of Afghanistan have
suffered for over two decades of war, splitting the country
into different factions and leading to intemecine strife and
turmoil. This protracted conflict has already taken an
unconscionable toll in human lives and material devastation.
There is no doubt that, in the face of the current crisis, the
people of Afghanistan really only aspire to security, order
and a return to normal life.

 

Further compounding the situation are the drastically
worsening humanitarian conditions, with a new exodus of
refugees, especially from the capital, which for the most
part has been destroyed. The war has obliterated any
prospects in the near future for reestablishing and
reconstructing the agricultural, industrial and economic
base of the country. Agriculture is in ruins. Neither
agriculture nor industry has functioned normally in years.
The fields are infested with landmines, further inhibiting
agricultural growth and causing a high level of casualties
among the communities. The formal economy and
infrastructure of the country have disappeared, and the
economic fabric of society has decomposed. This ongoing
conflict is also an obstacle to economic development and
to attempts to build a transnational infrastructure in the
region.

Continued violence in Afghanistan will only
contribute to increasing the risk of regional instability.
Already, because of the large number of Afghan refugees,
the negative impact of the war is being felt by
neighbouring countries. An unstable Afghanistan risks
sowing the seeds of violence throughout the region. We
would like therefore to urge all neighbouring countries to
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan.

The international community has borne witness to
the destruction of a country; hence, we must urge the
parties to cease fighting and to resolve their differences
through peaceful means. It is of utmost urgency that the
parties involved initiate broad-based inter-Afghan talks in
order to reestablish a Government of national unity and to
achieve a lasting political settlement to this conflict. It is
our hope that such initiatives will be taken to establish
contacts and open a conduit for talks. It is self-evident
that the history of Afghanistan resounds with proof that
no faction can impose its will on others through force of
arms. War-weary Afghanistan is in dire need of
reconciliation between its leaders and the interests of the
people, whose sole aspiration is the restoration of
normalcy in their country. A certain degree of mutual
trust and confidence-building measures need to be
established in order to achieve national reconciliation.

The Security Council has long been involved in
concerted endeavours towards a negotiated settlement of
the conflict in Afghanistan. At this critical juncture, the
role of the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan
has become indispensable in actively contributing to the
establishment of a ceasefire and to a political settlement.
We therefore urge the warring parties to accept United

 

Nations mediation efforts. It would also be an opportune
time again to consider convening an international
conference on the situation in Afghanistan, under the
auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of
all factions in Afghanistan as well as of neighbouring
countries and other interested States. In this context, it is
our fervent hope, that the Special Representative, Mr.
Norbert Holl, will be allowed to fulfil the mandate
entrusted to him by all parties. It is also incumbent upon
the parties to observe the fundamental tenet of respect for
the sanctity of United Nations premises and personnel
without any exceptions. Also, given the risks involved in
extending assistance, the parties should fully cooperate with
the United Nations, its associated bodies and all
humanitarian organizations in their endeavours to alleviate
the suffering of the people of Afghanistan. In the same
vein, we call upon the parties to respect the human rights
of all civilians.

Afghanistan is once again at a historic crossroads. If
the parties are not able to reach a negotiated political
settlement, the survival of the country will certainly be
threatened. In this regard, Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. My delegation
would like to underline the importance that the international
community attaches to the restoration of peace in
Afghanistan. But, in the end, peace will be determined by
the political will of Afghanistan's leaders to reach an
agreement and thereby save their countrymen from further
years of bloodshed.

