The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Kazakhstan.

During our presidency, Kazakhstan arranged its
programme of work to address the ongoing and new
emerging threats of the twenty-first century. We built
upon Secretary-General Guterres' new agenda for
peace, in synergy with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and today's realities.

As this has been the first time that Central Asia was
represented on the Security Council in the history of
the United Nations, we strove to balance the Council's
global agenda with priorities in the region. Through
multilateralism and a comprehensive approach for
conflict prevention, we have alerted the Council to some
impending challenges. Based on openness, neutrality
and inclusivity, we have aspired to give the Council
new dynamism with visions and forward momentum
that eventually could become lasting legacies.

In addition to political diplomacy and mediation,
a three-fold multidimensional strategy was put
forward by Kazakhstan to promote and strengthen a
security and development link, a regional approach
to tackling transnational threats faced by countries
in conflict, and streamlining the effectiveness of the
Organization's system in delivering as one United
Nations. Implemented in Central Asia, it can serve as a
model for other regions, as well.

Kazakhstan has always endeavoured to enhance
the unity and collective ownership of the Council. Our
term began with a solemn flag raising ceremony that
we introduced for the first time to pay tribute to newly-
elected members and symbolize the trust placed in them
by Member States. It is important that we agreed to make
that innovation an annual practice at the beginning of
every new term of the Council. We have also worked
on behalf of all Member States, with a majority of 20
public meetings and only 10 consultations. In addition to
three signature events, we have adopted two resolutions
and four presidential statements, and issued 12 press
statements. In many cases, their adoption and issuance,
together with authorized media events, were critical
to project the Council's support and unity, which was
much needed, for those struggling in conflict zones
to implement peace agreements. They also helped to
enhance transparency, agree upon outcomes and define
a road map for the future. I shall now briefly describe
our signature events.

At the high-level thematic briefing on 18 January
(see S/PV.8160), the most pressing global problem
concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction was afforded a new perspective, as was the
use of confidence-building measures. Presided over by
President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, the discussions,
which were attended by an unprecedented audience, gave
momentum to a new paradigm for averting deliberate or
accidental outbreaks of war, and conveyed my country's
honour and respect for the United Nations. As has been
stated by my Head of State, it is crucial to enjoy political
will and build confidence among leaders to achieve a
stable and secure world. Kazakhstan will continue its
efforts to build trust among nations during its term
on the Council. The same day, the Council adopted a
milestone presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/1) as
a blueprint for regional preventive diplomacy, which
aims at achieving a world free of violent conflicts by
the United Nations centenary in 2045.

The ministerial debate of 19 January, on building
regional partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia
as a model to link security and development (see S/PV.8162), was presided over by His Excellency Mr. Mr.
Kairat Abdrakhmanov, and included the participation of
several visiting Ministers. Council members and 16 other
delegations focused on investments in connectivity,
trade and infrastructure so as to strengthen the
security of the region. Kazakhstan's vision for the link
connecting security and development could be realized
through the integration of Afghanistan into the region
with all its human capital and promise. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/2, which was adopted before
the debate, calls for enhanced regional, interregional
and international cooperation to promote long-term
peace, stability and sustainable development, as well
as to combat terrorism, violence and drug trafficking.

One of the highlights of our presidency was
the Security Council mission to Afghanistan from
12 to 15 January, which aimed at gaining first-hand
information concerning threats facing the country and
its potential. That visit was the first made since 2010,
and provided a unique opportunity to meet President
Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah and a total of 120
representatives of the Afghan Government, the business
sector, civil society, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the NATO Resolute
Support Mission. The Council was able to demonstrate
its support for the country and its commitment to peace
and reconciliation. It also reinforced the importance
of holding parliamentary and presidential elections
in 2018 and 2019, respectively. The premise of our
approach concerning the linkage connecting security,
development, a regional approach and an effective
United Nations has been fully recognized by the
Afghan leadership.

On 29 January, at the initiative of Nikki Haley,
Council members visited Washington, D.C., to meet
with the United States leadership and exchange
views with President Trump on the Council's agenda,
including counter-terrorism.

The significance of regional preventive diplomacy
was prominently brought to the fore at the briefing
provided by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Natalia Gherman, Head of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia (UNRCCA), and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mohammed ibn Chambas, Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). It was the first time in three years that a
Security Council press statement (SC/13179) was issued
concerning UNRCCA in support for the Centre, which
celebrated its tenth anniversary in December 2017.

Meetings on various United Nations peacekeeping
operations reviewed the work of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission
in Colombia, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, UNOWAS, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and analysed the readiness of their operations,
while considering needed restructuring to address the
political, security, humanitarian, human rights and
development dimensions.

We take note that regional organizations
and forums - such as the African Union, the
European Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Group of
Five for the Sahel - are crucial to reaching early and
long-lasting solutions to conflicts in Africa. Intense
deliberations concerning the Middle East made it clear
that political will, confidence-building and trust are
indispensable to bring all parties to the conflict to the
negotiating table to bring about peace.

Dialogues with New York-based civil society
representatives as our partners proved helpful. Inviting
women activists gave on-the-ground insights and
strengthened the women/youth and peace and security
agenda as a prerequisite for stability and progress.

Although it does not fall under the programme of
work of the Council, the landmark high-level special
event surrounding the presentation by our Foreign
Minister ofa draft code of conduct towards achieving a
world free of terrorism, which was held on 18 January
and included more than 100 participants, was
nevertheless very relevant to its work. The document
will be further elaborated to serve as a platform to bring
Member States together to honour their commitments to
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and other instruments.

We now close with this formal wrap-up session as
a tool to assess the Council's response and relevance to
address issues and improve its working methods. No
endeavour is accomplished alone.

Unity is important. Our presidency was marked
by a convergence of ideas, a spirit of compromise and
readiness to seek common ground. As today's meeting
is the last official one of our presidency, on behalf
of my Government and my delegation, I express our
warmest appreciation to all Council members and States
Members of the United Nations for their whole-hearted
solidarity with us. I also thank the Council's secretariat,
the Executive Office of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Safety
and Security for their ongoing expert guidance at
every stage.

In addition, we thank all branches of the
Secretariat, and in particular the team of excellent
interpreters for standing shoulder to shoulder with us.
Alhough our presidency is ending, it only heightens our

resolve to move forward with greater commitment and
determination. It is with great pleasure that I now hand
over the stewardship of the Council to Kuwait. I wish
the Kuwait delegation every success next month, and I
assure it of our full support.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.

