Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Special Envoy Sellassie
for her briefing and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/20l4/397).

The briefing that we have just heard and the
Secretary-General's report indicate that considerable
challenges remain for the Sahel in terms of the three
pillars of the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel, namely, governance, security and resilience.

On governance, we note that more needs to be done
by countries in the Sahel to foster greater inclusiveness in
their political processes and to improve participation by
marginalized groups, including women and young people.
Experience shows that the exclusion of entire groups from
political participation often generates tension that could
cause instability and even conflict.

We also note from the Secretary-General's report
that State and public security, national reforms, regional
integration and economic development have all been
negatively affected by fragile State institutions and
weak border management in the Sahelian countries.
Insecurity in border areas has affected governance at
the local level and reduced the effectiveness of State
authority over national territories. There is therefore
a need to bolster State institutions and to strengten
border management in order for progress to be made in
improving governance in the region. One way to achieve
better border management would be for contiguous
States to collaborate effectively on border issues.

On security, we are concerned that the situation
in the Sahel remains precarious. Multiple challenges,
including political instability and the activities of
organized criminal groups and terrorist organizations,
such as Boko Haram and groups affiliated with
Al-Qaida, as well as extremist armed groups, are
significant contributing factors in that state of affairs.
The situation has been compounded by porous borders
across the region, which allow trafficking in arms
and drugs and the virtual unimpeded movement of
terrorists.

Such security challenges cannot be overcome by
any one country acting alone. The cooperation of all
countries of the region and, indeed, of the international
community will be essential in order to achieve that.
A good example of such cooperation can be seen in
the establishment of the multinational joint task force
by Chad, the Niger, Cameroon, Benin and Nigeria to
carry out coordinated patrols of their common border
areas in the fight against Boko Haram and other
terrorist groups. The five countries have also created
a regional intelligence fusion unit to strengthen
intelligence cooperation on terrorism. We would like
to acknowledge with gratitude the technical expertise
that France, the United Kingdom, the United States,
China and Canada are committing to support those and
other initiatives in our efforts to fight Boko Haram. We
also take this opportunity to thank all nations that have
expressed support and good will to us as we confront
the menace of Boko Haram.

With respect to resilience, we are deeply concerned
about the extremely fragile humanitarian situation in the
Sahel. The statistics in the Secretary-General's report
paint a grim picture of 20 million people at risk of food
insecurity, 5 million children at risk of malnutrition
and over 1.5 million displaced. However, the report
does not mention the efforts of national Governments
and humanitarian actors to provide assistance to
those in need. We believe that those efforts should be
reflected in subsequent reports in order to allow for an
appreciation by the Council of the degree to which the
problem is being addressed, especially at the national
level.

Experience shows that humanitarian crises can
have security implications for the country concerned,
as well as for neighbouring countries, if the situation
is not carefully managed. We urge the United Nations
and other humanitarian actors to pay close attention to
the difficult humanitarian situation in the Sahel, with a
view to alleviating the hardship faced by those affected
by it.

In terms of the implementation of the integrated
strategy, we welcome the progress made during the
reporting period. We take particular note of the high-
level meeting on the situation in the Sahel held on the
margins of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly in September 2013, the high-level visit of
the Secretary-General and other senior international
officials to Mali, the Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad in
November 2013, and the various activities of the former
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Romano
Prodi. We pay tribute to Mr. Prodi for his service and
efforts in support of the Sahel.

The establishment ofa steering committee to provide
strategic guidance, as well as three United Nations
inter-agency working groups on governance, security
and resilience, is a significant step in the implementation
of the integrated strategy. We take positive note of
the close consultations the United Nations has been
holding with other stakeholders, including the African
Union (AU), the European Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), with
a view to agreeing on common priorities and joint
programming in the areas of governance and security.
It is significant that the activities proposed by the
United Nations will be implemented in collaboration
with ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the AU and other partners. That kind
of cooperation is a win-win for all concerned, and we
would like to see it strengthened.

To conclude, I would like to congratulate Special
Envoy Sellassie on her appointment and assure her of
Nigeria's full support for her and her Office.
