Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Mr. Minister, it is a special honour to have you
presiding over the Council this week to underline the
importance of this discussion and of other aspects of
our work. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
presence here today and for his introductory statement,
which set exactly the right tone for our discussion.

We have had three very interesting and important
briefings from High Representative Petritsch, from
Special Representative Klein and from the High
Representative of the European Union. The United
Kingdom fully subscribes to the approach of the
European Union set out in Mr. Solana's presentation.

I should like to commend very warmly the
dedicated and professional work of Special
Representative Klein and High Representative Petritsch
on peace implementation in Bosnia. Those efforts are
really beginning now to bear fruit, marked not least by
the forthcoming membership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Council of Europe and also in the
dramatic increase in refugee return.

As this is Ambassador Petritsch's last address to
us in the Council, I should like to thank him very
warmly for the work that he has done in Bosnia and
Herzegovina at an extremely important time in the
history of that new country. It is the United Kingdom's
privilege to be providing his successor as High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, and he has a hard act
to follow.

Nevertheless, we all know that a great deal still
has to be done. The year 2002 is a crucial one, with
elections coming up in October. If our speakers this
morning are answering questions later, I wonder if they
could give us a slightly more detailed assessment of the
security situation in the run-up to the October elections
and the key challenges that still remain.

For instance, in spite of the success which
Mr. Klein has recorded in Mostar, does the Croatian
Democratic Community (HDZ) continue to pose a
security challenge? It is important, against that
background, that the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) downsizing does not begin prematurely, and we
hope that numbers and capabilities can be maintained
until after the elections.

We were also glad to hear from Mr. Solana that
there will be careful transition arrangements between
the IPTF and the European Union police mission, and
we hope that this will include the continuation in
service of those European Union police officers who
are serving with the IPTF at the end of the year.

Efforts to establish more firmly the rule of law in
Bosnia have to be the top priority in the immediate
term. This has a very direct impact on Bosnia's
development and its credibility within the international
community. Progress must encompass judicial and
penal as well as police reform, for the reasons clearly
set out by the Special Representative.

Economic reform also remains a serious concern.
Recent progress in areas such as privatization, the
creation of a single economic space and trade between
the entities has been disappointing. This is stifling
Bosnia's ability to attract international business
interest, and it also affects unemployment - which is
still far too high - and the immigration of younger
people.

The fight against corruption and criminality has
to be another priority. We welcome the steps that have
been taken so far, but the authorities need to step up
their efforts to show both the international community
and the Bosnian people that they are serious in these
respects.

As the High Representative has said, there are no
individuals in Bosnia and Herzegovina who are beyond
the reach of the law. The United Kingdom warmly
welcomes recent attempts to capture Mr. Karadzic. We
attach great importance to the apprehension of all
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia indictees, and we are disappointed at the
misguided criticism of these operations from the
Republika Srpska. We regard the operations of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) as completely legitimate,
because cooperation with The Hague Tribunal is key to
Bosnia's integration into the international community.
The arrest and transfer to The Hague of Karadzic and
Mladic would signal a new page in Bosnia's
development.

The implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Accord remains the overall goal. Dayton provides the
constitutional and structural evolution. The High
Representative's work on a structure to ensure civilian
implementation is a good example of this. We continue
to hope that the entities will be able to reach agreement
on constitutional change, but, if not, the High
Representative should be allowed to use his full powers
to make the changes necessary to help realize the
objective of a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is internally
cohesive and fully democratic.

