Mr. Taha (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
on behalf of the Government and the people of the
Sudan, to renew our thanks to the Security Council,
which left United Nations Headquarters to meet for
two days in Africa to discuss African issues, in
particular support for the peace process in the Sudan.

Let us hope that the resolution adopted today and
the memorandum of understanding, whose signature
the Council has witnessed, will, together, constitute a
strong guarantee that will expedite the implementation
of the remaining measures, so that the long and
difficult process of attaining a comprehensive,
sustainable peace will succeed by the end of the year.

Peace has long been a strategic option for the
Government of the Sudan. For one and a half decades,
we have knocked on all doors and have looked
everywhere in search of peace. Now, thanks to the
sincere determination manifested in the Naivasha peace
process, which led to the signature of the six protocols
and the 5 June Nairobi Declaration, we are more
determined than ever to see our people reap the fruits
of that long process. Therefore, what has been achieved
so far should be safeguarded, for it did not occur by
accident. Nor has it been posturing or manoeuvring; it
was accomplished through the work of bare arms,
struggling to pull down the wall of war.

The Government of the Sudan has repeatedly
emphasized, and continues to reaffirm that it is fully
committed to the implementation of the protocols and
to the agreement on a comprehensive peace treaty in
consonance with the spirit and the letter of the
resolution that the Council adopted today and with the
message to the parties to fulfil their commitments.

It was only natural that the resolution should
address the issue of Darfur, for peace is an integral and
indivisible whole. Hence, we assure the Council once
again that the conclusion of a comprehensive peace
agreement with the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) is the quickest way to settle the
crisis in Darfur. The Naivasha protocols lay down a
framework allowing the various regions of the Sudan
the widest possible self-rule, within a federal
framework. Moreover, balanced, comprehensive
development is a top priority of the plan that I outlined
yesterday.

We here renew our commitment to the provisions
of resolution 1574 (2004). We believe that it embodies
a positive message that gives impetus to the peace
process in its entirety.

Yesterday and today, Council members have
become acquainted with the facts and the details of the
Sudan peace process. As my brother, Mr. John Garang,
Chairman of the SPLM, and I both said yesterday, the
international community has a very important role to
play in supporting the implementation of the
agreement, especially during the first years of the
transitional period. We look forward to wider
participation and increased contributions from the
international community at the donors' conference to
be held in Norway. Here, we hail Norway for its efforts
and for the preparations it has carried out. We wish that
conference every possible success.

In conclusion, I reiterate my gratitude to the
President of the Republic of Kenya. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for accompanying us in this peace
process over the past three years. We extend our
gratitude to the members of the Security Council for
this historic extraordinary session. Our thanks go also
to the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and its secretariat, which has unflaggingly
followed this difficult process over these long years; to
the IGAD Partners Forum; to the African Union; to
General Sumbeiywo, the envoy of the Kenyan
President; and to all of the other partners, mediators
and observers who have taken part in the process.

Mr. President, you said in your statement that
these meetings should not end up as a photo
opportunity filled with grand but empty words. We
wish to assure you, Sir, that we are eager and fully
committed to giving the people of the Sudan, Africa
and the entire international community the gift of
peace at the end of this year and the beginning of the
next.

