Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should like first
of all to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate.

Civilians constitute the vast majority of human
casualties in armed conflict. They are the first victims of
the belligerent international environment we live in today.
The international community and its organizations should
give the utmost priority to this issue. On that basis, we
welcome the contribution made by the Secretary-General in
the report he has submitted to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which is contained
in document S/1999/957.
We would like to make some observations on the issue
under consideration. First, we expect the Security Council
to take into account the views put forward by States that
are not members of the Council in the open debate held
earlier this year on the question of the protection of
children and of civilians in armed conflict. Those views
should be integrated into the Council's programme of work,
in accordance with the functions of the Council, as
contained in Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which it is to act as a representative of the
States Members of the United Nations in the fulfilment of
its duties, thereby complementing the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, United
Nations agencies and the international community in
general.

Secondly, when the Security Council and the United
Nations deal generally with this very important issue, a
global perspective must be taken that gives the utmost
priority to the prevention of conflicts through activating the
mechanism of preventive diplomacy and its machinery and
making the United Nations a focal point for that preventive
diplomacy. When considering the roots of intra- or inter-
State conflicts, we find that one of the reasons for their
outbreak is the inequitable and unbalanced international
economic environment, which adversely affects the
economies of developing countries and creates "hot spots"
for conflicts.

As the Secretary-General pointed out, the deteriorating
economic situation is conducive to the eruption of violent
conflicts for a number of reasons, not the least of which is
that the political environment tends to be more favourable
to conflict in times of recession than in times of economic
growth.

The Secretary-General reiterated that the money
currently spent on military intervention and humanitarian
assistance could be reallocated to support equitable and
sustainable development, thus reducing the likelihood of
the outbreak of war. We call upon the countries of the
North to contribute to establishing a balanced and
equitable world economy that preserves the rights and
interests of the countries of the South.

Thirdly, the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, must adopt the principle of collective
responsibility in the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The
eruption of a given conflict means the failure of
preventive diplomacy - that is, our collective failure. We
should all bear our share of this responsibility, including
the Council, whose part in this failure is quite clear since
it bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We cannot make the
combatants solely responsible for the evils of war.

On the other hand, mistakes, bad judgement or the
abuse of the Security Council's mandate can sometimes
result in catastrophes that are greater that those caused by
armed militias in poor countries. A crime of genocide
occurred in Rwanda in 1994, when the Security Council
could not muster the political will to stop the situation
from deteriorating, as its member countries did not wish
to expose their forces to danger in a struggle that did not
threaten their interests.

Another crime of genocide occurred, and continues
to this day, in Iraq, because the Council took, on 6
August 1990, an erroneous decision by imposing
comprehensive sanctions against Iraq. The victims of
those sanctions so far have been one and a half million
Iraqi civilians, and the fabric of Iraqi society has been
rent in a way that will affect future generations.

The Secretary-General, in paragraph 25 of his report
to the Security Council, pointed out that "recent
experience has shown that sanctions can have a highly
negative impact on civilian populations, in particular
children and women". It is clear that the Secretary-
General was taking into account the suffering of the Iraqi
civilians as a result of the sanctions when he wrote this
paragraph, although he did not say that explicitly.

The report published by the United Nations
Children's Fund on 12 August 1996 gives documented

 

figures showing that a half million Iraqi children under the
age of 5 have died because of the sanctions. Here I must
recall that the Charter has no mechanism for making the
Security Council accountable to the States Members of the
United Nations with respect to the legitimacy of its
resolutions and to what degree they conform to international
humanitarian law. It is crucial that we consider this very
important issue.

Fourthly, it is imperative that the Security Council
adopt a fair and equitable policy, eschewing selectivity and
double standards, that places the principles of the Charter
before the narrow interests of the powerful members of the
Council. The actions of the Security Council over this past
decade have given us convincing reasons to doubt its
integrity, its objectivity and its ability to be effective in the
prevention of armed conflicts and in the protection of
civilians.

Indeed, the Council has dealt selectively with
international crises. Palestinian civilians, for example,
experience the worst kind of coercion, humiliation and
forced migration as well as the destruction of their homes.
Iraqi civilians, suffering from comprehensive sanctions, are
exposed daily to attacks by American and British aircraft.
Hundreds of them have been martyred as a result of this
aggression, and roads, schools and laboratories have been
destroyed. All of this is occurring under the very eyes of
the Council, which has not taken any measures or called the
perpetrators to account. Furthermore, other situations -
less dangerous than the ones the Palestinians and the Iraqis
are facing - are exaggerated. We fear that the day will
come when CNN, the news network, will force a
programme of work on the Security Council - if it has not
done so already.

Fifthly, the role and task of the United Nations consist
of the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The exception to this
is the resort to coercive measures. The United Nations
demonstrates its effective assumption of its role whenever
it is restrained in such resort, as pointed out in the Charter.
We have noted, however, that in recent times, the United
Nations has had increasing recourse to coercive measures,
as if they were the sole and preferable solution. This is,
per se, proof of incapacity, not of power or strength.

