Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): In recent
years, while fully discharging its responsibilities, the
Security Council has worked to improve its working
methods, increase efficiency and enhance transparency.
With efforts of the Council members and the support
of the broader membership of the United Nations, the
Council has constantly improved its working methods
in practice and has made positive progress.

There has been a marked increase in the number
of open debates of the Council. The Council has
strengthened coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and other United
Nations bodies as well as regional organizations. The
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters has adopted numerous notes by the
President, made recommendations on improving the
Council's annual report, maintained regular contact
with the Peacebuilding Commission and strengthened
interactions with countries that contribute troops to
peacekeeping operations. All of these efforts have
yielded good results. China supports the Council in its
continued efforts to improve its working methods. We
believe that attention should be given to the following
three areas.

First, key points should be highlighted to ensure
their effect. The Charter of the United Nations contains
specific provisions on the responsibilities ofthe Council
and other United Nations bodies. The Council should
concentrate its energy and resources on addressing
pressing issues threatening international peace and
security to improve the real effect of its actions. While
deliberating on some special topics, the Council should
align and coordinate its efforts with those of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
United Nations bodies in order to avoid duplication.

Secondly, it is imperative to emphasize consultation
and collective decision-making. When it comes to
decision-making at the Council and its subsidiary
bodies, Council members should engage in adequate
consultations in a bid to achieve consensus. If there are
still significant differences between parties, no actions
should be forced through. Rather, parties should insist
on seeking maximum consensus so as to safeguard the
authority of the Council.

Thirdly, to strengthen good offices, coordination
and communication, the Council should champion
and advance the culture of peace and give full play to
political means, such as preventive diplomacy, mediation

and good offices to push for diplomatic solutions to
crises and avoid the use or the threat of use of sanctions
wantonly. The Council should strengthen coordination
with the Member States and regional organizations,
heed the input of the countries on its agenda and draw
on the experience of regional organizations in dealing
with regional issues and leverage their advantages
in terms of close geographical distance, history and
culture. In this way, the Council can more reasonably
make decisions and form synergies so as to jointly play
a role in seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes.
China has always supported with its actions the
efforts of the Council to improve its working methods
so that it can work more equitably, efficiently and
transparently and better respond to the expectations of
the Member States and the international community.
China stands ready to work together with members of
the Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations to draw upon experience and make innovations
in order to push for active fulfilment of the Council's
duties so as to play a constructive role in safeguarding
international peace and security.

