Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council. I promise that I will be brief.

At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am certain that you will
execute the task excellently. I thank Mr. Martin for his
briefing to the Council this morning.

The initial election results were announced in
Tripoli this morning. According to all observers, the
elections were free and fair and met all international
standards. The Libyan people would not have reached
this point without the many sacrifices made and the
many sons lost in getting rid of the dictator Al-Qadhafi,
who treated Libyans as his personal slaves for more
than 40 years and who killed anyone who dared to
speak against his regime or in favour of democracy.

Today, as the Libyan people take firm steps forward
on the path towards democracy and the establishment of
a modern State, on behalf ofthe Libyan people, I cannot
fail to thank Security Council members for adopting
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), as well as
subsequent resolutions on Libya, in particular those
that established the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (resolution 2009 (2011) and extended its
mandate (resolutions 2022 (2011) and 2040 (2012)). The
roles of the Security Council and its resolutions have
contributed in a major way to Libya's transformation
today.

On this occasion, I would like to commend the
significant role that the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) has played in Libya under the
leadership of Mr. Ian Martin, whose diplomatic skills
and profound experience contributed to the success
of the Mission's mandate. Mr. Martin has succeeded
in establishing close cooperation between UNSMIL
and the Libyan authorities in all areas that fall within
the Mission's mandate. Mr. Martin's role was indeed
exceptional. We in Libya compare it to the role of
Adrian Pelt, United Nations Commissioner for Libya,
shortly before the country's independence in the 1950s.

Again, on behalf of the Libyan people, I thank
Mr. Martin. We wish him success in the future. We had
hoped to see Mr. Martin continuing to lead UNSMIL
in Libya through to the conclusion of its mandate. It
is undoubtedly a matter for Mr. Martin to decide. We
hope that UNSMIL will continue to be led with the
same skills and capabilities in assisting the Libyan
authorities to achieve genuine democracy and the
establishment of a modern State.

