Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Sweden welcomes this
opportunity for an open and thorough debate in the
Security Council on the tragic circumstances leading up
to the Council's decision to impose sanctions on Libya.

The fundamental issue at hand, and the reason for
the decisions taken by the Security Council in this matter,
is the scourge of terrorism. International terrorism
constitutes a threat not only to individual human lives, but
also to international peace and security.

We must never forget the victims of the bombings
of Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772. On behalf of
my Government, I wish to express my deepest sympathy
to their families, some of which are with us here today.

There were also three Swedish nationals on board
Pan Am flight 103. My country therefore has a particular
interest in seeking clarity and justice in this matter. One
of the victims was in the service of the United Nations.
He also happened to be a personal friend of mine.

The sanctions on Libya remain in force as a direct
consequence of the Libyan Government's continued
refusal to cooperate fully in the efforts to seek clarity and
justice in conformity with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. More specifically, Libya has not complied
with the Council's demands regarding the surrender for
trial of two suspects in the Lockerbie case. In this
context, we have noted the positive assessment recently
made by independent legal experts appointed by the
Secretary-General on the possibilities for the two suspects
to receive a fair trial in Scotland. We note also that the
United Kingdom has offered to allow international
observers to attend such a trial.

The Security Council does not impose sanctions
lightly. The aim must always be to obtain a specific
result, not to punish a State or its people. Negative
humanitarian consequences of sanctions should be
minimized. In the case of Libya, the sanctions are
designed to avoid humanitarian implications for the
Libyan people. We have carefully studied the report of
the recent United Nations mission to Libya. The sanctions

 

Committee, a subsidiary organ of the Security Council,
recently reiterated its willingness to continue to consider
applications for special permission for humanitarian flights,
including for religious purposes, as provided for in
resolution 748 (1992). Sweden strongly supports this
position in the sanctions Committee.

Sweden has studied carefully the various proposals put
forward to find a solution to the current situation, which
has a negative impact on both Libya and the international
community at large. We will also take into consideration
today's open and hopefully constructive debate. We will do
so bearing in mind that Security Council resolutions must
be fully complied with. It is our sincere hope that with full
respect for this fundamental principle, it will soon be
possible to find a solution to this matter.

