Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): We are pleased to note that progress has been
achieved in normalizing the situation in the Central African
Republic. To a significant extent this is due to the vigorous
work of the International Monitoring Committee for the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements and of the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB).

At the same time, it remains necessary to continue
international assistance for the consolidation of the process
of national reconciliation in that African country and to
maintain a secure environment conducive to the holding of
free and fair elections. An important factor in establishing
long-term peace and stability is finding a speedy and
effective solution to economic and social problems. Success
in this area is possible only through the united efforts of all
political forces in the Central African Republic.

The effectiveness of the international community's
assistance in achieving a definitive resolution of the crisis
in that country depends on the readiness of its Government
and all parties in the Central African Republic to
demonstrate further political will, implement strictly the
Bangui Agreements and comply strictly with the National
Reconciliation Pact. We consider as optimum the initial
mandate for the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA), as defined in the present
draft resolution, as well as the strength of its military
component. Our understanding is that its full deployment
will be completed by 15 April so as to ensure an orderly
transition from MISAB to MINURCA. The question of the
future role of the United Nations in fostering national
reconciliation, and in particular in preparations for holding
elections, can be decided later in the light of developments
and on the basis of the recommendations in the report of
the Secretary-General, which will be submitted by 20
June 1998.

For all these reasons, the delegation of the Russian
Federation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

