The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at
the Council table; Mr. Muvunyi (Rwanda) took the
seat reservedfor him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

There being no objection, it is so decided

I invite Mr. Vieira de Mello to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. J can-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, to whom I give the floor.


