Ms. Lnj: In my capacity as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), I would like to
brief the Security Council on the activities of the
Committee over the past three months and to submit to
the Security Council the Committee's sixteenth work
programme, covering the period from 1 July to 30
September 2005.

During the first three months of my chairmanship
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, focus has been
on the following. First, dialogue with States has
continued to develop through visits to States and
through intensified discussions with States about
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) and reporting thereon. Secondly, we have
strengthened our methodology for the identification of
States' needs for technical assistance. Thirdly, we have
embarked on a discussion on how to ensure clarity and
transparency in promoting implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) through the
development of a set of so-called best practices.
Finally, I should inform members that the fact that the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) is
still not fully staffed and operational has continued to
have an impact on the Committee's capacity to deliver
an ambitious work programme. However, we expect
the Executive Directorate to be at full capacity before
the end of the period covering the current work
programme.

Before going into more detail, I should like to
thank the Executive Director of CTED, Mr. Javier
Ruperez, and his team, as well as the Secretariat staff,
for the valuable support they have provided the CTC
over the past three months.

As mandated by resolution 1535 (2004), the CTC,
through its CTED, has conducted three more visits to
States, with their consent. CTED visited Kenya in May,
and both Albania and Thailand in June. I would like to
thank the Governments of those visited States for their
hospitality, cooperation and willingness to discuss with
the delegation issues related to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) in such an open manner.

The three Visits certainly provided the Committee
with a more thorough understanding of the situation in
those countries, including steps already taken by those
Governments to implement the resolution and their
commitment to doing so. The Committee now has
further insight into the difficulties States may face
while seeking to ensure full implementation. I would
like to stress that it is of high priority to ensure proper
follow-up to those Visits. To that end, the CTC is
committed to ensuring that technical assistance needs
identified during the visits are met.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
that the purpose of those Visits is to provide an
opportunity to "engage in a detailed discussion to
monitor implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)"
(resolution 1535 (2004), tenth preambular paragraph).
Deepening the CTC's relationship with States through
a visit is considered carefully by the CTC with the
State concerned, considering States that are already
engaged in the fight against terrorism and are in the
process of implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and
where the Committee would like to offer further
analysis and, if necessary, assistance to help the State
further its implementation of the provisions of the
resolution.

The Visits have been conducted with the
participation of representatives of relevant
international and regional organizations, such as the
International Civil Aviation Organization, Interpol, the
World Customs Organization, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union and the Commonwealth Secretariat. Such
cooperation has been essential in providing the
necessary expertise in all the areas of the resolution
and has been of great importance to the success of the
Visits. I would like to thank those organizations for
providing members to the expert teams that went on
those Visits and express the hope of the Committee that
such cooperation will only be further enhanced in the
time to come.

The CTC regards those visits as an essential
addition to its dialogue with States about
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). It is the Committee's intention to continue
those Visits, with the consent of the States to be Visited
and to the extent the available resources allow.

Dialogue with States has also intensified on
issues such as late submission of reports and needs for
technical assistance. The Committee, including through
its CTED, continues to provide general guidance on
implementation. As of 30 June 2005, the Committee
had received 601 reports and many States are about to
submit their fifth report. Still, a number of States have
difficulties submitting the reports in a timely manner.
At the moment, 67 States are behind in their reporting
to the Committee. Over the past three months, the
Committee has made a special effort to discuss issues
related to reporting with representatives of States late
in submitting their reports to the Committee. I would
like to thank the representatives of those States for
their willingness to discuss, in such an open manner,
whatever difficulties they are facing.

The Committee is aware that the problems
pertain, to a great extent, to lack of capacity, as well as
so-called reporting fatigue. In the months to come, the
CTC will continue discussions with States about how
the Committee can best help them in ensuring timely
reporting to the Committee, as well as full
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). In the meantime, I strongly encourage States to
report to the CTC, since it is of the utmost importance
that there be regular contact between the Committee
and States. Also, the Committee will continue
discussions with the other two Committees reporting
today on how we can best address issues relating to
reporting in a coordinated manner.

As I mentioned earlier, the Committee has
continued its discussions on how to facilitate technical
assistance. In order to ensure a comprehensive
approach to each State's implementation of the
provisions of the resolution and identification of needs
for technical assistance, the Committee has decided
that it will take further steps to identify needs for
assistance in the process of evaluating States' reports.
As a result, States may, from now on, receive a letter
from the Committee that will include advice on how to
further implement the provisions and, as a part thereof,
the Committee's suggestions regarding areas in which
technical assistance might be sought. The Committee
strongly encourages States that might benefit from
assistance to request such assistance.

The Committee will continue its discussions on
how to facilitate the meeting of requests, including by
further developing cooperation with potential donors
broadly. Therefore, the CTC also encourages potential
donors to continue to update the Committee on
assistance offers, as well as assistance provided, in
order to match identified needs with potential donors.

Finally, the Committee has considered the need to
provide clarity and transparency on what it takes to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, the
Committee has discussed the usefulness of developing
sets of best practices to provide guidance to States on
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Over the
next month, the Committee will continue that
discussion on how best to provide the desired clarity
and transparency through sets of best practices. The
Committee welcomes the work already done in that
field by international, regional and subregional
organizations and encourages relevant organizations to
continue to develop sets of best practices to provide
guidance to their respective member States on how to
implement the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001).

Before I conclude, I would like to say a few more
words about the tasks that are ahead for the
Committee. They are spelled out in greater detail in the
sixteenth work programme of the Committee, which is
before members in the annex to document S/2005/421.

Most important, the Committee is looking
forward to a fully staffed and operational CTED
working under the policy guidance of the Committee.
Staff members have started to take up their new
positions, and a key task during the next three months
is to ensure the adjustment and training of the new
CTED staff. An operational CTED will allow the
Committee to catch up on the unfortunate backlog of
reports from States that has been developing in the
transitional period. That is a key priority for the
Committee.

Moreover, the Committee will continue to
strengthen its dialogue with States on issues related to
the implementation of the provisions of resolution
1373 (2001), especially in order to ensure thorough
identification of needs for technical assistance. In that
regard, the Committee will also make a special effort
to strengthen its cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations.

The CTC remains a crucial instrument of the
international community in its fight against
terrorism - an instrument based on dialogue and
assistance to States. Its task remains Vital and urgent.
The support of Member States remains crucially
important, and the Committee is grateful for the
support it has received. We will continue to count on
such support in the future.

