The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
February, I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Cesar Mayoral,
Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of January 2005. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Mayoral for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cote d'Ivoire

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of cote d'Ivoire in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yao (Cote 
d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2005/54, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Denmark, France, Romania,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1584 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

