Mr.IliieheV (RussianFederation) (spokeinRussian):
We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons
(S/2017/1025). While the report in general covers the
broad scope of the issue under consideration, it also
contains a number of questionable points, to which we
would like to draw attention.

Russia has consistently supported the enhancement
of the United Nations role in coordinating the efforts
of the international community to address the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. The illicit
weapons trade remains the main source of financing
for terrorist and extremist groups and a major factor in
the proliferation and deterioration of local conflicts and
armed violence. Despite some progress in a number of
areas, we have not yet seen a significant improvement
in the fight against the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons in the world. The pace of implementing
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects remains inadequate. We
have also seen slippage in the implementation of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. The black and grey
markets in which such weapons are traded continue
to fuel the activities of terrorists, extremists, illegal
armed groups, organized crime and street crime, as
well as various types of conflict. It is therefore long
past time to reinforce the Programme of Action with
provisions such as the following that will enable it to
significantly reduce the risk of weapons moving from
legal into illegal circulation.

The first would introduce a universal ban on the
transfer of any type of small arms or light weapons to
entities that are not authorized by the States to which
they are sent. Secondly, States should be required to
enact strict regulations and exercise direct control
over arms-export brokering activities in areas under
their jurisdiction and limit the numbers of brokers
themselves to the absolute minimum. Thirdly, there
should be a ban on re-exporting imported small arms
and light weapons without the written consent of the
initial exporting State. Fourthly, the manufacture of
small arms and light weapons on expired licenses or
without licenses from the countries that own the rights
to the manufacturing technology should be banned.
Such measures could be based on the relevant best
practices of States, including Russia, which has highly
refined legislation in this area. For our part, we stand
ready to help States interested in learning from Russia's
experience so as to strengthen their legislation and
law-enforcement activities in every area related to the
control of small arms and light weapons.

In the context of establishing criteria for assessing
the effectiveness of the Programme of Action, it has
not escaped our notice that the standardized electronic
format for providing annual national reports does
not allow for potentially significant information for
other States Members of the United Nations regarding
advanced developments in the implementation of
the Programme of Action, or, on the contrary, about
existing problems with it. Unlike many other countries,
Russia has consistently made its national report on its
implementation of the Programme of Action available as
a separate document, which provides a comprehensive
overview of the full range of that implementation.

From a substantive point of view, the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) is frankly a weak document that is not
capable of fully enabling the implementation of its own
provisions. For example, it does not include a direct ban
on unlicensed arms production or transfers to non-State
actors, and it has no provisions regulating the re-export
of items intended for military use. The risk of weapons
falling into the hands of criminals and terrorists
therefore remains, along with potential threats to the
further destabilization of situations in various hotspots.

The Treaty's practical implementation also raises
serious questions. In our view it is unacceptable that
individual parties continue to supply goods for military
use, directly or indirectly, to areas dealing with internal
armed conflict. In that regard, we are particularly
concerned about the transfer of weapons and ammunition
to Ukraine during the period from 2015 to 2017. On the
one hand, we have been encouraged to accede to the
ATT as soon as possible, since it is designed to establish
general standards for regulating international trade
in conventional weapons and promote transparency
and responsible behaviour in that area on the part of
States parties. And yet in practice we have been given
to understand that those standards can be interpreted
selectively. In that context, for example, how should
we understand the Canadian Government's decision of
13 December to include Ukraine on a list of countries
permitted to receive supplies of lethal weapons?

The process of universalizing the ATT has now
been stalled for some time. To date, only 93 States are
parties to the Treaty, less than half of the total number
of States Members of the United Nations. The number
of State signatories to the Treaty is still stuck at 131.
It has been hard to miss the significant decline in the
number of observer delegations at the ATT's annual
conferences. Not does States' discipline regarding
annual reports stand up to criticism. Of the 80 States
that were supposed to submit national reports on the
transfer of military goods abroad this year, only 49
complied. The number last year was 51.

The Russian Federation shares the international
community's concerns about the uncontrolled spread
of small arms and light weapons and advocates the
continued consolidation of international efforts to
counter it, under the auspices of the United Nations.
In that regard, we view the Third Review Conference
of the Programme of Action on Small Arms, scheduled
for next year, as very important. We hope that it will
make a practical contribution to resolving the acute and
urgent issue of small arms and light weapons ending up
in illegal circulation.

