The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia.

Only two days ago, Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, in his remarks at the opening of the General
Assembly, told us that "global anxieties about nuclear
weapons are at the highest level since the end ofthe Cold
War" (A/72/PV3, p. I). It is impossible to disagree with
that assessment. Indeed, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction is posing serious threat to global peace
and security. Nowhere has this danger become more
pressing than in the current situation surrounding the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In this context,
I should like to underline the following three points.

First, it is important to comprehensively address
risks of proliferation through political and diplomatic
means aimed at finding a negotiated solution. The
modality through which the States participating in the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) managed
to address the Iranian nuclear issue is indeed a significant
achievement for multilateralism. The JCPOA and the
follow-up mechanism of the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), as well as
the progress registered so far in the implementation
of the JCPOA, have taught us a very important lesson.
By that, I mean that what was achieved amounted to
being an example for how pressing issues of peace
and security can be addressed through diplomatic
means. Of course, we recognize that much more needs
to be done by the participating States in clearing up
misunderstandings and avoiding any possible obstacles
to the full implementation of the J CPOA.

Secondly, based on the lessons learned from the
JCPOA and the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), the Security Council and the international
community might have to explore mechanisms to
address the serious and imminent threat posed by
the nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction
programmes of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. The continued provocative activities of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea should not be
a cause for weakening the unity within the Council,
which is so critical to effectively pursuing our broader
objective of addressing the risk of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

This brings me to my third point on the broader
threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. This has to do with the now very possible
scenario of weapons of mass destruction falling into
the hands of non-State actors and the real and present
danger this poses to international peace and security
and to humanind. Multilateral agreements, such as the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, continue to contribute immensely to
the prevention and elimination of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. They need to be adhered
to in a scrupulous manner. But still, much more needs
to be done to ensure universal accession to and the full
implementation of such agreements. Regional nuclear-
free zones, such as the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, also remain central to the global and regional
non-proliferation regime and the creation of a world
free of nuclear weapons.

The Security Council plays a critical role in
addressing the serious threat posed by the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by using all the
available tools at its disposal, including through
sanctions. However, all of us should be able to fully
implement Council measures if they are to meet their
intended objectives. I would therefore like to conclude
my remarks by affirming Ethiopia's commitment to
working towards that objective.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Her Excellency Ms. Kang
Kyun-wha, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Korea.

