Mrs. Byaje (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for inviting
Rwanda to be a part of this debate. At the outset, I
would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals; Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals; as well as other previous speakers
for their respective briefings and statements.

Before delving into the topic of today's debate,
allow me to preface my remarks with a reference to
the celebration of Human Rights Day, which we will
commemorate tomorrow, as well as the International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of
the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this
Crime, which we commemorate today. In the light of
these important events, I invite all present to pause and
recall to memory the reality of our common failure 21
years ago, when the world turned a blind eye to the
worst Violation of human rights that occurred in my
country, Rwanda, the worst genocide of our times. The
rationale behind this reminder is to invite us all to take
stock and to gauge whether any lesson has been learned
from that disturbing reality, and whether the Council is
currently better prepared and better equipped to avert
or stop future heinous crimes and genocide.

Sadly, we have no choice but to note that human
rights violations and abuses are becoming the norm as
we grow accustomed to unfathomable human suffering
caused by unrest and conflicts that are adversely
impacting the well-being of peoples. This state of
affairs is conducive to the spread of terrorism and the
displacement of people. Should this trend persist, the
enjoyment of freedom and human rights will continue
to remain an elusive and distant reality.

More than any other country, Rwanda understands
the adverse consequences of such despicable crimes
against humanity, which deprive people of their
basic rights. Drawing from our history - in which
such intolerance led to the creation of marginalized
communities that were treated as second-class citizens,
and the subsequent systematic slaughter of the Tutsi
during the genocide - the current leadership, in its
quest for peace, has made it a point to prevent Rwandans
from falling into the same trap by combating any form
of divisionism and genocide denial, and by ensuring
that all citizens enjoy the same privileges and equal
treatment. It is against that background that I wish to
tackle today's topic as we mark the end of the era of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
international justice.

As previously stated to the Council on numerous
occasions, the Government of Rwanda believes that the
ICTR has not only played a key role in the fight against
impunity for mass atrocities, but has also produced a
substantial body of jurisprudence, including definitions
of the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes, as well as forms of responsibility, such as
superior responsibility. Most importantly, the Tribunal
has established that the genocide that occurred in
Rwanda was against the Tutsi as a group, and ruled that
acts of rape and sexual Violence constitute crimes of
genocide if committed with the intent to destroy the
targeted group, thereby contributing to post-genocide
reconciliation and healing in Rwanda.

As we acknowledge that milestone in post-
genocide Rwanda and in the history of international
law and jurisprudence with the closure of the first
United Nations international tribunal, we note with
satisfaction that the 93 individuals from all walks
of life - international fugitives who had evaded
Rwandan justice and who were indicted for genocide
by the court - were mainly the masterminds of this
crime. We take note of the announcement by Prosecutor
Jallow of Ladislas Ntaganzwa's arrest, and trust that
he will be extradited as soon as possible to face justice
in Rwanda. We deplore, however, the fact that other
fugitives are still at large, and reiterate our call on
all Member States, especially those still harbouring
them, to honour their moral obligation to the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and to cooperate in their arrest.

Returning to the subject of fugitives, the son-in-
law oftycoon Felicien Kabuga, Paulin Murayi, provides
financial support to the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), a terrorist organization
that relentlessly continues to spread its genocidal
ideology and activities in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also regret the lack of progress in
the monitoring of cases referred to international courts
outside Rwanda. The two cases referred to Rwanda
in 2012 and 2013 have advanced. In addition, we are
extremely concerned by the decision of the French
prosecution to drop charges against Father Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka, a decision that contradicts the nature
and scale of the crimes committed. We call on the
French authorities to expedite the investigations and
proceedings in the case against Laurent Bucyibaruta.

Another outstanding issue that Rwanda is
determined to pursue is the matter of who should be
entrusted with the repository of the ICTR/ International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals archives.
While it recognizes that the archives constitute a
United Nations property, Rwanda has made several
strong requests for their transfer to Rwanda upon the
completion of the Mechanism's mandate. We believe
that there should be no ambiguity in the understanding
of the matter. In the aftermath of a conflict, archives
help to transfer historical realities into a shared
understanding of the past. The primary beneficiary
should be the sole proprietor of such materials. I
would emphasize that those archives are a part of
our history, and it is of paramount importance that
they be preserved in Rwanda for the sake of future
generations. Rwandans, as the people most concerned
by those historical records, which constitute the most
thoroughly depicted and comprehensive account of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi, are indeed entitled to
them. We hope that all stakeholders will understand the
legitimacy of our request and do us justice.

Another important point that was overlooked
pertains to the compensation of the victims of the
genocide for their loss. That remains a dark spot on the
Tribunal's legacy when compared to that of the Gacaca
courts, which recognized and honoured victims, and
provided compensation for their looted and destroyed

property.

Let me emphasize the need to fight genocide and
its ideology, and reiterate our belief that giving a media
platform to an individual convicted of the crime of
genocide is wrong and unethical. The recent media
interview with the unrepentant mastermind of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi, Jean Kambanda, was
not only an insult to the victims but also a platform to
spread Kambanda's evil motives, which remain fresh in
the memory of many Rwandans. We hope that Member
States will discourage such practices in their territories
in order to avoid similar incidents.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity, to
thank the ICTR judges and staff for their contribution to
humankind in the fight against impunity. We wish the
best of luck to those who will still continue to work for
the Residual Mechanism and assure them of Rwanda's
continued cooperation. Let me also thank Chile for its
leadership in chairing the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

Allow me to end this statement with the following
words - prompted by a tweet I read this morning,
stating that the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda has claimed more lives in neighbouring
Democratic Republic of the Congo -just to stress the
following message.

Genocide is not an ordinary crime. Its devastating
effects linger forever. In Rwanda, we have been battling
them for the past 21 years. Luckily, we have been gifted
with an enlightened leadership that, in tandem with
the Rwandan population, has conducted numerous
consultations and national dialogues to address the
multifaceted challenges it faces, including ending
impunity and preventing its future occurrence. Rwanda
will diligently continue to do its part and expects the
international community and the United Nations to do
theirs.

