Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
presenting this report (S/2003/243) and saying that I
am very pleased that you, Sir, have timely sounded the
warning on the changing situation. I would also like to
join my colleagues in offering my condolences to the
Republic of Korea on the loss we have registered in the
peacekeeping force in Timor-Leste.

Less than a year ago, the international community
celebrated with joy the birth of a new nation. After
many years of struggle, the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste was finally born as an independent
political entity, with United Nations as its patron, in a
demonstration of the power of the international
community when it decides to uphold the right of
reason against brutal force and inequity. I am pleased
to see seated to my right the Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste, my good friend Ambassador Guterrez.

We all were, and still are, immensely confident in
the future of Timor-Leste despite the worrying news
that has come recently from that country. In fact, we
believe that nobody expected things to proceed without
any more problems, or that peace and stability would
prevail undisturbed, as it seems is not the case.

We believe that the international community
should continue to assist Timor-Leste with the same
commitment and, by doing so, allow the people of
Timor-Leste to further consolidate their hard-won
freedom and independence. That the international
community can continue to cherish Timor-Leste is a
great success of its collective will.

The special report of the Secretary-General on
Timor-Leste submitted to the Council gives cause for
great concern, given the deteriorating security situation
in Timor-Leste. The relative fragility of the security
forces and of their ability to restore order is indeed a
cause for concern. The activities of the former militias
and the credible evidence revealed in the report are
indeed disturbing. We believe that the neighbouring
countries bear a special responsibility in controlling
and curbing such activities, as they might become a
source of the most undesirable developments. We urge
the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
promote a good-neighbourly relationship.

The situation now prevailing will eventually force
the Security Council to adjust the downsizing plans
that were expected to take place in the near future.
However, this must be done with caution and prudence.
In this connection, the Angolan delegation fully
supports the proposals presented in the report to the
Security Council that we are considering. In fact, the
recent developments fully justify our choice.

The proposed adjustment plan contains sensible
steps to promote stability and to provide the time
required for the Timorese security agencies to become
ready to assume their tasks. In fact, the report proposes
a revised policing strategy, with the development of a
professional police force in Timor-Leste as an essential
factor for the consolidation of the democratic State. We
are satisfied with the progress achieved so far in
building a credible Timorese police force, and we fully
understand the concerns behind the proposal: the
necessity of further training, the promotion of the
force's ability to contain civil disorder in urban areas,
and the strengthening of the police's ability to address
threats from criminal and armed groups in rural areas
and in the region of the Tactical Coordination Line. We
deem particularly worrying the situation along the
Tactical Coordination Line and the degree of influence
that former militia maintain in such a sensitive zone.

It is my delegation's belief that the United
Nations should do its utmost to help Indonesia to
resettle as soon as possible the greatest number
possible of those former refugees who constitute a
dangerous menace to peace and stability in Timor-
Leste. Moreover, we believe that the Indonesian
authorities should do their utmost to curb anti-
Timorese activities in the border region and inside
West Timor.

To conclude, we reiterate our support for the
conclusions contained in the report of the Secretary-
General. We also deem extremely important the
additional commitment of the international community
to Timor-Leste in order that the great political and
human investment made so far is not lost. We fully
support the proposals for the postponement of the
downgrading plan until we are assured that the security
situation in Timor-Leste can be handled by the
Timorese themselves and that its neighbours have a
more proactive role in curbing destabilizing activities
against the new country. We join the appeal of the
Secretary-General for bilateral support to supplement
the efforts of UNMISET, including in the vital areas of
defence, police and justice.

Finally, we reiterate our full confidence to the
people of Timor-Leste, with the conviction that as they
have done in the past, with international help and
solidarity they will be able to overcome their difficult
moments.

