Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

First, let me thank France for organizing this
important debate and in particular for extending an
invitation to Member States to make concrete proposals
for a non-paper. We have included some practical
suggestions in my statement. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for the important role she plays in promoting
and protecting the rights of children affected by armed
conflict.

(spoke in French)

I was personally touched by the story told by my
neighbour, Mr. Junior Nzita. It truly touched my heart,
and I thank him.

(spoke in English)

The protection of children in armed conflict should
be a major concern for all of us. The fate of children is
closely linked to peace, justice and development, the
three priorities of the Kingdom of the Netherlands here
at the United Nations. Today allow me to make three
specific points: prevention, the vulnerability of girls
and accountability.

My first point is on prevention and mediation.
We need an integrated approach for the prevention
of the abuse of children's rights by non-State armed
groups before, during and after conflict. We need to
invest more capacity and resources in mediation by the
United Nations, and the relevant programme run by
the Department of Political Affairs, which we support,
should be strengthened. The mandates of United
Nations missions should be well coordinated to address
the protection of children coherently. UNICEF has the
mandate to address the rights of children with both
State and non-State actors. We urge States to cooperate
closely with UNICEF to more effectively address those
violations. In that context, a UNICEF symposium on
the effects of conflict on the mental health of children
will take place in The Hague from 26 to 28 May 2015.
Furthermore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands would
like to express its continued support for the concept
of the responsibility to protect. National Governments
and the international community share a responsibility
to enable children to grow up in a safe and peaceful
environment.

My second point is on the particular risks for girls.
They demand specific attention from the Council. Girls
are especially vulnerable targets of sexual violence.
The acts of some extremist groups, such as Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, are
atrocious and abhorrent. Those groups seem to take
pride in the trafficking of young girls, forcing them to
marry and exploiting them as sex slaves. Because of
the vulnerability of girls, the Netherlands has deployed
several experts on sexual and gender-based violence
in United Nations peacekeeping missions around the
world, and we intend to step up our efforts in that area.

My third point is on sanctions and accountability.
We need a stronger focus on child protection in the
Council's sanctions committees. That could be realized
by enhancing cooperation between the sanctions
committees on the one hand and the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict on
the other. Furthermore, the Council could request input
from the Special Rapporteur on issues such as the sale
of children, child prostitution and child pornography.

Ensuring accountability for the crimes committed
against children should be a key priority for the
Security Council. Documentation can be an important
step to that end. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports organizations that document war crimes. Last
February, we organized an expert conference in The
Hague on documenting war crimes in Syria. Ensuring
accountability for the atrocious crimes in Syria, also
crimes against children, is a historic responsibility for
the Council.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
the Security Council should play a more active role in
the documentation and monitoring of crimes against
children in armed conflict. We believe that the Council
should therefore expand the listing criteria under
resolution 1612 (2005) to include abductions of children,
and it could do so in a non-paper. The problem of the
abduction of children by extremist groups is increasing
and needs to be addressed.

In conclusion, all children deserve protection
against all forms of violence. Sexual abduction,
abuse, mutilation and the killing of children during
armed conflict simply has to stop. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, as a partner for peace, justice and
development, will do its utmost to achieve those goals.

