Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express to you,
Madame Foreign Minister, how delighted my
delegation is to see you presiding over this important
session, whose item under consideration is of utmost
concern to the peoples of the world. Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
rich statement to us at the beginning of this meeting. I
cannot also fail to thank Mr. Oshima, Under-Secretary-
General for presenting the Secretary-General's report. I
should also like to thank the Director-General of the
International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) for
the comprehensive statement he made just now.

The decision by the Security Council to keep this
item at the top of its agenda shows the great
importance that the Council attaches to this issue,
especially since civilians are the primary victims of
today's conflicts. Unfortunately, women and children
make up an unprecedented number of the victims of
such conflicts.

Two and a half million people were directly killed
in the conflicts in the past decade. About 31 million
were either expelled or uprooted from their homes
because of armed conflicts. This is a very wide circle
of human misery.

The Middle East is a clear example in that regard.
The latest period has witnessed more acts perpetrated
against the defenseless Palestinian people. The Israeli
forces of occupation have a record replete with
criminal activities, with about 2,000 martyrs and
thousands of wounded among the Palestinian civilian
population in the last two years alone. This is a crime
of genocide being perpetrated by Israel. Palestinians -
children, women and the elderly - are being killed by
military aircraft, tanks and missiles used by the Israeli
army. We all have become aware of the killing of 10
Palestinian civilians at the end of last week, including
two workers of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Three
United Nations personnel have been killed by Israel in
the past fortnight alone. My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations for
his strong condemnation of such Israeli acts.

Under the pretext of fighting terrorism, Israel has
also most heinously exploited the international
consensus on combating terrorism established
following 11 September to combat the just Palestinian
cause. Israel continues its attempts to classify
resistance to occupation and resistance in self-defence
and in defence of land and dignity as terrorism, which
runs counter to every norm of international and
humanitarian law. Syria for many years has called upon
the international community - and, indeed, has
cooperated with it - to condemn terrorism in all its
manifestations, particularly State terrorism. Paragraph
24 of the Secretary-General's report refers to the
tragedy of the Palestinian people:

"Ms. Catherine Bertini, the Secretary-
General's Personal Humanitarian Envoy to the
Occupied Territories, reported in August on the
mounting humanitarian crisis, describing it as a
crisis of access and mobility. She highlighted the
impact on civilian populations of loss of access to
basic needs and services, including medical
treatment and education, because of curfews and
closures, while other services, such as food
supplies and water, are blocked from reaching
communities." (S/2002/1300, para. 24)

The Secretary-General has presented a series of
reports - for which we are grateful - on violations of
human rights in armed conflict so that United Nations
bodies, including the Security Council, may further
consider the issue. In his current report, he calls upon
the Security Council to take steps to guarantee the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation
understands fully the compelling reasons for the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report. We are fully prepared to discuss the measures
he has put forward, with a view to reaching agreement
in the Council on them.

The issue of access to vulnerable populations is a
primary challenge and a very complicated and
multifaceted issue that involves a number of entities.
Protection and assistance programmes serving millions
of vulnerable people are sometimes abused. At times,
they may be delayed or even rejected, producing
destructive results. My delegation therefore highly
appreciates the efforts made by the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to provide
assistance and to reveal the negative consequences of
the failure of assistance to reach the right people at the
right time and place.

My delegation also notes the fact that the report
of the Secretary-General has rightly focused on the
particular suffering of children in armed conflict and
on the great importance that the international
community must attach to that situation and to the
particular conditions of women and older persons in
armed conflict.

The increasing cooperation between the various
bodies, departments and agencies of the United Nations
is of utmost importance in promoting the efforts of the
Organization to protect civilians in armed conflict. In
that regard, we welcome the current cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Although half a century has passed since the
adoption of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, and
although most States are now party to that Convention,
there is still a wide gap between the Convention's
norms and their implementation in armed conflicts. In
that regard, some States hide behind the pretext of
particular circumstances to continue to act in ways that
run counter to the provisions of the Convention. We
believe that the international community has a special
responsibility to condemn and end such actions. That
requires that the international community quickly and
seriously implement international instruments on the
provision of legal and civilian protection, in
accordance with international humanitarian law, and
that it increase pressure in this regard. The delegation
of the Syrian Arab Republic calls for justice and
reconciliation in addressing the root causes of conflict,
so as to be able to avoid resorting to violence.

The Secretary-General's report includes a number
of recommendations and observations. We have read
them very carefully, and believe that they deserve
careful and in-depth consideration. Those who have
spoken before me have highlighted the elements to
which they believe the Security Council should give
special consideration. In order to save time, it would
not be useful to repeat them in my statement.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the President
and her delegation most sincerely for the excellent
preparations they have made for the Council's
consideration of this item.

