Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting
on the situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We also wish to express our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, for his comprehensive
briefing. Today's meeting allows the Council an
opportunity to review developments since the
establishment of MONUC.

A year ago, we were not as hopeful as we are
today. Indeed, the prospects for peace were dim. The
dynamics which have resulted from certain seminal
events, including the successive meetings of the
Security Council with the Political Committee -
culminating in the recent visit by the Security Council
mission to the region - have all contributed to
opening the window of opportunity that now prevails in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, as
Ambassador Morjane has pointed out, we are not yet
past the point of no return. The peace process remains
fragile and it is now up to the parties themselves to
take advantage of the opportunity presented to act
decisively and to bring lasting peace to the region.

My delegation is cognizant of the regional
dimension to the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and of the need for regional solutions. We
appreciate the need to satisfy the security concerns of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of all the
countries in the region. The recent Security Council
mission to the region sharpened the focus of the parties
to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement on their respective
responsibilities. The need for increased dialogue
between the leaders of the States of the region was
highlighted and we have already seen a significant
increase in the dialogue, which is having a positive
impact on the peace process.

The role of the Joint Military Commission (JMC)
has also taken on increased importance. Co-location of
the JMC with MONUC is necessary in order to further
develop and coordinate the withdrawal plans of all
foreign troops from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe that it is essential if the third phase
of the deployment of MONUC is to be realized and if
MONUC is to be enabled to carry out its assigned
mandate.

The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement programme is perhaps the
most important issue with respect to the region's
security. It is one of the major challenges facing the
Lusaka peace process and an effective strategy to deal
with the so-called negative forces. In light of this, the
recent invitation extended by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to carry out an
assessment of the requirements for the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation or
resettlement of the 3,000-plus members of the so-called
negative forces, now in the two camps, should be
accepted. This assessment could lead to the
implementation of an effective disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation or
resettlement programme, with the assistance of the
international community. Success with this group
would be a catalyst for others to voluntarily join the
programme.

My delegation supports the enhancement of
MONUC's role to facilitate this process. Future
political developments in Rwanda, Burundi and
Uganda will significantly affect the future of the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement programme. Those three
countries have important roles in ensuring the success
of such a programme.

The Security Council, in resolution 1341 (2001)
of 22 February 2001, urged all parties to the conflict to
cooperate with MONUC in preparing and
implementing the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, repatriation or resettlement plans.
Unfortunately, there are a number of recent, ominous
reports that are very troubling. Not the least of these
suggests that support for the armed groups, rather than
being phased out, has intensified in recent weeks. It
would appear that the sponsors of these groups are
facilitating a build-up of these forces that would
prolong their control of the territories they now occupy.
Equally troubling is a report that suggests that they are
supporting the forced recruitment of civilians,
including children, for the military forces of the armed
groups. This is absolutely deplorable and must be
brought to an end immediately. In this regard, my
delegation would like to hear from Mr. Morjane as to
whether there has been any discernible compliance
with resolution 1341 (2001).
Another factor affecting the peace process is the
lack of freedom of movement. In this regard, we
believe that the Congo and Ubangi Rivers must be
opened to commercial traffic without further delay.
This will require the full cooperation of the parties in
control of the regions through which the rivers pass.
The economic benefits are obvious to everyone, but it
is also important to confidence-building and
reconciliation among the protagonists.

Also of concern to my delegation are the reports
of gross human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law throughout many areas
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
in the eastern region. What is even more disturbing is
that the perpetrators of these abuses show scant regard
for the humanitarian needs of the civilians in areas
under their control. Furthermore, the level of insecurity
severely restricts the delivery of aid to relieve the
suffering of the population in these areas. These abuses
cannot go unpunished and the perpetrators must
understand that the international community is
determined to put an end to impunity.

There are also reports from the region which
indicate that illegal exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has continued
unabated and, in some areas, has actually increased.
We emphasize the need for all parties to cooperate fully
with the Panel of Experts. The Council must send a
message that it is prepared to consider actions
necessary to put an end to this exploitation. In this
regard, we welcome the decision of the Government of
Uganda to establish an inquiry into the conduct of its
military and civilians in the illegal exploitation of these
resources. It is important that this inquiry be carried
out with utmost transparency.

My delegation wishes to recall that the Security
Council demanded, in resolution 1304 (2000), that
Kisangani be completely demilitarized. To a large
extent, the success or failure of the peace process could
rest on the demilitarization of Kisangani. We therefore
call on the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie (RCD) in Goma to act in compliance with
Security Council resolutions and we call on the
supporters of the RCD-Goma to use their influence to
bring about the demilitarization of Kisangani and full
cooperation with MONUC and the Lusaka peace
process.

As we have in the past, my delegation expresses
our full support for the inter-Congolese dialogue under
the facilitation of Sir Ketumile Masire. While we
recognize the need for reconciliation at the level of the
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement, it must also be
recognized that members of civil society, particularly
women, have an important role in the process. Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) aptly reaffirms the
importance of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peace-building. It also stresses the
importance of measures that support women's peace
initiatives and indigenous processes for conflict
resolution and that involve women in all of the
implementation mechanisms of peace agreements.

We believe that lessons can be learned from
experiences in other conflict-torn regions in which
women have taken the lead in conflict resolution and
reconciliation. One concrete success has been the
holding of peace tables and we believe that one could
be held, perhaps in Kisangani, in collaboration with the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and the
Division for the Advancement of Women. This could
serve not only as an example, but also as a confidence-
building measure.

As my delegation has indicated in the past and
again today, we believe that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be resolved
without taking into consideration the security of its
neighbours, particularly those to the East. We have also
stated that, for there to be any prospect for long-term
sustainable peace, an international conference on the
Great Lakes region to address issues of long-term
regional security, economic and development issues
and regional political cooperation must be held. We
believe that preparations for such a conference should
begin now, and in this regard, we would support the
View expressed by the Permanent Representative of
Singapore, who suggested that an interdisciplinary
mission could be mounted by the Secretariat in
preparation for such a conference.

We in the Council must speak up for the voiceless
and defend the powerless. We must continue to take
action to further the process of peace. We must be firm
when firmness is required. We must command respect
for and compliance with our decisions. We have done
much, but we can and should do more for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We speak of the window of opportunity for peace,
but if the parties fail to act now and take full advantage
of it, the window could be slammed shut. They must
seize the time and act now and give peace a chance.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the indefatigable efforts and the
diplomatic skills of Ambassador Kamel Morjane. He
has set an example for us in the international
community of an international civil servant who has
worked hard in the cause of peace. We wish him all the
best, and we commend him, the staff of MONUC,
General Diallo and the military personnel for all the
efforts that they have brought to this process.

