The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy;
Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Romano
Prodi for their participation and contribution to the
work of the Council in today's meeting. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for her presence
here today, and welcome the participation of the States
members of the African Union (AU) in this debate.

While the Security Council has primary
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security, regional and subregional organizations
are playing an increasingly significant role in
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. Nowhere in the world has this fact manifested
itself more vividly than in Africa. Hence, enhancing
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union will boost the international
community's collective power in resolving conflicts in
Africa and improve the latter's capacity to resolve
existing local conflicts and prevent future ones.

We fully support the promotion of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peacekeeping, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, resolution 1809 (2008) and relevant
presidential statements of the Security Council.

Since the adoption of resolution 1809 (2008) in
April 2008, considerable progress has been made in
United Nations-AU cooperation and partnership in this
field. Endowed with its comparative advantage and
valuable experiences and lessons accumulated through
decades of carrying out peacekeeping operations in
Africa, the African Union is capable of making
important contributions to the success of any United
Nations-authorized joint peacekeeping operation on the
African continent.

Finding ways and means to effectively support
AU peacekeeping operations will add value to the
Security Council's task of maintaining international
peace and security. Enhanced dialogue and close
consultation in their respective decision-making
processes between the United Nations and the African
Union should be further promoted, especially between
the Security Council and the AU Commission. This
cooperation can range from conflict analysis to strategy
development and the operational planning of
peacekeeping activities.

We note with appreciation that a mechanism for
joint annual meetings between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council has
been established and implemented for the past three
years. We support ongoing efforts to promote
information exchange and cooperation between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission.

Due to its limited resources and capacity, the
African Union has faced tremendous difficulties in
carrying out peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. Further support should be extended to
ensure the successful finalization of the United
Nations-African Union 10-year capacity-building
programme. The efforts made by the African Union,
with the support of the United Nations, to build, over
the long term, the African Standby Force, should also
be recognized and encouraged.

Regarding financial contributions, which remain
one of the thorniest challenges to the success of joint
United Nations-AU peacekeeping operations, we take
due note of the recommendations put forth in the AU-
United Nations panel report (S/2008/813) and the
Secretary-General's assessment of these
recommendations, and hold that all options deserve due
consideration.

We call on all able donor countries to extend
necessary financial and logistical resources to facilitate
the implementation of present and future AU
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. In this connection, we welcome the readiness
of the European Union to earmark funds for the AU in
the framework of its Africa Peace Facility.

Finally, we share the Secretary-General's
observation that peacekeeping is merely part of a
political solution, not an alternative to it. Adequate
attention should be paid to preventive diplomacy, early
warning, conflict prevention and mediation. Lessons
from Kenya, Darfur, Mauritania, Zimbabwe,
Madagascar and many other flashpoints in Africa have
shown the importance of early warning and mediation
in preventing and resolving local conflicts.

Apart from pooling resources for peacekeeping
operations, earmarking sufficient resources for socio-
economic development to address the root causes of
conflicts on that continent must be considered a
priority because it is the only way to prevent the
recurrence of conflicts and sustain peace and stability
where it they have been hard-earned.

I thank the delegation of Uganda for drafting the
draft presidential statement that we will adopt at the
end of this meeting.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Sweden.

