The Secretary-General: Nine months ago,
approximately 20 million people were at severe risk
of famine in South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and north-
eastern Nigeria. In South Sudan, almost 100,000
people were on the verge of starvation. At that time,
I expressed my deep concern to Member States in
two letters calling for urgent action and support for
humanitarian and development agencies. I also held a
media briefing here in New York on the crisis with the
principals of the World Food Programme, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme and representatives
of from the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and UNICEF. In March, I visited
Somalia, where I saw at first hand the need for a massive
scale-up in international support in order to avert a
famine. I heard heartbreaking stories from people who
had been forced from their homes by drought, and last
month the high-level event on famine during the General
Assembly highlighted our continued grave concerns.

The international community responded quickly
to the warnings. Donors came forward. Nearly 70 per
cent of the funds requested have now been received.
Aid operations were scaled up. Humanitarian agencies
and their partners are now reaching Close to 13 million
people each month with life-saving food, nutrition
assistance, health care and other support. Development
partners have also stepped up by working with
humanitarian agencies to link emergency relief with
long-term programmes aimed at breaking the cycle of
risk and vulnerability. Although we have succeeded in
keeping famine at bay, we have not kept suffering at
bay. Hunger continues for millions of people. Children
under 5 will suffer the mental and physical scars of
stunting throughout their whole lives. In fact, in the
past nine months, the need for humanitarian aid has
increased in those four areas.

The number of people at risk has increased. In
South Sudan, approximately 6 million people are
severely food-insecure - an increase ofS million since
the beginning of the year. Humanitarian aid is saving
lives, but we have not dealt with the one major root
cause of those food crises: conflict. Some 80 per cent
of the World Food Programme's funding is going to
areas affected by armed conflict. Approximately 60 per
cent of the 815 million people suffering from hunger
today live in the shadow of conflict. Three quarters
of the children whose growth has been stunted live in
countries affected by conflict. Until those conflicts are
resolved and development takes root, communities and
entire regions will continue to be ravaged by hunger
and suffering.

Let us talk about each of those food crises
individually. In north-east Nigeria, some 8.5 million
people are now in need of humanitarian aid. There
have been tangible improvements in food security in
some areas, thanks to the efforts of the Government and
humanitarian organizations. However, aid agencies face
obstacles because of ongoing attacks by Boko Haram,
while operations by the Nigerian military also affect
access. We believe that up to 700,000 people in parts of
Borno and Yobe states are completely inaccessible and
may require urgent support. Two thirds of the health-
care facilities in those states have been damaged.
Those that are functioning are short of staff and lack
safe water, basic drugs and equipment. That poses very
serious challenges in dealing with outbreaks of cholera,
malaria and measles.

In Somalia, more than 6 million people depend on
humanitarian aid for their survival. Aid agencies and
their partners face armed conflict, insecurity, blocked
roads and unnecessary bureaucracy. Four aid workers
were killed in the first eight months of this year, and
there were more than 100 violent incidents affecting
aid organizations. Large parts of southern and central
Somalia remain under the control or influence of
Al-Shabaab. Almost 1.9 million people who need help
are beyond the reach of aid agencies. Road access is
severely limited by illegal checkpoints and blockades.
Al-Shabaab and other non-State armed groups have been
targeting humanitarians and confiscating or destroying
aid supplies. Meanwhile, the Government frequently
imposes bureaucratic obstacles, which include
arbitrary taxation and interference in recruitment and
the awarding of contracts.
In South Sudan, localized famine has been
averted, but severe food insecurity has risen to
unprecedented levels. Government and opposition
groups are preventing agencies from accessing areas
in urgent need, including parts of the Equatorias and
the Greater Upper Nile region, and areas to the south
and west of Wau. Nineteen aid workers have been
killed since January, and more than 440 have had to
be relocated. Humanitarian supplies are being regularly
looted from convoys and compounds. More than 830
incidents relating to access have been reported this
year, more than half of which involved violence against
humanitarian agencies. That amounts to more than
one such incident against humanitarians per day. Both
Government and opposition forces are implicated. The
collapse of the economy has led to widespread violence
and increased criminality, thereby making the delivery
of food aid even more dangerous.

In Yemen, the World Food Programme and its
partners helped avert famine by reaching 7 million
people in August - an increase of more than 60 per
cent since the first half of this year, but many millions
of people continue to suffer. Approximately 700,000
people in areas of the Sa'ada, Hajjah, Al Hudaydah
and Taizz governorates are hard to reach because
of bureaucratic obstacles, air strikes, shelling and
ground clashes. Both the alliance of those loyal to
Abdulmalik al-Houthi and Ali Abdullah Saleh, which
controls the capital, Sana'a, and the Government of
Yemen have imposed restrictions on the movement and
transportation of humanitarian personnel and aid. An
economic blockade has led to an increase in fuel costs
of more than 50 per cent and in food costs by 30 per
cent over pre-crisis levels. Meanwhile, the world's
largest cholera epidemic has resulted in some 800,000
suspected cases and more than 2,000 deaths.

The parties to conflict in all four of those countries
have stated their commitment to humanitarian law and
human rights law, but most of them have not followed
through. I call on them and those with influence over
them to translate that commitment into practical
measures and to address impunity immediately.
That means allowing and facilitating the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief, imposing
constraints only in good faith, and respecting and
protecting humanitarian personnel and supplies.

I also call for urgent measures to address the root
causes of conflict, improve access and mitigate human
suffering. Specifically, I ask the Council to continue to
engage in and support the political process in Somalia,
and encourage the Federal Government of Somalia and
the federal member states to stabilize their relationship.
Worryingly, we can see that that process is not going
as smoothly as we would like. Without progress in the
political and security areas, any improvements in the
humanitarian situation will be only temporary.

It is critical to clarify key issues defining the
federal states, including the division of powers and
agreements on revenue and resource-sharing between
the federal and state Governments. I welcome the
efforts by the Government and several federal states
to improve access by unblocking routes and removing
illegal checkpoints, and I call for continued progress
on that issue. In Nigeria, I encourage the Government
and its counterparts in the Lake Chad Basin region to
develop a regional strategy to address the root causes
of the crisis there.

I urge all partners to step up efforts to provide
humanitarian aid, as well as long-term solutions
for sustainable development. It is critical that a
greater civilian presence be established in the newly
accessible areas, and I welcome the Government's
efforts to achieve that. In Yemen, we face increasing
constraints and interference by the alliance of Houthis
and Ali Abdullah Saleh, which controls Sana'a, as the
Government of Yemen and its partners from the coalition
led by Saudi Arabia attempt to restore legitimacy. I call
on all parties to ensure unhindered access to people in
need. I repeat the call for the payment of civil servants"
salaries and the effective and continued operation ofthe
port of Al Hudaydah. What is needed most is for the
parties to return to the negotiation table and focus on
reaching agreement. Member States with influence on
them must also play their role.

Finally, I urge the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan to come to terms urgently, so as to prevent
increased food insecurity and refugee movements,
which threaten to destabilize the region, and continued
human suffering and misery. I encourage all Member
States to support the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development's high-level revitalization forum, which
has gained momentum in recent weeks. I urge the
Government to facilitate access to people in need, to
ensure the safety of humanitarian workers and supplies,
and to remove bureaucratic impediments to aid.

Last month, the United Nations food and nutrition
agencies released a report entitled The State of Food
Security and Nutrition in the World. The report
underlined that we are now seeing a reversal in the
long-term decline in hunger. Conflict and violations
of international humanitarian law inevitably increase
vulnerability to all kinds of threats, including food
insecurity, which in turn causes people to flee. The
World Food Programme estimates that a l per cent
increase in food insecurity leads to a 2 per cent increase
in refugees.

Conflict in one country places demands on
its neighbours to provide food and basic services
to refugees. That can lead to further instability,
affecting the security of an entire region and beyond.
Prevention must, as always, be our watchword. Early
famine-warning mechanisms have worked well in
north-eastern Nigeria, Yemen, Somalia and South
Sudan. We will continue to support famine prevention
and humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian aid and
strengthened respect for international law must be
complemented by investment in sustainable peace and
comprehensive long-term solutions.

Those countries are dealing with violent extremism
at the same time as they are being hit by economic
recession and low oil prices. They present powerful
examples of the complex and multidimensional
challenges that we face. They require a system-wide
approach that addresses the humanitarian-development
nexus and its link to peace. Development agencies
must engage early on with innovative solutions. The
World Bank has shown that it is possible to scale up
development-oriented programmes, complementing the
humanitarian response, even in fragile countries like
Yemen. I welcome those efforts, which must include
the involvement of regional neighbours and front-
line States.

In the long term, we must focus on what communities
and countries need in order to emerge from protracted
conflict and instability. We must help people not only to
survive, but also to thrive. Right now, we must urgently
commit to increasing humanitarian aid and funding the
programmes that we have in place. Wherever we have
not prevented or resolved conflict, we must support
its victims and survivors. It is unconscionable that aid
agencies must make life-or-death decisions about who
should receive aid, owing to a shortage of resources. I
am grateful for the solidarity shown and urge continued
commitment and support.

