Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, Sir, I want
to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Please be assured of the full support and
cooperation of my delegation. I want also to thank you
for the kind words addressed to my delegation
expressing high appreciation of Ukraine's presidency
last month.

I would like also to join previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Annabi for his very informative briefing
on the latest developments in East Timor. In fact, his
information provides some hope.

We congratulate Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta on his
appointment as President of East Timor's National
Council, and we wish him every success. We hope also
that Mr. Xanana Gusmao will continue to play an
active part in the political life of the territory.

We are encouraged by the information on the
security and order situation. We think that an important
step towards the independence and self-rule of the
territory is the establishment of a local police service
and of an effective justice system, as well as of an East
Timorese defence force. In that regard, we are pleased
to note that just in the one year of the East Timor
police service's activities, 450 police officers have
been graduated. They have already been deployed
throughout the territory. Two hundred cadets are
currently undergoing training at the police college. We
are encouraged by the information that a Defence Force
has been established. We heard too that this month will
see the beginning of construction of a new East Timor
Defence Force training centre at Metinaro.

We are of the opinion that the successful conduct
of democratic and transparent elections should be one
of UNTAET's priorities. In this regard, we welcome
the setting of a specific date for the first East Timorese
free elections on the basis of a recently approved
electoral law, which is among the most open and
democratic in the world. With the establishment of an
Independent Electoral Commission, the electoral
process has really started, and Mr. Annabi has in fact
informed us that the election campaign is in full swing.
It is essentially important now to make all political
parties become part of this process and to involve the
population in it.

Another important issue is, of course, the smooth
return and resettlement of refugees. This is yet another
important condition for the successful creation of civil
society and reconciliation in East Timor. We are
pleased to know that as of today 180,000 refugees have
returned. This is a very encouraging fact. In this
regard, we believe that the development of good-
neighbourly relations and cooperation with Indonesia is
extremely important to the territory. In this respect, we
are glad to note the efforts of the Special
Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, to advance
the reconciliation process, and in particular his meeting
with pro-autonomy East Timorese leaders in Dili on 28
March of this year.

It is extremely important, in our view, to put an
end to the presence and the activities of militias at
refugee camps in West Timor and to resume there the
activities of the international humanitarian agencies.
We welcome, in this respect, the readiness of the
Government of Indonesia to accept the United Nations
mission of experts for assessment of the security
situation in West Timor, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Secretary-General's report of
16 January 2001. I also recall that this request was also
put forward in the statement by Mr. Ramos Horta
during our previous meeting on this agenda item. In
this connection, we hope that the Secretariat is
preparing to send the mission at the earliest possible
time.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, and the United Nations staff for their efforts.
I want to assure them of Ukraine's readiness to
continue its full support of UNTAET efforts in building
an independent East Timor and in the implementation
ofits people's aspirations.

Finally, I have one question for Mr. Annabi. In
View of the information on the latest disturbances
within East Timor, what would Mr. Annabi's
explanation be? In fact, what is behind the latest
disturbances in East Timor? It seems that it is not only
competition between fighters or sportsmen. It seems
that there is a trend, and maybe an evaluation can be
made by the Secretariat.

