Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of the
Republic of Timor-Leste, and to thank him for his
presentation. I would also like to offer him our most
sincere condolences following the passing of a dear
close relative. I would also like to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for her
detailed briefing on the most recent developments in
Timor-Leste since the previous meeting last November
(see S/PV. 6664).

My country welcomes the fact that the situation
in Timor-Leste remained calm in the period covered by
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/43). At this
crucial moment in its history, Timor-Leste must pursue
the stabilization and pacification process in the
country. This stability was made possible by the
determination of the national authorities to preserve its
achievements and by the efforts of the international
community through UNMIT and the presence on the
ground of the multinational security force.

In this context, we welcome the considerable
efforts made by the Timor-Leste authorities, the Policia
National de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the army, to
ensure security. Indeed, the implementation of the
PNTL-UNMIT police Joint Development Plan and the
institutional capacity-building of the Timor-Leste army
have significantly contributed to stabilizing the
country. Moreover, the unprecedented participation of
Timorese soldiers in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan attests to the professionalism of the
Timor-Leste army and to the commitment of the
Government to contributing to achieving the objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations.

In terms of the rule of law, actions taken to
protect children, investigations into crimes against
humanity and combating discrimination against women
are all of considerable significance. The reforms
undertaken by the Timorese authorities in the judicial
sector have also facilitated access to justice, reduced
the backlog of criminal cases, and improved prison
infrastructure. These reforms also have facilitated the
adoption, in the framework of enhancing democratic
governance, of legal texts concerning the fight against
corruption, money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism.

Timor-Leste is on the eve of important
presidential and legislative elections that will represent
a turning point by leading to the establishment of a
new Government. In this regard, all stakeholders - be
they political parties or members of civil society, and
particularly women and young people - must be
committed to a satisfactory electoral process, which is
so important for the future of Timor-Leste. At the same
time, as noted by the President of the Republic, the
necessary support of the international community must
continue in order to support the Timorese reforms, the
reintegration of ex-combatants and the economic and
social development of Timor-Leste.

