Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I should like to congratulate
Ambassador Le Luong Minh and the delegation of Viet
Nam on their successful guidance of the Security
Council in July, and to wish you, Sir, equal success for
the delegation of Belgium in doing your difficult job as
President of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe, who introduced the report describing the
situation in Iraq and the work of the United Nations
structures (S/2008/495). We listened with interest to
the comments of the Permanent Representative of Iraq,
Mr. Al-Bayati, who has given us an assessment by his
country's authorities regarding recent events there. We
are also grateful to Ambassador Wolff for his briefing
on the activities of the Mulitnational Force in Iraq.

On the whole, the report submitted to us
objectively reflects today's realities in Iraq. We agree
with most of the report's findings and conclusions. We
are pleased to note that the report describes a certain
amount of progress on security, which has taken place
in some Iraqi governorates. However, it is still too soon
to talk about the irreversibility of that process.

In recent days and weeks, certain high-impact
terrorist acts have taken place in Baghdad and Kirkuk,
and several less sensational but no less ruthless clashes
and attacks have been committed by extremists in
various areas of the country. We support the approach
of Iraqi leaders and all political forces to achieve a
lasting settlement by advancing a real, comprehensive
inter-Iraqi dialogue and by strengthening national
reconciliation and understanding. In that connection,
we think that expediting the adoption of laws regarding
local elections and hydrocarbon is critically important
to the sustainable political and economic development
of the country and to the stabilization of the situation
there as a whole.

We note the active efforts made by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to help
Iraq resolve those challenges. We believe that, in that
context, the question of maintaining the unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq remains a top priority. An
important event in that regard will be the elections to
the local organs of power, preparations for which are
under way with the active assistance of UNAMI. We
believe that the elections should take place in
transparent conditions and that the results must be
accepted by all Iraqis.

An equally important goal is the facilitation of a
settlement in Iraq by the States of the region and by the
international community as a whole. In that regard,
steps are being taken, in terms both of political issues,
as mentioned in the report - for example, the opening
of new embassies in Baghdad - and of economic
issues, which include in particular processes to write
off Iraq's foreign debt. We are pleased to note that,
following the lead of the Russian Federation, a number
of other countries are stepping up to resolve that
problem.

We welcome the prospect of establishing a
general time frame for the presence of foreign troops in
Iraq. We think it is important that the appropriate
agreements not infringe on Iraq's sovereignty or cause
new conflicts or fissures in Iraqi society. We believe
that a democratic, unified Iraq, strengthened in its
sovereignty, will become an important factor for the
stability of the Persian Gulf region and for the entire
Middle East.

We agree with the concerns expressed in the
report of the Secretary-General about the serious
violations of human rights in Iraq. We support the goal
of UNAMI to continue to work with the Government
of Iraq and Iraqi officials to put an end to impunity and
to redress the human rights situation as a whole. We
support UNAMI's practice of preparing periodic
reports describing the humanitarian and human rights
situation in Iraq. Those reports must include statistics
about the number of civilian casualties, which
unfortunately remain high.

We strongly condemn attacks on civilians and
civilian deaths resulting from indiscriminate and
excessive uses of force. There is no justification for
armed groups that use suicide bombers and engage in
the process of hostage-taking to attain their goals.

We are very concerned about the activities of
private security companies and other mercenary
structures in Iraq, which often violate the rights of
innocent civilians and the norms of international
humanitarian law.

We welcome the recent accession by Iraq to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict. We call upon all parties to implement
resolution 1612 (2005), including the full deployment
in Iraq of a monitoring and reporting mechanism. We
hope that those steps will help mitigate the inhumane
treatment of children in Iraq, including the detention of
underage children in military jails in contravention of
international standards, and the still widespread
practice of using child soldiers.

In conclusion, allow me to once again express our
profound gratitude to the United Nations personnel,
who, in extremely difficult conditions in today's Iraq,
are valiantly and effectively doing their jobs, as
defined in the Security Council's mandate.

