Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me first extend my condolences to the people and
Government of Afghanistan for the loss of lives caused
by the Taliban terrorist attacks in Kabul yesterday.

I would like to express my appreciation to France for
organizing this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I
would also like to thank the Ambassador ofAfghanistan
for his statement, as well as Mr. Nicholas Haysom for
his briefing and introduction ofthe Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2016/532). We wish him all the best in
his new assignment, and welcome Mr. Yamamoto as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

My Government is concerned over the volatile
situation in Afghanistan, which continues to face
major security, economic and political challenges.
The Secretary-General's report refers to "continued
and intense armed clashes, which were at their highest
number recorded since 2001" (S/2016/532, para. 3) as the
lead factor contributing to the deteriorating situation in
the country. Also distressing is the uncertainty over the
prospects for direct talks between the Government and
the Taliban. We condemn all violent attacks committed
by the Taliban and all other terrorist groups, as well
as any cooperation with them, which we believe would
encourage them in their odious behaviour and would
thus be counterproductive to establishing peace in
Afghanistan. Iran reiterates its support for any Afghan-
led peace process.

At the same time, the emergence of Da'esh and its
offshoot, the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province, along with a spectrum of
other terrorist and extremist groups, such as the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan in the north and the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement, are all alarming signs of
more trouble in the future if we fail to properly address
them now.

Today, the Afghan National Unity Government is
at the forefront of fighting terrorism. The sustained
support of the international community is sorely
needed to shore up the Afghan Government in its fight
against terrorism and extremism and to address the
security, economic and political challenges that it faces.
Strengthening regional cooperation with Afghanistan
is a priority and a major path towards consolidating
peace and security in the region. We see great potential
in our economic cooperation with Afghanistan and are
ready to increase bilateral cooperation, particularly
on security matters and counter-narcotic efforts,
developing projects and economic cooperation in the
fields of infrastructure and agriculture and finding
durable solutions for Afghan refugees.

During the past decade, Iran has helped
Afghanistan to complete nearly 300 projects, ranging
from infrastructure to human resources training and
capacity-building, particularly by offering of hundreds
of scholarships each year. On 23 May, the Presidents of
Afghanistan and Iran and the Prime Minister of India
signed the Trilateral Transport and Transit Agreement
in Tehran to facilitate trade among the three countries
and, potentially, Central Asia. The Agreement covers
the development of the Iranian port of Chabahar, which
would provide Afghanistan with access to the high
sea, which would be very valuable to Afghanistan
as a land-locked country and the entire region. Iran
and Afghanistan are also committed to increasing
their connectivity, with emphasis on the Khaf-Herat
railway, the 78-mile railroad project in Farah and the
second bridge over the Helmand River. A planned
trilateral Afghanistan-Iran-India transit corridor is also
under way.

Narcotics are a real threat to the region and beyond
and should be addressed by the international community
in a serious and comprehensive manner. Any increase
in narcotics use is a reflection of prevailing insecurity
and poverty. The strong support and commitment of
international donors, Afghan authorities and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are essential
to deter the menace of narcotics as a social health
challenge and, more importantly, as a major source of
income for extremist and terrorist groups.

With regard to refugees, Iran continues to participate
in the work of the Tripartite Commission in order to
plan for the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual
repatriation of Afghan refugees. It is very unfortunate
to learn from the Secretary-General's report that 2016
represents the lowest recorded returnee rate since
the establishment of the voluntary return programme
in 2002, with many of the returnees choosing not to
return to their areas of origin, including many who
settled in urban centres. We welcome any effort to help
overcome the main reintegration challenges faced by
returnees and to formulate a comprehensive voluntary
repatriation and reintegration strategy. Success in
voluntary repatriation depends first and foremost on
addressing the reasonable needs of repatriated refugees
in Afghanistan, which underscores the necessity of
mobilizing more international support for this purpose.

Over the past few decades, we have supported and
continue to support millions of Afghan refugees, who
have not been confined to camps and have had free
access to Iran's job market, despite the difficulties
that the country has faced. This year, 386,000 Afghan
students are enrolled in our schools and universities,
which represents an increase of 36,000, thanks to the
Government's decision to enrol all children, regardless
of their legal status. In the field of health care and
medical services, Afghan refugees continue to have
access to public health services in the country.

Iran continues its full support for the promotion of
security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan, since we consider the
security of Afghanistan to be the security of our borders

and the region. We support UNAMA and United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through a
genuine commitment on the part of the United Nations
to a sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth
in final report of the Tripartite Review Commission on
the United Nations in Afghanistan. We need to utilize
the UNAMA mandate and its good offices to strengthen
national institutions and capacities in priority areas
requested by the Government.

