Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for putting this very important issue on the agenda of the Security Council. We heard from the three wonderful briefers as they gave a very bleak picture of where we stand with regard to terrorism. Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo mentioned Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida affiliates. Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye mentioned the arc of instability. And Ms. Fatima Mohammed mentioned that whole regions are at war, with infrastructure and livelihoods destroyed. She also mentioned the technological advances by terrorists, with the use of drone techniques, among others. Ms. DiCarlo, as well as others, including Mr. Jose Singer Weisinger, mentioned the number of victims, reaching into the tens of thousands, who have been killed. I agree with Ms. Mohammed that there are very complex situations, which necessitate complex solutions - or, as presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5 states, a holistic approach. In terms of what we must do, I see significant coherence in the responses provided by the briefersand other speakers, in particular the representative of the United Kingdom, and that is prevention. It is important to understand the reasons and drivers behind individuals, specifically young people, joining terrorist and extremist groups in order to then enable societies and individuals to become resilient to terrorism and extremist ideologies. What are resilient societies? They are societies that respect the rule of law and human rights, are inclusive and protect rather than marginalize minorities, ensure the meaningful participation of women and provide economic prospects. As Mr. Dieye mentioned, not enough money is spent on prevention. He gave us statistics on the much greater results yielded by one dollar spent on prevention compared to the large sums spent on crisis response. Of course, the long-term approach of making societies resilient has to be complemented by the work of law enforcement agencies and by security sectors that counter terrorism and prosecute perpetrators. Moreover, it is very important how that is done and how enforcement agencies act, that they be held accountable for human rights and that they respect the rule of law. I would like to pick up a figure cited by Mr. Dieye that we should bear in mind, and that is that 71 per cent of the respondents in the study he mentioned stated that Government action, including human rights violations and disrespect for fundamental principles such as the rule of law, had triggered their joining a terrorist or violent extremist group. The authors of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) study came to the conclusion that "dramatic reappraisal of state security-focused interventions is urgently required, including more effective oversight of human rights compliance, rule of law and state accountability". We should take that advice very seriously. The study also points out that socioeconomic marginalization fosters radicalization, though it draws the very important conclusion that socioeconomic marginalization is not the main driver of terrorism. In other words, poverty does not automatically lead to terrorism, but on the other hand prosperity does not immunize societies and individuals against recruitment by terrorists. Thus, again, the key is prevention, respect for human dignity, the creation of an environment where young people can earn a living, support families and have opportunities for social, economic and political participation. Mr. Dieye also mentioned quality education in his presentation. The UNDP study calls for childhood education "enabling critical thinking, social cohesion, peace education and civic engagement values". In that respect, what Ms. Mohammed said in her statement about the fact that thousands of schools are closed is rather depressing and extremely worrying because the spaces created in schools are not intended for the individual. Furthermore, it is important to include gender equality and a gender perspective incounter- terrorism efforts. We say this frequently - in fact, we said it yesterday in relation to Afghanistan (see S/PV.8742) - gender equality and meaningful participation in decision-making and peace processes are crucial. We should also mention sexual violence. We all remember the horrible acts of Boko Haram, a group that has abducted hundreds of girls. One issue that was new to me in reading the study, and which Mr. Dieye mentioned, is female radicalization. That is also something we have to look at. I do not want to take up too much time. We need to work on regional cooperation. That is clear. Germany is co-Chair of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, and we actively participate in regional cooperation, in particular with the Group of Five for the Sahel, about which my French colleague will say more. In addition, we work on disarmament and arms export control and promote the Silencing the Guns initiative. However, what remains the most important is national action and national responsibility for counter-terrorism and respect for human rights and international humanitarian law. It is very important that the values we demonstrate as Governments also strengthen our credibility in the fight against terrorism.
