Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to warmly thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, as well as the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for their very insightful briefings.

We are aware of the current political situation in the
Sudan, and the issue of Abyei is inextricably connected.
Belgium continues to closely monitor developments
and encourages the parties to continue their dialogue
to find a solution that establishes a political transition
authority led by civilians, in line with the will of the
people of the Sudan.

We welcome the fact that the security situation in the
Abyei Area remains relatively calm. Nevertheless, it is
still tense and unpredictable due to persistent challenges
on the political, humanitarian and economic fronts. The
situation could deteriorate rapidly, with unacceptable
consequences for civilians. Therefore, we fully agree
with the Secretary-General that the continued presence
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) remains crucial. I wish to underline two
points - the need for a political solution and the role of
UNISFA in that regard.

The Council has long been committed to peace and
security in the Abyei Area and must continue to play a
role in the prevention of violence. Stability in the region
remains our main goal. The primary responsibility for
implementing the agreements of2011 and 2012 lies with
the Governments of both countries. However, it is clear
that no progress has been made since last November
in terms of keeping to the commitments agreed by
the parties. Increasingly belligerent political remarks,
noted by UNISFA, highlight the need and urgency for
renewed dialogue.

The Security Council should encourage the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to quickly
establish joint mechanisms, make progress on border
demarcation and, in the longer term, develop a political
solution to settle the final status of the Abyei Area and
other border disputes. We call on the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, led by President
Mbeki, and the African Union Commission to revitalize
their support for political dialogue between the parties.

As the name of the mission indicates, UNISFA was
established as an interim security force in 2011. The
environment in which it operates has evolved since
then. The Council will have to renew the mandate of
the mission in two weeks' time, and the mandate should
be adapted to the situation. A lasting political solution
is needed for Abyei. The Council must make sure that
the dispute between the Sudan and South Sudan over
Abyei and the border region does not become another
frozen conflict.

We support the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, in particular the recommendation to
strengthen the civilian component of the mission - to
which my French colleague also referred - with a view
to facilitating the revitalization of the political process
and devising a possible exit strategy.

The Council should also consider how to adapt
the military and police components of the mission to
effectively address the challenge of rising crime rates
in the region in the absence of national security forces.
We call on the parties to facilitate the operations of the
mission, including the issuance of visas.

I would like to conclude by saying that dialogue
is the only option for resolving the Abyei issue. The
presence of UNISFA remains crucial for the stability
of the region, but it cannot replace the role of the State.
Only a political settlement can address the causes of the
conflict and ensure the long-term stability of both the
Sudan and South Sudan. The Council must therefore
ensure that the mission has the necessary resources to
support the achievement of that fundamental objective.

