Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month and for your valuable
initiative of resuming the discussion on the question of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which was
first discussed in 1999. It is perhaps one of the most
serious issues of global concern, especially as it relates
to the core of international humanitarian law on armed
conflict.

I should like to thank your predecessor, the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine, for his stewardship of the
Council last month.

What is of particular interest in this discussion is
that it complements previous debates in the Council
and that it follows upon the Millennium Summit, which
emphasized in its Declaration our commitment to the
United Nations Charter and its purposes, which are
relevant for all times and all places. We will spare no
effort to save our people from the scourge of war, be it
within or among countries, which has claimed the lives
of over 5 million people in the past decade.

In the Millennium Declaration, all Member States
committed themselves to expanding the scope of
protection of civilians in complex emergency situations
and to enhancing such protection under international
humanitarian law. This will entail a great deal of work
for the Council in that field.

In this regard, I should like to refer to the
Secretary-General's report of 30 March 2001; before
the Security Council in document S/2001/331. The
report emphasizes the promotion of a culture of
protection, the parameters of protection and measures
to enhance protection. It contains 14 recommendations,
which complement 40 others contained in the first
report of the Secretary-General on the same subject,
dated 8 September 1999. If they are heeded,
implemented and reinforced by Member States, these
recommendations can indeed strengthen and revitalize
the mechanisms provided for in international
instruments in order to enhance and expand the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation would like to raise some points in
this regard. First, it is regrettable that the devil-
aggressor is growing in its brutal power. On the other
hand, the suffering and anguish of the civilian
population caught in the armed conflict is increasing.
Civilian victims now account for over 75 per cent of
casualties, according to some reports, while other
sources put that number at 90 per cent.

Secondly, despite the fact that over half a century
has elapsed since the adoption of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions on the protection of the victims of war, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and its
Additional Protocols, and the fact that the vast majority
of Member States have become parties to those
Conventions, there is still a wide gap between their
provisions and the implementation of those provisions
in times of armed conflict. This fact was mentioned
yesterday in a statement made by the former President
of the United States, Mr. Jimmy Carter, at an
environmental conference convened two days ago in
Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

This fact requires the international community to
move expeditiously towards the implementation of
international instruments in order to ensure that
physical and legal protection is provided under
international humanitarian law. The basis for doing so
is particularly strong since these instruments provide a
legal foundation for the protection of civilians.
Nonetheless, such instruments have not prevented
brutal and atrocious attacks against civilians.

A question therefore arises: if the primary
objective of the Security Council is to remove threats
to peace, why are civilian suffering and tragedy
increasing? Why are we witnessing serious threats to
civilians, as they are subjected to forced displacement,
blockades and starvation and are denied access to
humanitarian relief aid and even access to the dead
bodies of their relatives for burial in their homeland?
Today's newspapers carry many examples of such
stories in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Thirdly, given these phenomena, we believe that
there is a need to discuss the two reports of the
Secretary-General - the first, which was originally
discussed in 1999, and the second, which is before us
now. These reports must be discussed in the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and
each organ should address matters in the two reports
that fall within its respective purview. Coordination is
also required among the three primary organs of the
United Nations, as well as among all the agencies and
main bodies of the United Nations system, with a view
to ensuring efficiency within a comprehensive and
integrated approach. The United Nations would thus
take on the role of coordinator.

Fourthly, my delegation had hoped that the scope
of the response to hotbeds of tension and to violations
of the rights of civilians in armed conflict, which
covers areas of conflict in Africa, Asia and the
Balkans, would be extended to cover the serious
violations committed by Israel against the Palestinian
civilians and all other civilians in the occupied Arab
territories. It is clear that the current escalation of
tension in our region, the resort to aggression, the use
of force against the sovereignty of some Arab States
and the continuous threat of the use of force, constitute
a flagrant violation of the Charter, as well as of
international humanitarian law.

We hope that in the future these benchmark
reports will not disregard this chronic problem, which
has been on the agenda of the Council for a very long
time. Is there anything more important to the Council
than the use of missiles, tank shells and bulldozers to
destroy homes and evict the residents who are still
inside? Is there anything more serious than striking
terror into the hearts of children in order to drive them
into perpetual misery and forcing peace-loving people
to the brink of surrender? Is there anything uglier than
collective punishment practised against civilians, or the
closure of entire cities? Is there anything uglier than
the ethnic cleansing undertaken by Israel against the
Palestinian civilians and other Arabs in the occupied
Arab territories?

We do not understand this complete silence by the
Security Council. Why is there such inaction and
disregard for this grave humanitarian situation? We
cannot understand the selectivity in appealing to human
conscience on humanitarian grounds. We cannot
understand why the Security Council has still not taken
action, and what the humanitarian justification can be
for the its failure to address the realities of this conflict
and to respond to the need to protect Palestinian
citizens in the occupied territories.

Will patience and caution be exercised here until
all Palestinians have been liquidated through the use of
the most lethal and advanced weaponry? I should like
to remind the Council that in the Syrian streets as well
as in other Arab streets the failure by some members of
the Council to provide protection to the Palestinian
civilians is construed as support and encouragement for
the aggressor as it perpetrates its aggression. The
continuation of that situation will indeed endanger
regional and international peace.

Fifthly, in his report, the Secretary-General has
focused on measures to enhance protection, especially
through the prosecution of violations of international
criminal law. In this regard, we would like to
emphasize the need to prosecute war criminals and
perpetrators of aggression as a means of providing
protection, and to prosecute those who perpetrate the
crime of the forced transfer of persons, replacing them
with others. Again, this is typical of the situation in the
occupied Arab territories, in which the people are
evicted from their homes and settlements constructed
for new settlers. In this regard, we would like to recall
that the recent Arab summit in Amman reiterated what
had been said earlier at the Cairo summit: there is a
need to pursue the creation of an ad hoc court to
prosecute Israeli war criminals who have carried out,
and continue to carry out, massacres against Arab
civilians in occupied Arab territories.

Sixthly, the Syrian Arab Republic stresses the
importance of access to civilian populations in need,
and of ensuring the safe delivery of relief aid. This
requires that humanitarian assistance agencies and
organizations act with objectivity, impartiality and
humanitarian compassion in keeping with the
provisions of the Charter, other international
instruments and General Assembly resolution 46/182,
and with complete respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and national
legislation of States. Nor should such aid be used for
political purposes.

All people - especially civilian populations
caught up in armed conflict and subjected to foreign
occupation - attach great importance to the existence
of the agreements, recommendations and international
instruments that have been created to protect them; but
of even greater importance is the existence of sincere
political will to respect those international instruments,
covenants and resolutions.

Permit me in conclusion to express our
appreciation for the contribution of the Security
Council and its President, the Secretary-General and
other effective Member States to enriching today's
discussion of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. It is our hope that it will be possible to
enhance the protection of civilians everywhere,
including civilians in the occupied Arab territories, and
that special importance will be attached to this
question, in the interest of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

