Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Allow me at the outset to convey our appreciation to the
Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, His Excellency
Mr. Jozias van Aartsen, for personally presiding over
today's Security Council debate on small arms. We would
also like to thank the Permanent Mission of the
Netherlands for its efforts in arranging this meeting.

In recent years, excessive accumulation of and illegal
trafficking in small arms have intensified conflicts in
some regions and have caused many civilian casualties.
The international community, including the United
Nations, has taken various measures with a view to
reducing and ultimately eliminating the negative impact
of small arms. Towards that end, the Department for
Disarmament Affairs created the Coordinating Action on
Small Arms mechanism.

At the end of July, at its third session, the Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms adopted a report
(A/54/258) summarizing the progress the international
community has made in recent years in dealing with the
issue of small arms. The report draws a reasonably
objective picture of the present state of affairs, and
contains a number of new recommendations. We believe
that the report will be helpful in preparations for the
international conference on the illicit arms trade, to be
held in 2001. We hope that all parties will give due
attention to those recommendations.

The Chinese delegation endorses the efforts of the
international community to solve the problems caused by
small arms, and stands ready to be actively involved in
those efforts. In this connection, I would like to take this
opportunity to make the following observations.

First, we agree that the Security Council should pay
due attention to the issue of small arms. But at the same
time, we are of the view that the Council should
concentrate its efforts on issues of international peace and
security. The issue of small arms should be handled
mainly by the Department for Disarmament Affairs, the
First Committee of the General Assembly and other
competent United Nations bodies.

Secondly, in its endeavours to solve the problems
caused by small arms, the international community should
fully respect the sovereignty of the countries concerned
and should refrain from interfering in the internal affairs
of countries in conflict regions, so as to avoid further
complications.

 

Thirdly, while efforts are being intensified to eliminate
the adverse impact of small arms, due consideration should
be given to the legitimate self-defence and security needs
of countries and to guaranteeing their right legally to
possess, manufacture and transfer small arms.

Fourthly, in its peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building process, the United Nations should act strictly
within its mandate concerning the confiscation and disposal
of weapons, and should respect and comply with
arrangements and agreements reached voluntarily among
the parties concerned.
And fifthly, the issue of small arms involves many
complex causes and diverse factors. It is imperative to
address both the root causes and the symptoms of the
problem and to analyse issues on a case-by-case basis. The
efforts and experiences of some may be of help to others,
but they should not be applied mechanically.

We hope that this Security Council debate and the
presidential statement that will be issued on small arms will
give impetus to the efforts of the international community
to solve the problem of small arms through global and
regional cooperation.

China exercises strict control over the manufacture and
export of small arms. The Chinese Government
promulgated laws on gun control in 1996 and on the
management of exports of military material in 1998. China
has made outstanding achievements in cracking down on
the illegal manufacture and smuggling of guns. We are
willing to join international efforts to solve the problem of
small arms at an early date.

