Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are gratified to welcome Mr. Oscar Arias
Senchez, President of Costa Rica, to the presidency of
the Security Council.

The issues of disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control cannot be considered in isolation from
today's overall security situation. The Russian
Federation tirelessly advocates the development of an
equitable system of collective security, which would
enable us to address together the growing spectrum of
threats and challenges.

The very logic of the development of today's
international relations reveals the bankruptcy of
unilateral and bloc mechanisms, in particular those
based on force. We believe that an important role in
strengthening the collective security architecture must
be played by peacekeeping mechanisms, in particular
those established within the United Nations
framework. Here, significant experience has been
accumulated and numerous successes achieved. In that
connection, we note that United Nations activities for
the maintenance of peace are constantly evolving in
both conceptual and operational terms. That promotes
the resolution of emerging problems and effective
responses to new political realities.

At the same time, we note that, to date, the
problem of ensuring the level of military expertise
required for action within the framework of United
Nations peacekeeping operations remains unresolved.
The thrust of Russia's initiative, proposed at the
Millennium Summit, to intensify the activities of the
Military Staff Committee lies in involving that body in
fact-finding missions and inspection groups to assess
the combat readiness of troops and equipment allocated
for participation in peacekeeping operations. That
would provide timely and relevant information to the
Security Council. As experience has shown, there is a
growing understanding at the United Nations that we
must improve the quality of our work on various
aspects of the problem as we make decisions relating to
United Nations peacekeeping. I should also like to
remind members that we complemented our initiative
with a proposal that the Committee work in a full
format with all 15 Security Council members.

In today's complex international situation, it is
more pressing than ever to ensure collective actions
and to strengthen the legal basis for regional and global
policies based on the United Nations Charter and the
recognition of the indivisibility of security and
development in today's world. It will be possible to
achieve that task only by setting up open collective
security mechanisms including in the Euro-Atlantic
region. We are convinced that security is needed not
from each other, and especially not against any person,
but from transboundary threats.

The President of the Russian Federation, Dmitry
Medvedev, set out a positive alternative to the further
escalation of tensions in the Euro-Atlantic area. I refer
to the development of a legally binding treaty on
European security. In our view, such a document would
enable us to create a sound system of comprehensive,
unitary and indivisible security on the basis of the
principles of polycentricity, the primacy of
international law, and the central role of the United
Nations, the inadmissibility of isolating particular
States, and the existence of zones with different levels
of security. Our proposal for a positive programme of
action would enable us, in practice, to establish a fair
basis for cooperation among all States.

Preserving the primacy of the disarmament
process, non-proliferation and arms control is the
alternative to expensive confrontation and a new arms
race. The further legal and treaty development of the
disarmament process, including on a multilateral and
universal basis, must be carried out in a spirit of
strategic openness.

Russia, for its part, spares no effort to ensure that
disarmament, first and foremost nuclear disarmament,
is ongoing and irreversible in nature. Since 1991, the
Russian nuclear arsenal has been reduced by a factor of
five and the overall stockpile of tactical nuclear
weapons by three-quarters. The Moscow Treaty on
Strategic Offensive Reductions is being implemented
successfully. The Strategic Offensive Arms Reduction
Treaty (START) has fully achieved its objectives and
will expire in December 2009. We are talking with the
United States about a new legally binding treaty to
replace it. We believe that it could include all the best
elements of START and set out new, lower verifiable
levels for strategic delivery means, i.e. intercontinental
ballistic missiles, under-water ballistic missiles and
heavy bombers, as well as the warheads carried by
them.

We want to bolster existing non-proliferation
regimes of weapons of mass destruction, including the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Global
security and protection against possible missile threats
would be strengthened by making the Treaty on the
Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range
Missiles universal.

In the First Committee in October 2007, Russia
and the United States made a joint statement calling
upon all interested States to discuss possible
universalization of the innovative Treaty on
intermediate and short-range missiles regime by
eliminating ground-based ballistic and cruise missiles
with a range of 500-5,500 kilometres, leading to the
destruction of that class of missiles and the termination
of any related programmes.

Issues of strategic stability are directly related to
the problem of States' activities in outer space. A key
area of work here remains developing effective
measures to prevent the deployment of any class of
weapons into outer space in order to prevent turning
outer space into a new area of military confrontation
and a potential theatre for military activities.

In February 2008, the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, Sergey V. Lavrov, on behalf
of Russia and China, introduced at the United Nations
Disarmament Conference in Geneva a draft of such a
treaty. We expect that the Conference will step up
activities in this field. We call for support for the
initiative submitted by Russia and other member States
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization and for
accession to the moratorium on the first deployment of
any type of weapons in outer space. Measures aimed at
strengthening transparency and confidence in space
activities would serve to reduce motivation to deploy
weapons in outer space.

We are grateful to all States having backed
Russia's initiative in the First Committee. Here, I am
referring to the traditional draft resolution on this
issue.

Another priority for us lies in the field of
international information security. The aim of our
efforts within the United Nations is to help enhance the
security of the international information space, prevent
humankind from being dragged into another cycle of
arms race - this time at a qualitatively new
technological level - preserve resources intended for
development purposes, including financial resources,
and contain the risks of information and
communication technologies and resources being used
for purposes running counter to the interests of States
in the sphere of security. We would also like to thank
all States that supported the draft resolution on the
subject submitted in the First Committee.

Turning now to control of conventional weapons
transfers, we are seeing today a sort of renaissance,
running from manufacturing to stockpiling and use by
importers. Serious concerns arise from the illicit
trafficking in arms, first and foremost small arms and
light weapons, which heightens the likelihood of them
falling into the hands of terrorists and irresponsible
users.

The crisis in the Caucuses in August showed the
inadequacy of current arms transfer mechanisms,
including the various codes and understandings within
the framework of the Wassenaar Arrangement. Clearly,
the time has come to conduct a serious study of this
field, determine the main problems and outline ways to
resolve them.

By way of conclusion, I would like to note that
Russia backs the adoption of a presidential statement
on strengthening international security and the
regulation of armaments. We anticipate that this will
provide significant political impetus to our common
efforts in this field.

