The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Morocco,
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Serbia, South
Africa, Sweden, Tunisia and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; and General Martin Luther Agwai,
Force Commander for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. I will begin by making a few
remarks at the outset.

I should like to start by welcoming the two
Under-Secretaries-General, Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra. In their recent non-paper on peacekeeping,
entitled "A new partnership agenda: Charting a new
horizon for United Nations peacekeeping", they have
2
spoken about the need to set a new horizon for United
Nations peacekeeping - one that will help meet the
challenges of today and tomorrow. I hope that today's
debate will make some contribution to achieving that
objective.

I am also very pleased that we have with us today
General Martin Agwai, Force Commander of
UNAMID, to provide a perspective from the field.
Effective delivery on the ground has to be at the centre
of our efforts to review peacekeeping - in the
Security Council, in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, in the General Assembly and
elsewhere in the United Nations system. I thank
General Agwai for his attendance today.

I also welcome his colleagues, the commanding
officers of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
who between them represent and command around
100,000 United Nations peacekeepers around the
world. I pay tribute to them and to the men and women
they serve with - military, police and civilian - and
thank them all for their contribution to peace and
security around the world.

United Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership. Our peacekeepers help fragile nations
emerge from conflict to find new stability. They are a
scarce asset, demand for which continues to grow. The
United Nations system has a responsibility to ensure
that United Nations peacekeepers are deployed to
maximum effect in the places where they are needed
most.

The initiative that the United Kingdom and
France launched in January sought to ensure that the
Security Council could play its part to best effect. In
the early stages of our work, we have focused on the
strategic oversight of peacekeeping operations, seeking
to ensure that mandates are credible, achievable and
measurable. And we have sought ways to improve
information sharing and consultation with the countries
that contribute troops and police.

At the same time, the increasing scale and
complexity of peacekeeping have stimulated a dialogue
among Member States and the Secretariat - a dialogue
that has already produced important proposals from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support which warrant our further
reflection.
09-44283

This work has generated some initial progress on
which we now need to build, working within the
Security Council and beyond, in close cooperation with
the wider United Nations system. Our objective today
is to hear the views of colleagues from across the
United Nations membership, record and review
progress to date, and identify common elements of a
way forward.

I now invite Mr. Le Roy to address the Council
on this subject.


