Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
During its recent term in the Security Council,
Argentina was actively involved in the development of
a response to the serious crimes committed against
civilian populations. As this issue is one of our main
concerns, we thank the United Kingdom in particular
for having convened this open meeting.

We wish to express our gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his report and to thank Mrs. Louise
Fre'chette, Deputy Secretary-General, for her eloquent
statement, and Mrs. Mary Robinson, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for her
excellent and encouraging statement. In addition, we
wish to express our appreciation for the clarifications
provided by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Oshima.

The Secretary-General made 40 recommendations
in his first report, to which we must add the 14
contained in his second report, which we are
considering today. It is clear that we have now a large
enough framework to lay the foundations for our work.
Taking into account the guidelines given to us, we
would like to focus our statement on four aspects that
we deem to be crucial.

The first aspect is justice as a deterrent factor.

We agree with the Secretary-General's view that
the protection of civilians in times of conflict must
have a sound legal foundation. The deterrent capacity
ofjustice is the primary key to the prevention of crimes
against the civilian population.

A relatively adequate framework of judicial
protection exists at the international level, but we must
ensure its effective enforcement. In order not to thwart
the work of the courts, we must take into account two
factors: financing and the cooperation of States with
those courts.

In addition to the regular budgets appropriated by
the Organization, we urge donors to become aware of
the role that their contributions, in cash or in kind, play
in this area - an area that is so very sensitive with
respect to the prevention of conflicts. At the same time,
States must cooperate fully to ensure that those
suspected of having committed crimes that fall within
the jurisdiction of the courts are brought before those
courts.

The second aspect is the safety of humanitarian
personnel.
Turning to humanitarian access, the safety of
personnel delivering humanitarian assistance is crucial
to ensuring the protection of the civilian population.
The design of peace missions should include, at the
very least, personnel protection and safety, courses on
safety before deployment, consideration of safety in the
initial budget of each operation and the provision to
missions of the necessary logistical support.

We should give humanitarian assistance personnel
the same level of protection granted to United Nations
and peacekeeping operations staff. The agreements on
the status of forces and the status of mission must
include measures based on the 1994 Convention. We
suggest that analogous stipulations be included in the
model agreements.

With respect to Security Council field missions,
on the basis of our recent experience as a member of
the Security Council, we encourage an increase in the
practice of sending such missions to conflict areas as a
tool that allows for a more fluid dialogue among all
parties. One priority that must invariably be included in
the mandates given to these missions is the capacity to
negotiate humanitarian access, with sufficient security
conditions, with the interested actors.

As to operating preconditions, the
implementation of the Secretary-General's
recommendations from the operational point of view
requires, inter alia, that information collection and
analysis capacity be strengthened in order to gain a
clear picture of the situation when deciding to send a
mission to the field; that mandates be established
taking into account the reality of the conflict and that
missions be given clear and consistent rules of
engagement, taking especially into account the
protection of civilians; that the capacity of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations be
strengthened in order to optimize the design and
planning of missions; that missions be provided with
sufficient resources; that the provision of training
courses on safety matters, including the participation of
military personnel, civilian police and civilian
personnel to be deployed in a peacekeeping mission, be
increased; that the command and control functions in
the area of operations be strengthened; that the
functions of all interested actors be identified; and that
a coordinating strategy avoiding the overlapping of
work be outlined.

In the light of the statements we have heard, I
wish to make a few additional comments. We will soon
be holding a coordination meeting of the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council that will
enhance the joint action of the bodies of the system.
We must try to strengthen this practice. Similarly, we
support coordination with regional organizations. We
recognize the important contribution that can be made
by non-governmental organizations and the media in
the provision of information on the situation on the
ground and we believe that it is important to continue
to perfect it. Finally, we support Mrs. Robinson's
proposal that the reports of human rights fact-finding
missions be made available to the Security Council. We
believe that this information should be taken duly into
account by the Council.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our readiness
to continue actively to work in support of all initiatives
to ensure safety conditions for all the populations
affected by conflicts.

