Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): First
of all, I want to fully support what Ambassador Levitte
has set out by way of conclusions to the mission and
his response to the interventions that we heard earlier.

I would like to make one additional point which I
think is very important. As I understand the view of all
members of the Security Council mission, we came
back convinced that there was a real chance to move
forward in resolving the conflict in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo and in the Great Lakes region if
the inter-Congolese dialogue could be brought to a
conclusion that fitted the Lusaka Agreement and the
aims of resolution 1291 (2000) and following
resolutions. In our conversations with the Presidents of
the countries that we visited, it was quite clear to us
that they were prepared to work on the basis of a
successful dialogue to complete the rest of the
programme that was required under Lusaka. This puts
an extra focus on the need to conclude the dialogue
successfully so that it will be something which
Mr. Ketumile Masire can declare a proper result that
satisfies the conditions of the dialogue. That will then
produce a series of reactions and further activities
under the requirements of coordination between the
parties of Lusaka, which can produce peace in the
country, demilitarization of the armed groups, the
withdrawal of all foreign troops and the restoration of
stability and of economic normality in the region. It is
a watershed that the Council cannot allow to be left on
the wrong side of. Therefore, it is very important that,
in the days and weeks to follow, we all put our
collective and several influences behind a successful
conclusion of the dialogue. It is more than just one
opportunity among many; it is the opportunity to make
progress at a time when the fighting has died down and
the people of the Congo sense that there is an
opportunity for them to have a future quite different
from the one that they have had to face over the last
three years. So, we must all find practical ways of
producing a real conclusion to the dialogue and not just
support with rhetoric the words that have been written
in resolutions. We have to act to support a real
conclusion to the dialogue to release that potential.

