Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on a very
important question: recent developments in West
Africa. I would also like to welcome the participation
in this meeting of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana and
current Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), Nana Akufo-Addo; and all
other speakers, whom I thank in advance for their
valuable statements.

The Council has before it a comprehensive report
submitted by the Secretary-General (S/2004/200). We
appreciate the fact that the Council has been frequently
seized of the situation in West Africa. That does not
necessarily mean that the situation on the ground is
deteriorating - quite the contrary - although the
latest news about disturbances in the region is certainly
worrisome. The Council has been looking into the
matter more often because there is a growing
understanding of the importance of a comprehensive
regional approach to deal with the consequences of
long years of conflict and instability.

As the delegation of Brazil stated in January,
when we considered the progress report on
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
West Africa, a regional approach can be the
determining factor in solving problems that affect
many countries in a similar way and that require
common and concerted efforts.

Brazil fully supports the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General and by his Special
Representative for West Africa. Concerted action
among United Nations political and peacekeeping
missions and agencies, common border management
and the strengthening of arms control institutions are
some of the urgently needed initiatives that the Council
should endorse. ECOWAS, with the support of the
international community, has a fundamental role to
play in strengthening the 1998 moratorium on small
arms in the region. We also welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation that a meeting of defence
ministers be held later this year. Such a meeting should
enjoy the full involvement of the African Union.
The Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP) has also been actively engaged in
promoting peace and stability in West Africa. Together
with ECOWAS, CPLP has provided its good offices in
Guinea-Bissau since the events of September 2003 and
has worked with the parties to ensure a peaceful
solution to the political crisis. We are looking forward
to the holding of parliamentary elections in Guinea-
Bissau on 28 March - three days from now - and we
expect an orderly transitional period in that country.

It is the view of my delegation that the issue of
development should be particularly stressed.
Combating subregional and cross-border problems -
such as the use of child soldiers and mercenaries and
the existence of refugee flows - will not be successful
in the long term if development is not sufficiently
emphasized. A programme for sustained development
must be set up pari passu with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
In recommendation 13 of his report, the Secretary-
General stated:

"To address the needs of the communities
receiving demobilized soldiers, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration should be
accompanied by community development
programmes."

We certainly agree with that. However, concrete
recommendations on how to deal with this aspect of
peace-building have yet to be presented.

We have consistently advocated greater
involvement by the Economic and Social Council in
this process. Alongside measures to regulate the
exploitation of natural resources in the region and to
promote fair trade of African commodities, the United
Nations and its agencies should be capable of
designing focused development strategies to enable
post-conflict communities to resume growth and to
generate employment and entrepreneurship. That is the
only way to respond to the social needs of populations
in a sustainable manner. In the long run, the lack of
economic activity for the adult population and of
schooling for children is likely to lead to further
conflict in the region.

That is an additional reason why the United
Nations has a responsibility to maintain its presence in
post-conflict areas. United Nations peacekeeping
operations need to have an exit strategy, but we believe
that an effective exit strategy is not limited to
downsizing the military presence. It necessarily
includes many other dimensions, among them the
launching of a consistent social and economic regional
development programme. It is not enough to create a
stable security environment and to hold national
elections; the international community must also
support government efforts to consolidate peace and to
promote national recovery, addressing adequately the
root causes of conflict. Otherwise, the achievements
will prove fragile or even elusive.

One last word, on disseminating the right ideas.
We consider that the role to be played by the media in
supporting sustainable peace efforts should not be
belittled. The Organization's public information
structure, in particular the information centres existing
or to be created in the region, should be actively
working with local radio stations to raise awareness of
the bitter consequences of conflict and of alternatives
to it. We consider that to be of particular importance in
the case of West Africa, in view of the cross-border
dimension of conflicts in the region.

