Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join the
previous speakers in thanking France for convening
this open debate under its presidency. I note the
presentations made by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights.

We followed carefully the issues highlighted at
the most recent Security Council debate on this subject,
held in November 2010 (see S/PV.6427). As a country
that faced a brutal terrorist threat for over two and a
half decades and whose civilians were a constant target
of this threat until the very end, we see an overarching
need to achieve more tangible change, especially in
enhancing protection on the ground for the
communities most affected by conflicts.

We also emphasize that this protection task
cannot be understood or addressed solely within
traditional frameworks, as today's threats require us to
be conscious of a multiplicity of different factors,
ranging from changing political realities, socio-
economic factors, the basic rights of individuals, the
proliferation of small arms, asymmetric warfare and
the sophistication of terrorists to the complexities of
disarmament. We must pay special attention to
vulnerable categories, such as women and children,
who are increasingly exploited by terrorist groups. A
realistic and honest appraisal of protection issues will
help us to identify gaps in the existing protection
policy frameworks and guide our collective efforts at
effectively addressing them in a pragmatic manner.

During almost three decades of combating
terrorism in our country, we took utmost care to draw a
clear distinction between civilians and terrorists. Those
who are intent on dismissing this effort will continue to
do so, but successive Governments ensured a
continuous supply of essential goods and services, such
as food, free health services and education, to civilians
in the north and the east of Sri Lanka over the 27 years
of the conflict, despite the control that the terrorists
had over them. While allegations of infractions of
international standards emerged after the end of the
conflict, those allegations were not heard until the end
became abundantly clear to the terrorist group. Once
the end of the terrorists became obvious, a well-oiled
propaganda machine began to churn out reams of
allegations to set the stage to continue the conflict by
other means.

During the conflict, Sri Lanka also engaged
closely with the international community and related
human rights and humanitarian mechanisms - United
Nations agencies, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and local and international
non-governmental organizations - to facilitate
provision for the needs of civilians in terrorist-
controlled areas, despite the constraints imposed by
logistical and security needs. This close cooperation
has extended to the aftermath of the conflict by
providing for the needs of the displaced population,
their resettlement and reintegration, and the
reconstruction of their homes.

Many of today's conflicts take place within States
and involve non-State armed groups. Sri Lanka's
experience relates in particular to the challenges we
faced in protecting civilians in the context of an
internal conflict - a challenge to the State itself,
involving a ruthless terrorist group, the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). In Sri Lanka, that
terrorist group made the Tamil civilian population a
part of its military strategy. The terrorists' brutal
strategy was to create a situation inviting civilian
casualties by forcing civilians to be trained in weapons
and to take up arms, recruiting children for combat
duties, herding thousands of civilians to form human
shields, holding them hostage and placing heavy guns
in their midst, attracting retaliatory fire.

Some of the children were under 12 years of age.
UNICEF recorded over 5,700 cases of child
recruitment. The LTTE withheld food supplies sent by
the Government and diverted those supplies for use by
its armed cadres. The civilians being used as a human
shield by the terrorist group were our own people. This
strategy of the LTTE posed extraordinary operational
challenges to our security forces engaged in combating

the group while ensuring the protection of civilians.
The Government, for its part, adopted a zero-civilian
casualty policy. Our troops endeavoured to distinguish
between combatants and civilians, and the protection
and liberation of civilians from the clutches of the
terrorist group were their highest priority. Over
280,000 civilians were eventually freed.

In this context, the challenges posed by terrorism
in many parts of the world today may necessitate a
re-examination of the rules of military engagement.
Many of the rules of war are largely based on the
presumption that the parties to a conflict are
conventional armies of responsible States engaging
other State parties. But terrorists disregard those laws
and principles as they wage asymmetric warfare. They
mingle with civilians and use them to achieve their
goals.

Whether it is one human being held as a human
shield or many, the fact remains that terrorists employ
inhumane strategies that existing international
humanitarian law may not have adequately taken into
consideration. Once again, we must seriously
investigate the practical realities learned in the
experiences of Member States instead of attempting the
theoretical application of a one-size-fits-all
humanitarian framework. One size does not fit all, and
the complex Sri Lankan experience would seem to
demonstrate that reality.

There is a need to recognize the fundamental role
of the State in civilian protection. In the first place, the
role of Governments in civilian protection should be
respected as it is their primary responsibility to protect
their own citizens. The United Nations and
humanitarian agencies must support and assist
Governments, and in doing so be sensitive to ground
realities, including by respecting the sovereignty of
States.

Unfortunately the politicization and selectivity
that characterize the debate have affected its
credibility. The willingness to accept wild and
unsubstantiated allegations made in the media - even
those disowned by senior United Nations officials - is
extremely unfortunate. Such an inconsistent approach
and an unambiguous tendency to target the small and
the weak for the rigorous application of principle also
affect post-conflict reconciliation in complex country
situations. Difficult reconciliation processes that are
successfully moving ahead are disrupted by insensitive
external interventions.

In keeping with the recognition that it is the first
and foremost responsibility of States to address
infractions of the law, and with a view to initiating a
long-term healing process, the Government of Sri
Lanka has established a Lessons Learnt and
Reconciliation Commission to address reconciliation
and confidence-building issues, including
accountability.

My delegation hopes that the Council's
discussion on the protection of civilians will facilitate
practical outcomes based on ground realities. It is for
this reason that my delegation has sought to share our
experience and to urge all of us to invest greater efforts
in preventing conflicts and their recurrence and to
respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations. It is also our view that
seeking to punish the past does not ensure a guilt-free
future.

