Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing, which captured in broad terms the main
developments in the country, the progress made by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in the fulfilment of its mandate and the challenges that
lie ahead. We extend our gratitude to the entire staff
of MONUSCO, the United Nations country team, the
representative of civil society, Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, as
well as to the troop- and police-contributing countries,
regional organizations, bilateral and multilateral
partners and non-governmental organizations for their
commitment, ongoing support and devotion to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Equatorial Guinea, as a member of the Security
Council and as a brother country to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - we are both part of the
same regional and subregional economic communities
and participate in the same subregional security
council, the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa - welcomes the progress made in our brother
country. We value the spirit of resolution 2424
(2018), which calls for respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for the
full respect for the principles of non-interference,
good-neighbourliness and regional cooperation
in that country, neighbouring countries and other
countries of the region as guarantors of their stability
and development.

We believe that the Congolese have been able
to take advantage of this historic opportunity by
undertaking the first democratic transfer of power in
the country in a civilized manner. We are sure that
this is a decisive step towards the consolidation of
democracy, peace, stability and social progress for all
the Congolese people and that it represents the greatest
expression of popular sovereignty. We commend the
progress achieved following the elections and welcome
the decisions issued by the Commission eIectorale
nationale independante, reporting on the ongoing
electoral process and establishing the definitive
calendar of the combined direct elections of national
deputies in the electoral districts, which were officially
postponed for health and security reasons, and the
indirect elections of senators, governors and deputy
governors in the provinces.

We welcome the appointment of His Excellency
Mr. Fe'lix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi as second
Vice-President of the Bureau of the Assembly of Heads
of State at the thirty-second Summit of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, which took
place in Addis Ababa. We also welcome with optimism
his statements reiterating his commitment to working
to build peace, the rule of law and democracy and the
need to foster socioeconomic development, eradicate
corruption, address the scourge of armed groups,
begin meaningful reforms in the security sector and
strengthen good relations throughout the region,
which has resulted in several visits after assuming his
responsibilities as Head of State.

Thanks to those acts, the country is moving with
determination towards building a rule of law that
guarantees respect for the fundamental freedoms
of citizens and communities, equal opportunity,
democracy, good governance and the freedom of
opinion, which makes the dream of genuine national
reconciliation a reality that will solidify stability in the
country, the establishment of the conditions necessary
for its development and the maintenance of a peaceful
and harmonious post-electoral atmosphere.

We appreciate the measures taken by the
Government, such as the release of political prisoners,
the improvement of the human rights and humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, the destabilizing activities of armed groups
and the ongoing conflicts among communities ensure
that 12 million people continue to need humanitarian
assistance and protection and remain exposed to
malnutrition, cholera, measles and Ebola, requiring the
provision of adequate technical and financial assistance.
The international community must provide sufficient
funds for the updating of the three-year humanitarian
response plan that ended in mid-January.

We condemn the frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel, their transport and equipment. Such
actions are considered to be violations of international
humanitarian law. All parties to armed conflicts
must guarantee and facilitate full, safe, immediate
and unhindered access for humanitarian and medical
personnel, their equipment, transport and supplies
and the timely delivery of medical assistance to
affected areas and people in need. We encourage
the Government to pursue its efforts to ensure the
accountability ofperpetrators of crimes of all kinds and
to combat impunity.

As far as my delegation is concerned, it is essential
that steps be taken to effectively apply and implement
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which was signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis Ababa,
in order to neutralize the armed groups operating in the
country, especially in the eastern regions of North and
South Kivu, which are very rich in the natural resources
that are plundered by the armed groups.

We welcome with optimism the surrender of
weapons by some armed groups, which requires
the effective implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme for former
combatants and persons linked to armed groups so that
they can convert and participate actively in the process
ofpeace and stability in the country. We call on the States
members of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the Southern African
Development Community and international partners
to continue participating in the post-electoral period
to strengthen stability and democratic governance
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly,
we encourage the Congolese authorities and regional
partners to take measures to strengthen cooperation
and good-neighbourly relations among the countries of
the Great Lakes region, including in the fight against
armed groups and the pursuit of economic integration.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
important work to promote peace, security and stability
being undertaken by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which has risen to the occasion and carried
out its work within its mandate in a very complex
context. I would like to mention in particular Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui for the leadership and
determination with which she is addressing the situation.

We are convinced that the collective endeavours
of the United Nations, the African Union and regional
and subregional organizations in support of the
cause of peace and security in Africa will redound
to greater effectiveness and ensure that due attention
is paid to conflicts, which has led to the signature
of a memorandum of understanding among those
organizations as a concrete way of implementing the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.

