Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
speak this morning.

(spoke in English)

The 10-year anniversary of any international
initiative is a notable milestone. After a decade, the
global community is well positioned to assess what an
initiative has achieved and where further efforts are still
required. We have reached that moment of reflection for
resolution 1540 (2004). We have an opportunity to take
stock of what the resolution has helped us accomplish
to date and to reaffirm our commitment to do what is
needed to achieve its intended objectives.

The proliferation of nuclear, chemical, biological
and radiological weapons remains a serious threat
to global peace and security. An attack using such
weapons would have devastating consequences for
the global community and would directly contradict
the values of human dignity, as well as free and open
societies. At the recent Nuclear Security Summit in The
Hague, our Prime Minister, The Honourable Stephen
Harper, cited the responsibility of world leaders to take
the necessary steps to ensure that an act of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) terrorism did not happen. As
no country is immune to the effects of WMD terrorism,
we must work collectively to prevent weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery systems and related materials
from falling into the wrong hands.

(spoke in French)

That is the primary objective of resolution 1540
(2004), which the Council adopted unanimously
a decade ago. As we mark the resolution's tenth
anniversary, Canada remains committed to its full
and universal implementation. We are taking several
tangible steps, including in collaboration with our
partners, to advance that essential goal.

At the recent Nuclear Security Summit, Prime
Minister Harper announced that Canada and the
Republic of Korea were leading a joint initiative on the
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004). The initiative,
which outlines a series of concrete steps that countries
can take to advance the effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) both domestically and
internationally, was endorsed by more than 30 Summit
participants and the United Nations. We believe that this
document, albeit focused on nuclear issues given the
context in which it was prepared, can provide valuable
direction to States in their efforts to implement the
resolution, both within and beyond the nuclear security
context. We will submit it to the Security Council for
inclusion in the record of this debate.

(spoke in English)

Canada strongly supports the central role of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its Group of Experts in the implementation
of the resolution. We believe the extension of the 1540
Committee's mandate to 2021, in resolution 1977 (2011),
is an acknowledgement of the ongoing importance of
our joint WMD counter-proliferation efforts. We must
continue to provide support to help the 1540 Committee
advance its work. That is in our interests, as well as
those of future generations.

Reporting is an essential element of the resolution.
Canada has submitted three national reports on our
national implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in
2004, 2006 and 2008. We urge all States that have yet
to submit their initial mandatory national reports to the
Committee to do so as soon as possible, to ensure the
universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Canada is working with partners, through multilateral
organizations, to encourage countries to submit their
initial national reports, and stands ready to provide
assistance, as required, to help meet that objective.

Canada also submitted in 2010 a voluntary National
Summary Action Plan on resolution 1540 (2004).
We plan to soon submit a forward-looking update
outlining our ongoing domestic and international
efforts to implement the resolution. We encourage all
Member States to consider preparing and submitting
such action plans as a way to outline their national
priorities for 1540 implementation. It is also important
that all countries identify a national point of contact
for resolution 1540 (2004) as a tool to facilitate the
resolution's implementation.

(spoke in French)

Through its global partnership programme, and
in furtherance of the voluntary commitments outlined
in the statement to the Nuclear Security Summit and
the call contained in the resolution itself, Canada is
making a significant and tangible contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) throughout
the world through capacity-building activities in
support of States requiring assistance in implementing
provisions of the resolution.

Canada is supporting six regional workshops and
related follow-up activities to build capacity in States
to implement international legal instruments related to
nuclear security such as the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Materials and its amendment. We
are also providing legislative assistance to countries
in South-East Asia and Latin America to support the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and related
treaties. We are working through the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum
and with the World Customs Organization to support
efforts to counter illicit trafficking of weapons of mass
destruction and related materials in the ASEAN region.

As called for in resolution 1977 (2011), regional

and subregional organizations have an important role
to play in the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We encourage countries to consider
the value of establishing and/or funding coordinator
positions for resolution 1540 (2004) within regional
and subregional organizations, as appropriate, in order
to facilitate regional approaches to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), including through relevant
capacity-building events.
(spoke in English)

Ten years after its adoption, resolution 1540
(2004) remains a cornerstone instrument in the global
effort to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Guided by the resolution, the international
community has taken concrete and effective steps to
enhance domestic legal and physical controls over
weapons of mass destruction, their related materials
and delivery systems, and has established mechanisms
to prevent their illicit trafficking.

Despite this progress, we must remain focused
on achieving the full and universal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Canada continues to take
concrete steps towards achieving this objective and we
encourage all Member States, in their respective national
contexts, to do the same. It is only through concrete
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004) that the
international community will be able to effectively
combat the ongoing and serious challenges posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
terrorism. Maintaining global peace and security will
depend on our ability to succeed in these efforts over
the years to come.

