Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me at the outset express
my condolences to the people and Governments of
Afghanistan and India for their tragic loss that resulted
from the heinous terrorist attack at the Indian embassy
in Kabul last Monday. The attack was a reminder that,
even though formidable efforts have been made to
stabilize and rebuild Afghanistan, more remains be
done.

Norway welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/434) on the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the outcome of the Paris
Conference on 12 June and the way forward. We also
welcome the statements just made by Special
Representative Kai Eide and Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes. We recognize the achievements to date,
but we also recognize that there are still many
challenges ahead in ensuring stability and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.

The Paris Conference demonstrated that the
international community is united in its long-term
commitment to the Afghan people. The Paris
Conference also made it clear that more needs to be
done to ensure that the benefits of development reach
all Afghans in all areas of Afghanistan. We, the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community need to increase our joint efforts. We need
to base our efforts on the priorities of the Government
of Afghanistan, in close coordination with UNAMA
under the strengthened leadership of Special
Representative Kai Eide. Let me assure the Security
Council that Norway is committed to doing its part.

The recent meeting of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board in Kabul on 6 July outlined the
priority areas for the years to come based on the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy. Norway
fully supports those priorities in supporting the
upcoming elections, good governance and the rule of
law, increased aid effectiveness, institution-building
and strengthening humanitarian access to vulnerable
populations. In particular, I would like to underscore
that the Government of Afghanistan, international
donors and the United Nations should increase their
efforts to meet the urgent humanitarian needs caused
by the combined forces of conflict, drought and soaring
food and energy prices.

The Paris Conference also served to reaffirm our
support for the strengthened role of UNAMA in leading
and coordinating the international civilian effort. Our
expressions of support should be accompanied by
concrete action in the three following areas.

First, we must commit ourselves to working in a
more coordinated way and to using our resources in a
more effective manner, guided by UNAMA and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Secondly, we must ensure better coordination of the
different parts of the United Nations system and
strengthen its operative programmes in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, we must ensure that UNAMA is provided with
the necessary resources in terms of personnel and
security to fulfil its responsibilities with regard to its
mandate. We endorse the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to expand UNAMA's presence in the
field and support the call for increased resources to that
end.

The Paris Declaration is an expression of the
partnership between the international community and
the Government of Afghanistan. The Declaration
emphasizes the importance of holding fair, free and
secure elections in 2009 and 2010. The upcoming
elections are critical to stabilizing the fragile Afghan
democracy. Norway is determined to support all
aspects of the electoral process - politically,
practically and financially. Ensuring the participation
of women in the elections is of particular importance. I
am pleased to announce that Norway has pledged to
support the voter registration process with a total of
$3 million for 2008.

Norway remains committed to the development
of Afghanistan. The concentration and prioritizing of
development assistance will guide our efforts. As
international financial assistance continues to increase,
the Government of Afghanistan needs to demonstrate
good governance and adequate delivery of services to
its people. We expect the Government of Afghanistan
to dismantle the system of corruption. In that regard,
we welcome the anti-corruption law enacted recently
by the Afghan parliament and look forward to it being
implemented swiftly and effectively. We also expect
the Government of Afghanistan to commit itself to the
protection and promotion of human rights. By doing
that, we are building a true and lasting partnership.

