Mr. Rawal (Nepal): On behalf of the Government
of Nepal, I wish to compliment the French presidency
of the Security Council this month for holding this
debate on the protection of civilians in the context of
peacekeeping operations. As a consistent and major
troop and police contributor for nearly six decades, my
country attaches particular significance to this debate.

In the interest of time, I will deliver an abridged
version of my statement; the full version will be
available in PaperSmart.

While the safety and security of civilians is
primarily the responsibility of national Governments,
it is also critical to the legitimacy and credibility of
United Nations peacekeeping missions, since civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts, often as soft targets.

Thereis nowagreaterneedforafine balance between
the realities of the field, the principles of peacekeeping
and the responsibility of protecting civilians.

Nepali peacekeepers are fully oriented towards
protecting civilians, particularly women and girls,
during and after conflict. The Nepal Army, Nepal Police
and the Armed Police Force Nepal have all integrated
United Nations policies regarding the protection of
civilians, sexual exploitation and abuse, and protection
of human rights into the predeployment training
of peacekeepers. Together, we have already started
placing investigation officers in every contingent to
investigate disciplinary issues, gender-based violence,
and sexual exploitation and abuse. In this connection,
it is my pleasure to reiterate that Nepal supports the
Kigali principles.

Nepal applauds the increasing triangular
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries as a key to accomplishing civilian protection
mandates. We encourage further reinvigorated synergy
between these partners, with all due efforts to ensure
that peacekeeping operations are not politicized.
The provision of additional resources should be
considered a prerequisite - initially, at least at the
force-headquarters level - for missions with civilian
protection mandates.

Nepali peacekeepers have always believed in
building the best possible rapport with the civilian
population through community services and other
confidence-building measures. Based on our positive
experience, the practice may be worth emulating.
The safety and security of peacekeepers themselves
should be built into mission mandates and the
rules of engagement to complement the purpose of
civilian protection.

I wish to highlight two practical pitfalls that, in our
experience, should always be considered while crafting
civilian protection mandates. The first is how to guard
against unrealistic expectations that peacekeepers will
be able to protect all civilians at all times. This issue
comes to the fore particularly as expectations invariably
rise following each successful act of civilian protection.
The second pitfall is how far to go for protection and
what level to escalate to. There is a very fine line
where well-meaning but mismanaged intervention for
civilian protection suddenly results in United Nations
peacekeepers being perceived as no longer neutral.

The principles and purposes enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations constitute a fundamental
plank of Nepal's foreign policy. The Constitution that
Nepal adopted last September by over four-fifths
majority - by far its most forward-looking, inclusive
and democratic ever - both inspires and provides for
a national commitment to the cause of international
peace, security and prosperity.

Since 1958, Nepal has consistently contributed
peacekeepers for the maintenance of international peace
and security under the aegis of the United Nations.
While Nepali peacekeepers are currently deployed
in 15 out of 16 missions, over 122,000 peacekeepers
have already completed tours of duty in 42 different
missions. Nepal does not hesitate to partake in the most
challenging of missions, often in response to urgent
requests and never, I might add, with national caveats.
With 72 Nepali peacekeepers having made the ultimate
sacrifice in the line of duty, my delegation cannot but
feel honoured to join forces with you, Mr. President,
and all our partners as we march ahead in this
noble endeavour.

I wish to conclude by expressing our gratitude to all
peacekeepers deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, and by paying tribute to those who have
sacrificed their lives for the noble cause of maintaining
international peace and security around the world.

