Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his insightful briefing on the latest developments in
the Republic of Haiti with respect to the activities of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to the present
and future of the Republic of Haiti. The international
community must continue to work in unity, supporting
Haiti's economic and social development in order to
enable it to face the remaining challenges, particularly
in the security sector and the rule of law. We believe
that such support should be provided in consultation
and close coordination with the Government of Haiti.

Similarly, we believe that the new mandate of
MINUJUSTH will be decisive, since, in the light of
the latest Visit of the Security Council to the country,
the long-term needs to be met on the ground have been
identified. We must take into account the fact that there
is a two-year term to execute a series of essential tasks
and objectives in accordance with the 11 benchmarks
established for the Mission's exit strategy. In that
regard, and in accordance with the latest report of the
Secretary-General, we encourage MINUJUSTH and its
partners to strengthen their link with the Government
of Haiti, in order to

"ensure a closer convergence ofviews and priorities
and to establish a joint programme of work that
will provide a road map for collaboration and joint
action" (S/2018/241, para. 54).

Progress on those benchmarks and their results must be
worked on pursuant to the mandate of MINUJUSTH in
the areas of the rule of law, security and human rights,
in accordance with resolution 2350 (2017).

We also highlight Haiti's progress in implementing
its reform agenda so as to, inter alia, promote sustainable
development and fight corruption through its six
political priorities, which include the strengthening
and modernization of the justice sector, the adoption of
a legislative agenda focused on stimulating investment
and the improvement of social services, among others.

Furthermore, we welcome the appointment of the
Ombudsperson's replacement and the future appointment
of a focal point within the executive branch to facilitate
the implementation of the commitments undertaken
through international human rights mechanisms in
order to continue strengthening Haitian institutions.
We believe that it is essential to ensure the rule of law
and to lay the foundation for greater political and social
cohesion, as well as to address current socioeconomic
and development challenges.

Likewise, we commend the Republic of Haiti for
assuming the presidency of the Caribbean Community,
in addition to the initiative taken by the Heads of State
and Government of that organization to create an
intraregional workforce to combat the increase in crime
and violence in the region. We note the decrease ofboth
in Haiti and encourage them to continue along that path.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of MINUJUSTH
to improve the infrastructure and training of the
Haitian National Police through its mentoring and
advising programme, which seeks to transfer essential
skills to middle and senior management, as well as
its training programme, which will contribute to the
implementation of the 2017-2021 strategic development
plan for that institution. We also appreciate and support
the work carried out by the Mission in the area of
the rule of law and encourage it to pursue its work in
coordination with the Government of Haiti.

We appreciate the progress made in the fight against
cholera through the Secretary-General's new approach.
The United Nations and its members have a collective
responsibility to ensure its full implementation. With
that in mind, we call on the international community to
work to meet its commitments and cooperate with the
Republic of Haiti to build solid sanitation and health
systems. Cholera remains a central problem that affects
not only sanitation and access to water, but all areas
of development and stability in Haiti. Fighting that
scourge is a priority, as highlighted during the Security
Council's visit in 2017.

With regard to sexual abuse and exploitation,
we take note of the commitment of MINUJUSTH to
prevention activities, including training, facilitation of
information and counselling. We encourage the Mission
to pursue its efforts with respect to the principle of zero
tolerance for those responsible for sexual exploitation
and abuse, who, if found guilty, should be punished
accordingly. We reiterate our concern about the
issue of children who are left fatherless as a result of
sexual abuse.

Finally, Bolivia recognizes the national ownership
and primary responsibility of the Government and
people of Haiti for all aspects of their country's
development, and encourages MINUJUSTH to fulfil its
mandate with respect to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Haiti.

