Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Allow me, first of all,
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May. We have no doubt that the United States
presidency of the Council this month will be very
productive and fruitful. We also thank you for holding
this important public meeting to discuss the report of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of the
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by various parties
involved in the conflict in that country.

This public meeting is an important opportunity
for all interested parties to comment freely on the
contents of the report, and the views expressed here
will undoubtedly help the Security Council in charting
the course of its future action.

In this regard, my delegation is particularly
pleased to welcome in the Council Chamber the
Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu; the Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of
Uganda, Mr. Amama Mbabazi; the Minister of Finance
of Burundi, Mr. Charles Nihangaza; and the Special
Envoy of the President of the Rwandese Republic, Mr.
Patrick Mazimpaka.

We also appreciate very much the presence of Ms.
Safiatou Ba-N'Daw, Chairperson, and of the members
ofthe Panel on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation commends the Chairperson and
the members of the Panel for the comprehensive report
they have submitted in fulfilment of their important
mandate. We must all recognize that the Panel has been
entrusted with an extremely complex and daunting
task. We thank the members of the Panel for the
dedication and courage with which they have fulfilled
their responsibilities.

A report of this nature, based on investigations
carried out in difficult circumstances we all know, will
obviously be questioned by concerned parties. There
may be criticisms with regard to the form, method and
depth of the investigations carried out, as well as on the
conclusions, recommendations and comments
contained in the report.

In certain cases, criticism may be genuine and
justified, and in others just superficial. But overall the
report has confirmed beyond a doubt that there is
indeed massive illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including diamonds, coltan, copper, cobalt, timber and
gold, and that there is a nexus between such illegal
activities and the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
sovereign nation, and the resources of the country
belong solely to its people. It is unfortunate that this
important African country has been engulfed in conflict
over the last few years and that several neighbouring
countries have become involved in it for one reason or
another. It is a sad reflection, however, that the conflict
has served as an opportunity for many to plunder the
resources of the Congo, particularly at a time when the
country has been in a situation of crisis. We urge all
concerned parties to cease forthwith all unlawful
activities in the Congo.

With regard to the report of the Panel, my
delegation supports the proposal that the mandate be
extended to enable the Panel to pursue and complete its
important work. We urge all parties concerned to
cooperate fully with the Panel and to ensure the
security of the members of the Panel while it is
carrying out its important mandate on behalf of the
United Nations.

In the meantime, we support the view that the
Security Council should keep in abeyance the
application of measures recommended in the present
report until the additional report of the Panel becomes
available at the end of the three-month extension of the
mandate.

We urge the Governments concerned to take such
unilateral measures as they deem necessary to ensure
that their nationals are not in any manner involved in
illegal exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this regard, we welcome the
initiative taken by the Ugandan Government to carry
out investigations in the country.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has not only inflicted immense suffering on the
people of that country, but has also affected peace and
security in the region as a whole. It has also impeded
development and progress as well as regional
cooperation. This deadly conflict must end, and the
way to achieve that is full implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement and full compliance with the
disengagement plans which have been subsequently
signed by all parties involved in the conflict. We urge
all the parties to honour their commitments in this
regard.

I cannot end without expressing our shock and
dismay at the killings of International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) workers in Bunia. We hope that the
parties that have influence in the area will help identify
the assassins and bring them to justice.

Finally, Mauritius supports the presidential
statement which is proposed to be issued at the end of
this meeting.

