Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing us to take part in this discussion. We would
like to congratulate the United States on taking the lead
in drawing the world's attention to this epidemic. We
also applaud the Secretary-General for his commitment
to fighting the epidemic. In that vein, we are proud to
have sponsored resolution 2177 (2014), adopted this
morning.

The people of Botswana have been truly concerned
by the outbreak of this pandemic. Ebola has been
visiting the West African part of our continent with
frightening regularity. Even though Ebola cases have
been reported on African soil, we are aware that it has
the potential to engulf the entire continent and beyond.
Ebola is not just an epidemic, it is a humanitarian
disaster and a catastrophe waiting to happen. The extent
of the catastrophe can be measured not only in human
terms, but also in the fear it instils in those it affects.

As our dear brothers and sisters in West Africa
continue to fight the scourge, we are acutely aware that
containing it is a monumental task. It is therefore in
that context that we need to pull together as children
of the same soil, together with the assistance of the
international community, to address this pandemic
with whatever resources we have at our disposal. We
share the pain and suffering of those who have fallen
victim to the disease. As a regional neighbour to West
Africa, we know that epidemics such as Ebola know
neither boundaries nor frontier regulations.

Over the past weeks we have seen with horror the
images ofpeople who have fallen victim to this scourge,
including mothers and children, and we know that the
virus is swift, sudden and severe. We remain concerned
that, at any point in time, it can strike with precision
and ravage entire populations if left unchecked. As
we speak, over 3,500 people are reported to have been
infected, with over 1,900 deaths. Those include the
most vulnerable: women and children.

In that respect, the Government of Botswana took
a decision in August 2014 to render financial assistance
to Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone in order to assist
those countries in fighting the disease. We hope that
that modest humanitarian gesture of good will and
compassion will go a long way in supporting the
deployment of resources and expertise required to fight
and eventually eradicate the dreadful virus.

We are encouraged by the outpour of support from
the international community, including humanitarian
organizations, civil society, medical experts and people
of good will, but we know a lot more still must be
done. As the disease persists, we wish to call on other
stakeholders to play a part. We welcome the African
Union's Support to Ebola Outbreak in West Africa
initiative, through which they sent a team of medical
experts to the affected countries.

We welcome the Secretary-General's plan to have
established Ebola crisis centres within six to nine
months so as to harness and suppress the spread of
the virus. We believe that is both practical and timely.
We wish to further congratulate the Secretary-General
for appointing the Senior United Nations System
Coordinator for Ebola, Dr. David Nabarro, and his
deputy, Mr. Anthony Banbury.

