Mr. Holbrooke (United States): Thank you, Sir,
for making the trip from Jamaica to honour us and to
highlight the significance of today's meeting by taking
the chair yourself on behalf of Jamaica and on behalf
of all of us. Your leadership and that of Ambassador
Durrant has made today's event possible.

I want to thank also all the other countries on the
Security Council who have agreed to have this
unprecedented resolution on a health issue - the first
in the history of the Security Council. I want to look
back with the Council members on how far we have
come since the beginning of January, when the very
question of whether we could discuss this issue in this
Chamber was before us - and since March, when we
wondered we could put preambular language into a
resolution. Now we have a draft resolution that, as the
previous speaker just said, is of tremendous value in
this fight.

I also want to especially praise the previous
speaker, my friend, one of our leaders, Peter Piot, for
his leadership in this field and for returning again to
the Security Council today. Without his Vision, his
creativity and his leadership, I do not think we would
be here today. I know that he has told me privately how
important the Security Council's efforts are to his
efforts.

I also want to bring to your attention, Sir, the fact
that we have a very distinguished American delegation
here with us today. It is led by three leaders of our
Congress who have led the fight in the Congress for
more funds for AIDS research and AIDS prevention.
Carolyn Maloney, in whose Congressional district the
United Nations is located, is to my right in the first row
behind me. Sheila Jackson-Lee, from Houston, Texas,
one of the leaders in the great fight, is with us today, as
is Barbara Lee, from Oakland, California, who is our
most tenacious leader, the originator of the Marshall
Plan for AIDS, a proposal she submitted two years ago.
She is the person who reinstated the money that some
members of Congress tried to cut during last week's
debate. I pay tribute to all of these people, and
especially to Barbara Lee, for her tenacious and
effective efforts in this area. I thank you, Sir, for giving
us permission to have them join us. We also have here
today Reverend Eugene Rivers and Mathilda Krim, two
of the great leaders in this fight, and many other
people, including some from the pharmaceutical
industry, who have come to join us today.

I am really honoured that you are here, Sir,
because we think that today's draft resolution is
historic for the Security Council. It is certainly not the
end of the process of fighting AIDS. The problem
continues to get worse, as Dr. Piot has just said, and
today's draft resolution marks only an important
benchmark in the process. But it is particularly
important for the Security Council.

I want to say at the outset to my friends who are
concerned about the issue of sovereignty and about
what the Security Council should and should not do,
that this draft resolution in no way infringes on the
sovereignty or authority of countries, but shows the
collective will of the Security Council, the most
important body of its sort in the world. This draft
resolution legitimately extends our interest into a field
that had previously not been considered. In no way do
we undercut the work of our equally important
Economic and Social Council; rather, we reinforce it. I
would also mention that the American Secretary of
Agriculture, Dan Glickman, will be addressing the
Economic and Social Council this afternoon.

As recently as a year ago, as recently as seven
months ago, few would have considered AIDS part of
such a discussion in the Security Council. Today I
think that by this action we show that it is. The world is
paying attention to Durban and to the Security Council.
This week's issue of The Economist, which came out
this morning, has AIDS on the cover - another
symbol of the importance of this issue to the world.

Since 10 January, when we had our new century
and new millennium begin in the Security Council with
the session on AIDS, chaired by the Vice-President of
the United States, Al Gore, we began to acknowledge
that the HIV/AIDS crisis is a threat not only in a health
sense but also to the prosperity, to the people and
indeed to the security of the world. In his remarks in
January, Vice-President Gore reminded us that we owe
it to ourselves and to each other and to future
generations to fight this disease. He called on all of us
to "acknowledge our moral duty and accept our grave
and great responsibility to succeed". We are doing so
today with this resolution, a historic resolution, as I
said before, because it is the first Security Council
resolution ever focused on any health issue at all, and it
is appropriate that this issue is HIV/AIDS. I believe
that today, 17 July, will be marked as a benchmark in
the evolution of the Security Council, and it will be a
vote that will illustrate our recognition that AIDS is as
great a security challenge as we have faced since the
founding of the United Nations.

This draft resolution also serves as an example of
one of the primary purposes for which the United
Nations was created more than half a century ago: to
galvanize international action to meet common threats.
AIDS is not just the problem of a single country. It is
notjust an African problem; it cannot be treated simply
as a problem of a single continent. In a world defined
by globalization and interdependence - two of the
catchwords of the modern era - we cannot do triage
by continent, and we cannot simply focus on economic
interdependence; we have to recognize that while
interdependence provides economic opportunities, it
also can pose global threats. You cannot deny AIDS a
Visa; you cannot embargo it or quarantine it. You
cannot stop it at a border. That is why we must work
together.

This draft resolution covers many things, but it
focuses appropriately on the area where the Security
Council has primary responsibility and the most at
stake, in particular in addressing the impact of AIDS
on peacekeeping. Let me speak here an unpleasant
truth. While United Nations peacekeepers perform very
admirably, and while all who contribute to
peacekeeping deserve our respect and admiration, it is
a fact that without proper training, education and steps
towards prevention, peacekeepers may also be
spreading AIDS inadvertently.

I want to pause here for a moment to pay special
tribute to the peacekeepers in the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone, who so marvellously and
bravely battled their way to safety yesterday at Daru,
and to express my great sympathy to the Indian
peacekeeper, the sergeant who gave his life in that
effort.
This is an example of United Nations
peacekeeping at its best. But we must also recognize
that HIV/AIDS can ironically produce the opposite
result from what is intended.

On a personal note, I first encountered this issue
in 1992 when as a private citizen I visited Cambodia
and Visited the United Nations Transitional Authority
in Cambodia (UNTAC) in Phnom Penh and talked at
that time to Mr. Akashi and Mr. Carney and other
members of the United Nations team. I was deeply
impressed by their efforts, but I was disturbed by the
fact that the United Nations forces were already
spreading AIDS. I was so disturbed, in fact, that on 27
July 1992, as a private citizen, I wrote a letter to
Mr. Akashi and Mr. Carney, raising this issue with
them. I mention this because this is not, to me, a new
issue, and there is a sense of grim satisfaction that we
have - although much too late - come to this action.
On that date, I wrote something which, if one changed
the name "Cambodia" to the words "certain countries
in Africa where peacekeepers are", would be true
today. I hope that this draft resolution will go a long
way towards ending it.

To be sure, the Security Council and the United
Nations cannot require Member States to force
involuntary testing of their troops. This would violate
the United Nations respect for national sovereignty, but
we recommend - and Dr. Piot is correct in drawing
attention to paragraph 3 of the draft resolution - and
urge that all countries increase their testing, especially
of those troops that will be sent overseas. Once troops
become part of a United Nations peacekeeping mission,
the United Nations should have an obligation to
provide them with education and training; to provide
condoms, as the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has now started to do; and to take other
actions to prevent the spread of the disease. We must
avoid the supreme irony which would occur if, in the
course of trying to prevent conflicts, United Nations
peacekeepers spread a disease even more deadly than
the conflicts themselves.

In fact, it is equally true that, in today's world,
one cannot have a modern and effective military unless
AIDS is taken seriously and troops are tested and
educated. It makes as much sense to prepare, arm, train
and protect our troops from such enemies as AIDS as it
does to protect them from enemies with guns and
mortars.

In the United States, incidentally, every troop sent
abroad gets tested for AIDS. If a soldier tests positive,
he or she stays at home to get treated. I might also add
that, last week, the Congress, in conference, put $10
million into the Defense Department budget to
authorize the Defense Department to participate in
working with other Governments and with the United
Nations on this issue, as well as with military
establishments. I am pleased that this has passed the
conference and I hope it will get the support of the full
Congress shortly.

This draft resolution calls for a number of
important measures to address the pandemic on all
fronts and all continents and in all populations affected.
It urges the United Nations Member States to create
effective long-term domestic strategies. It calls on the
United Nations to ensure robust training for
peacekeepers. It urges Member States to institute
voluntary and confidential testing of all military
personnel, especially peacekeepers, and it asks the
Secretary-General to develop the means to track
nations' policies in military forces around the world.

These are all significant steps, but while
peacekeeping is the draft resolution's primary focus,
the ultimate goal must be to increase international
intensity and coordination against HIV/AIDS across
the board. The fight against AIDS is not the Security
Council's alone. It must be waged at every level in
every agency throughout the United Nations system: in
the Economic and Social Council, in the United
Nations Children's Fund, in the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in the
United Nations Development Programme, in the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations; by
everyone behind a desk in Geneva and New York; and
by every humanitarian worker in the field. The
challenge of AIDS far surpasses the ability of any of us
alone. It will require a combined commitment, our
cooperation, our creativity and our resources.

Let me stress again that today's action is
significant and it is groundbreaking, but it is only a
beginning. We welcome today's meeting and we hope
that you, Sir, will invite Dr. Piot to return to Visit us
periodically. I would draw to your attention the fact
that he is here more or less on schedule, as was
suggested in the January meetings by several of the
ambassadors here today.

Today's effort should strengthen our resolve. In
the days ahead, we will have an opportunity to take
further action, including at the Millennium Summit and
in the upcoming session of the General Assembly. Let
us commit ourselves to bringing the same sense of
determination and cooperation then that we have
shown today. Again, I thank you, Sir, for making the
trip here today, and Dr. Piot, his team and all the
people who work so hard on this issue. We in the
Security Council are honoured to be able to join the
fight to highlight the fact that it is more than a health
problem and to help accelerate this battle. I want
simply to underline my personal View that, of all the
problems we face in the world today - and there are
many: the conflicts we are here to try to prevent or
contain; nuclear proliferation; population issues;
environmental issues; and social and economic issues
- I think that this is the most serious problem we face
because of the damage it can do to everything else.

