Mr. Le Roy: At the outset, I would like very
much to thank you one more time, Sir, for organizing
this debate and for the great support we have heard this
morning for our peacekeeping missions, and especially
our Force Commanders, from Security Council
members and of course from those who spoke under
rule 37, representing countries that participate in
peacekeeping operations.
At the outset, because not all of our Force
Commanders will have the opportunity to speak, allow
me, Sir, to just introduce those who have not been able
to speak this morning. I will start with Colonel
Svystak, Chief Military Officer of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo; Colonel
Logan, Chief Military Officer of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste; Major General
Kandji, Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad;
Major General Hafiz, Force Commander of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI);
Lieutenant General Prakash, incoming Force
Commander for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Major General Ecarma, head of Mission
and Force Commander of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force; Rear Admiral
Sanchez, Force Commander of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus; Major General Zhao,
Force Commander of United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara; and Major General
Kim, Chief Military Officer of the United Nations
Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan. I think
the others have spoken and were introduced this
morning.

For the rest of the debate, as many questions have
been asked and some have been targeted to specific
Force Commanders, I would propose an order for the
sequence of events, to make it interactive. I would
suggest that Lieutenant General Afzal of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) should answer
the questions directed to him about transition and the
time to draw down in Liberia, the slow progress in
security sector reform, the early peacebuilding
activities of UNMIL, the challenges for the elections
and the risk of a security vacuum. Those questions
were specifically directed towards General Afzal.

Then I propose that Lieutenant General Gaye
answer the questions on, of course, the protection of
civilians; the conditionality policy, technology,
intelligence needs for our missions, mobility, and
cooperation with other missions, especially concerning
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

Then I propose that Major General Cruz of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti answer
the questions directed to him on sexual and gender-
based violence in internally displaced persons camps,
deterrence, the role of the engineers, and the efforts
and coordination undertaken with development actors.

Then I would propose that Major General Hafiz
of UNOCI answer the questions on the protection of

civilians, transition, interoperability - which have
been raised on several occasions - and formation of
the troops.

Then I propose that General Kandji answer the
question on deterrence and interoperability, especially,
of course, for a mission that has transitioned from a
European Union operation to a United Nations
operations.

Then I propose that Major General Obi of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan answer the
question on cooperation with other regional missions,
especially on the question of the LRA; the question on
capacities; and of course the key question on
helicopters.

Then I would propose that Major General Mood
answer the question raised by the representative of
Lebanon about the reporting of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization.

I would give the last word - if you agree, Sir -
to General Obiakor to conclude, for our part.

