Mr. Kaludjerovie (Serbia and Montenegro): At
the outset, I should like to express my condolences to
the United Nations and to the families of the victims of
the tragic incident that took place this morning in
Sierra Leone.

Allow me, Sir, to thank you for this opportunity
to state my Government's position on the question
under consideration. I would also like to thank the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their comprehensive briefings.

Serbia and Montenegro is committed to the
administration of international justice through the
establishment of individual criminal responsibility for
all those who perpetrated crimes throughout the
wartime conflicts in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. The truth that has been established in the
proceedings of the International Tribunal is of pivotal
importance for achieving a historical perspective on the
tragic events that afflicted all of the peoples of the
former Yugoslavia as well as for finally ending the
legacy of the Milosevic regime.

Therefore, we consider our cooperation with The
Hague Tribunal to be both our domestic and
international obligation. Most of the persons indicted
by the Tribunal committed, first and foremost, a crime
against their own people. The Serbian people have
never before been accused of genocide or ethnic
cleansing. Moreover, we consider that the
establishment of the truth in the proceedings of the
International Criminal Tribunal as well as of national
courts will contribute to the promotion of mutual trust
and reconciliation in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia.

Resolution 1503 (2003) endorsed a completion
strategy for the Tribunal, and Serbia and Montenegro
joins others in supporting the envisaged timetable for
the completion of the ICTY's work.

Strengthening national legal systems, as
emphasized in Security Council resolution 1503
(2003), will contribute significantly to the Tribunal's
completion strategy. My Government appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) in organizing a visit to the Tribunal by judges
from the Department for War Crimes at the Belgrade
District Court, with the aim of transferring knowledge
and experience from the practice of the Tribunal, as
well as establishing channels of communication
between the Special Court and the ICTY. We also
welcome the stated commitment of the ICTY to
support the holding of credible war crimes trials that
meet international norms of due process in all States of
the former Yugoslavia.

My country has independently initiated a number
of proceedings against perpetrators of war crimes. In
proceedings before the national courts of Serbia and
Montenegro as many as 17 persons have been
convicted of war crimes and sentenced to prison terms
ranging from eight years to the maximum penalty of 20
years. The Council for War Crimes of the District
Court in Belgrade is currently investigating the cases
of Hladnjaca, Petrovo Selo, Batajnica and Perucica,
with international assistance in exhuming the bodies
and providing forensic analysis.

While reaffirming that we are fully aware of our
obligations to the ICTY, we feel it necessary to repeat
that any evaluation of cooperation must be based on
facts, not on preconceived political perceptions. My
Government has carefully studied the report before the
Council today. We have given particular consideration
to the assessments of the cooperation of Serbia and
Montenegro with the ICTY and the criticism advanced
by the Prosecutor's Office regarding insufficient
cooperation with the Tribunal. In that connection, I
would like to highlight some important points.

Cooperation with the Prosecutor's Office was of
somewhat lower intensity due to circumstances
stemming from the political situation of the country -
the protracted process of setting up the new Serbian
Government and appointing the Council of Ministers of
Serbia and Montenegro, as well as the presidential
elections in Serbia. At the time, all energies were
focused on ensuring the country's political stability,
preserving and building institutions and continuing the
initiated reform processes.

Even in the face of such difficulties, at a time
when the new National Council for Cooperation with
the Tribunal had not yet been constituted, efforts were
made to sustain a basic level of cooperation with the
Tribunal. Regular, almost daily contacts at the working
level were maintained between the Office of the
Prosecutor and Belgrade. More than 50 requests by the
Prosecutor's Office were responded to by providing the
requested documents, granting waivers and by
providing relevant information. An investigative team
is expected to come to Belgrade in the next few days,
and it will be granted access to the archives of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Now that, in Sunday's elections, the citizens of
Serbia have strongly reaffirmed their commitment to
democracy, internal political conditions have been
created for the Government of Serbia to honour its
obligations to the ICTY as soon as possible. I assure
the Council that cooperation with the Tribunal,
primarily with the Prosecutor's Office, will be one of
our foreign policy priorities.

My Government is aware of the fact that
cooperation with the ICTY is its obligation and that
still more needs to be done in that respect. Cooperation
with the Tribunal is a process my Government will
continue, maintaining efforts to improve that
cooperation as part of its fulfilment of Serbia and
Montenegro's goal of taking further steps towards
Euro-Atlantic integration.

Given that over the past few years we have
summoned the will to hand over or assist the transfer to
the Tribunal of the highest ranking former political and
military leadership, including Slobodan Milosevic,
Milan Milutinovic, Dragoljub Ojdanic and others,
unprecedented in the recent history of any State, the
Council may rest assured that in the near future we
shall continue to cooperate with the Tribunal along the
same lines.

