Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having called this important
debate. I welcome the clear Security Council support
for discussing this issue. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing and strongly agree with all ofit.

The United Kingdom is committed to the promotion
and protection of human rights worldwide, not just
because it is the right thing to do, but also because it
is a cornerstone of peace, stability and security and a
tool for conflict prevention. The Security Council has
a clear role to play. This is necessary in order for us
to do the job that the United Nations Charter gave us.
It is absolutely not encroachment, for the reasons the
Secretary-General so eloquently set out.

Too often, after a conflict, the international
community looks back and concludes that more should
have been done at the outset and that warning signs had
not been acted upon. All too often those warning signs
involve human rights violations and abuses.

Twenty-five years ago, the Special Rapporteur
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
reported on allegations of killings in Rwanda. A year
later, his successor visited Rwanda and later warned the
Commission on Human Rights of his fears of potential
genocide. We all know now the consequences of the
international community not responding decisively to
those concerns.

Today the international community is being asked
the same questions and given similar warnings in South
Sudan. We need to come up with better answers.

The situation in Syria also shows the clear
connection between human rights violations and
conflict. A regime faced in 2011 by peaceful protests
from its people responded not with reform but with
repression and violence. We have seen where this has
led: a civil war, a huge rise in violent extremism, death
and forced disappearances, a refugee crisis, regional
instability and even the use of chemical weapons
against civilians.

The story of Masri, a Syrian man is, sadly, just
one example. He was arrested after participating in
a peaceful protest at the start of the conflict. He was
tortured, starved and interrogated over two years in
four detention facilities and then taken to a regime
hospital that has been described as a slaughterhouse.
A rare survivor, he was taken back to the notorious
Sednaya prison for another year of torture. He was
eventually released, but when he returned home, he
screamed at his own reflection in the mirror: he had not
recognized himself - a ghostly skeleton of a human
standing where he had once stood. That is an illustration
of why repeated abuses of the veto in the Council, to
block accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses in Syria,
are so damaging. They reinforce the Syrian regime's
certainty that it can get away with carrying out gross
violations of human rights with impunity.

The United Kingdom will continue to do its
utmost to hold accountable the perpetrators of all such
violations and abuses. That is why the United Kingdom
also welcomes the Secretary-General's continued
focus on prevention. That includes his support for his
predecessor's Human Rights Up Front initiative, which
seeks to bring the United Nations system together,
prioritizes human rights and promotes joint work on
cross-cutting issues. It also seeks to ensure that the
United Nations does all it can, notjust to respond to, but
to prevent serious violations or abuses of human rights.
We have seen time and time again how detrimental
those are to peace and security.

Two institutions of the United Nations are
particularly vital to delivering this joined-up approach
to human rights. First, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and his Office provide
invaluable support to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. They advise on mandates. They carry out
strategic assessment missions to South Sudan, Liberia
and Mali. They send technical and operational support
missions to Iraq and Kosovo, to name just a few from
the last year. We welcome the interaction between the
Council and the High Commissioner and his Office.

The second is the Human Rights Council. Like
many others, we are concerned when countries with
poor human rights records get on to the Human Rights
Council. Nevertheless, the Human Rights Council plays
a central role in responding to human rights violations
that pose imminent threats to peace and security. Every
country, including the worst offenders, has a Universal
Periodic Review. Each has to explainpolicies and actions.
The United Kingdom particularly values the role the
Human Rights Council plays in overseeing the Special
Rapporteurs and other investigative mechanisms, such
as commissions of inquiry. Crucially, for the work of
the Council, these vital tools help provide objective and
professionally gathered information on how potential
or active conflicts are evolving.

Human rights are intertwined with so much of
what the Council does. The United Kingdom welcomes
this debate. The Council cannot fully discharge its
responsibility, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, to maintain international peace and security
without addressing human rights every single day.

