Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We
welcome you, Mr. President; it is great to have you join
us in the Security Council today.

Over the past days, we have seen a dramatic and
significant series ofevents unfold in the Sudan. However,
the demands of the Sudanese for a representative
Government have not yet been met and the situation
remains tense. Protesters and opposition groups are
calling for a quick transition to civilian authority, and
the African Union (AU) said on 15 April that it will
withdraw the Sudan's membership if the transition is
not made within 15 days. We agree with the Sudanese
people that the first step is forging a new transitional
body that includes the leadership and participation
of civilians representing the diversity and breadth of
Sudanese society.

We are concerned by the impact of the events
in Khartoum on the security and stability of Darfur,
including last Saturday's deadly attack on a camp
of internally displaced persons that other speakers
have cited, and we continue to receive reports
of violence resulting from protests in Darfur. In
addition, the United States is deeply concerned that
violence between the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction
increased during the reporting period. We are also
troubled that crimes against displaced persons and
vulnerable civilians increased, and with them a rise in
fatalities. Such violence worsens the possibilities for a
humanitarian response in an already severe situation
and has prevented humanitarian actors from accessing
the most vulnerable to provide life-saving services
and assistance.

Violence has also prevented United Nations
peacekeepers from carrying out important
prevention-and-response patrols. Despite those
challenges, the United States strongly encourages the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) to redouble its efforts to address the
spike in violence and prioritize the safety and security
of civilians.
The joint United Nations-AU report on UNAMID's
future, due in May, will be an opportunity to provide a
set of prioritized benchmarks, while also recommending
possible trajectories for the mission. The United States
expects the strategic report to also consider the events
of the past several months and weeks and their impact
on the stability and security of Darfur.

Even with the significant events, the Government
and parties should show measurable and sustainable
progress on prioritized benchmarks, in particular,
demonstrating the Government's ability and capacity
to protect and provide for the Darfur people and
addressing the root causes of the conflict. Absent such
evidence of progress, the United States is supportive of
the Council considering all options as we seek to bring
long-term peace and stability to Darfur.

The United States commends the people of
the Sudan for their resilience and commitment to
non-violence as they express their legitimate demands
for an inclusive and representative Government that
respects and protects human rights. The United States
urges all parties to continue the process towards an
inclusive, civilian transition, amid an atmosphere of
restraint and calm. We stand ready to work with partners
in the Council and the region to support those efforts.

