I thank Special Representative Lyons for her briefing and for her leadership in guiding the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in support of peace, human rights, women's empowerment and economic development in Afghanistan. I also thank Mr. Mohseni for the work that he has done to promote freedom of expression in Afghanistan. I would like to begin my remarks by commenting on the string of recent targeted attacks in and around Kabul. Those attacks are reprehensible and must end immediately. They erode the safety and security of Kabul's residents and workers, and they threaten the efforts of those working towards peace. For example, among the individuals targeted and killed in recent weeks was Mr. Abdul Baqi Amin, a scholar and an activist firmly committed to peace. The United States condemns that and all acts of terrorism, and we offer our sincere condolences to his family, his friends and everyone affected by those explosions and killings. We urge all sides to move swiftly to deny spoilers the opportunity to shake the faith of those demanding peace now, when Afghanistan is closer than ever to advancing its peace process. President Ghani's decree paving the way for the Government's release of members of the Taliban, following the brave decision of the Loya Jirga, allows for the next steps of the peace process to occur and for intra- Afghan negotiations to begin soon. The United States is encouraged by the Afghan Government's recent decision to finalize the make-up of the High Council for Peace and National Reconciliation and to fill the majority of its Cabinet positions. Delays in implementing the May political agreement between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah threaten progress on the peace process and governance reforms, as well as the Government's response to the coronavirus disease. An inclusive and unified Government is needed to serve the interests of all Afghans at this critical moment. Another necessary component of a prosperous and secure Afghanistan is the meaningful participation of women in the peace process. Their essential role goes beyond addressing the issues that uniquely affect them. Their participation is vital to achieving economic progress and stability in Afghanistan, and that is why it is critical that their rights be protected and advanced. The United States has spoken clearly on what will happen if these rights are not maintained: No current, or future, Afghan Government should count on international donor support if that Government restricts or represses the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women and girls. I would like to pause for a moment to say something that I truly believe needs to be said: It is utterly cruel and incomprehensible that we have to be excited about something that should be a given. Why in the world have Afghanistan's women been so marginalized? It could be argued that, if women had participated fully in their country's development, Afghanistan would have not been held back for so long and would not be facing such a difficult path today. Since when do women have to justify their role in humankind? Do men negotiate their place? Women's leadership in the region is nothing new. Look at Indira Gandhi and Benazir Bhutto. We have to be thankful for the progress that has been made, however much more needs to be done. Women make up four out of 21 members of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan's negotiating team, and we firmly believe that these women must have the opportunity to be heard. That is why we are appalled at the recent attempted assassination on the life of the negotiator Ms. Fawzia Koofi. We strongly condemn this attack and hope that it will not deter Afghan women from continuing to speak out courageously and with conviction about their country's future. Meanwhile, the Trump Administration continues to follow through on its long-standing commitment to Afghanistan through the provision of critical humanitarian aid, recognizing that Afghanistan's humanitarian crises serve only to compound one another. Since the beginning of fiscal year 2020 alone, the United States has provided nearly $99 million in humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. In addition to the $99 million, the United States has provided more than $24 million in humanitarian assistance and roughly $35 million in development assistance to support the response to the coronavirus disease pandemic in Afghanistan. I would like to take this moment to thank the men and women of our military and humanitarian workers who have been killed or wounded trying to help Afghanistan build a better future. Finally, as members in the Council are aware, we are in the midst of negotiating a new UNAMA mandate. As the intra-Afghanistan negotiation process begins, we must ensure UNAMA's mandate is especially clear and robust during this pivotal moment in history. All of us must display discipline and the political will to focus the mandate on the core issues that will support the Government and the people of Afghanistan in achieving peace. The United States seeks a sovereign, unified and democratic Afghanistan that is at peace with itself and its neighbours. Let me again express my appreciation to the United Nations and other international partners for their support in strengthening Afghanistan's democratic institutions and in support of the peace process. Surrounding nations and neighbours also deserve credit for their constructive role in supporting refugees and humanitarian assistance that has been instrumental in so many Afghan lives. Together, we must all continue to support Afghanistan for a better future for the Afghan people.
