Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her
briefing. We would also like to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Korea, to the Security Council.

The immeasurable destructive power of nuclear
weapons means that it is now imperative that the legal
ban on nuclear war be strictly adhered to in practice ifwe
are to ensure the survival of civilization and humankind
itself. Because of their permanent radioactivity, nuclear

weapons, whose terrible and indiscriminate effects are
inevitably felt by military personnel and civilians alike,
represent a threat to humankind's very survival and
could ultimately render the entire Earth uninhabitable,
as is stated in the preamble of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, otherwise known as the Treaty
of Tlatelolco.

I am from that region, the first in the world to
declare itselfa zone ofpeace. Bolivia, a constitutionally
pacifist State, promotes a culture of dialogue and
the right to peace, as well as cooperation among the
peoples of the world, with full respect for sovereignty,
through diplomacy among peoples. Our Constitution
prohibits the manufacture or use of chemical, biological
and nuclear weapons on Bolivian soil. We once again
urge all States, in particular the nuclear-weapon States,
to stop including nuclear weapons in their doctrines,
security policies, military strategies, political discourse
and arsenals.

During its presidency of the Security Council in
June, Bolivia convened an open debate entitled "The
global effort to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors" (see S/PV.7985),
with the goal of determining how to strengthen the
preventive system so as to avoid the humanitarian,
political, economic and environmental catastrophes
that could result from the use of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons by non-State actors, particularly
terrorist groups. We firmly believe that resolution
1540 (2004) is a platform for providing assistance
and fostering cooperation among States to prevent
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction, whether chemical, biological or
nuclear. However, we completely disagree with that fact
that it is very often used as a mechanism to put pressure
or impose sanctions on States.

Once again, Bolivia firmly condemns the ballistic-
missile launches and nuclear tests carried out by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and we call on it
to abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme
in a comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible manner,
in line with the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We reject any act of provocation,
unilateral measure or any measure not sanctioned by
international law or that flouts the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which could pose a
threat to international peace and security, especially
on the Korean peninsula. That is why we encourage all
the parties concerned to avoid escalating tensions and
rhetoric. We call for an end to the downward spiral of
confrontation, the threat of the use of force or war, of
nuclear retaliation or of the complete destruction of one
or other of the parties.

It must be understood that there can be no military
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula. We
echo the words of the Secretary-General, who said,
based on resolution 2375 (2017),

"[t]he solution must be political... We must not
sleepwalk our way into war. More broadly, all
countries must show greater commitment to the

universal goal of a world without nuclear weapons."
(A/72/PV3, p. I)

So far this year, the Security Council has adopted
three resolutions with increasingly stringent sanctions,
which may have various distinct consequences. As the
resolutions stipulate, we believe that not only must we
work to implement the sanctions, we must also work to
bring the parties to the negotiating table and resume
the Six-Party Talks. In that regard, Bolivia reiterates
its support for the Chinese "suspension-for-suspension"
initiative, which would allow for a simultaneous
cessation of hostilities on the Korean peninsula, as well
as the Chinese-Russian proposal and road map, which,
to date, is the only concrete proposal that has been put
forward to resolve the situation.

It is important to highlight the major achievements
that have been made in the area of non-proliferation
through dialogue and peaceful means. The most
poignant example is the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, which
was negotiated by the five permanent members of
the Security Council, the European Union and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. It highlighted
the willingness of the parties to achieve the goal of
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. All reports,
including from international organizations, indicate
that Iran is honouring its commitment. That is why
we want to draw attention to the fact that one of the
parties is threatening to renege on that commitment
and cause more instability in the region. It is critical
to ensure that we learn from the past and do not use
the putative presence or absence of weapons of mass
destruction as a pretext for effecting regime change or
destroying States.

I would like to conclude by reading two of
the preambular paragraphs of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which was opened for
signature yesterday.

"Mindful of the unacceptable suffering of and
harm caused to the victims of the use of nuclear
weapons (hibakusha), as well as of those affected
by the testing of nuclear weapons

"Recalling that, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, States must refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes ofthe United Nations,
and that the establishment and maintenance of
international peace and security are to be promoted
with the least diversion for armaments of the
world's human and economic resources".

Article I of the Treaty states that each State party
to it undertakes never under any circumstances to
develop, test, produce, manufacture, otherwise acquire,
possess or stockpile nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices.

