Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First of
all, on behalf of my country, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and my personal behalf, I wish to express my deepest
condolences to the people of South Africa on the passing
away of the great leader, humanist and symbol of the
fight forjustice and human rights, Mr. Nelson Mandela.

I would like to welcome the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and to express our gratitude
for their reports and respective briefings at today's
meeting. I also want to express our appreciation to the
Permanent Mission of Guatemala for its successful
chairmanship and leadership of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. The Tribunals serve
as a constant reminder that there is no impunity for
the serious crimes that were committed. In that light,
the successful completion of the work and missions
of the ICTY and the ICTR is necessary to achieving
sustainable peace and reconciliation.

The ad hoc Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda are milestones in the development of
international criminal law. The ICTY and the ICTR
established that crimes against humanity could be
committed not only in armed conflict, but also in its
absence. Thus, those who were not members of armed

forces have been brought to justice for their involvement
in Violating international norms and laws.

Throughout history, women have often been Victims
of rape and other forms of sexual abuse in conflict and
war. At the present, the documentation of facts related
to sexual violence is better than at any time in history.
The ICTY and the ICTR have contributed to classifying
sexual abuse as a crime against humanity, and as such
sexual abuse has become an integral part of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). Women
judges and women in senior positions in the Offices
of the Prosecutors have made significant contributions
to the effective prosecution of cases of sexual violence
against women. In general, the Tribunals have sent a
strong crime-prevention message to all those who have
committed crimes against humanity, regardless of the
functions they serve.

The punishment should from the outset prevent the
emergence of conspiracies to commit genocide, crimes
against humanity, crimes against peace and other
serious crimes. We support efforts to harmonize the
serving of prison sentences with the norms of human
rights. However, we underline that the manner in which
prison sentences are served should not put into question
the meaning of the punishment.

Considering that the Tribunal will soon complete
its mandate, the further processing of war crimes will
have to be transferred to national judicial systems.
Our commitment to investigating, prosecuting and
appropriately punishing perpetrators of war crimes is
unquestionable. We are also making additional efforts
to increase the number of completed cases at the levels
of State and entity.

As regional cooperation also plays an important
role, we are certain that the protocol on the exchange
of evidence and information on war crimes, signed
between the Offices of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of Serbia and Croatia, will serve as
an impetus towards strengthening communication and
enhancing coordination of the Offices. My country
remains dedicated to further promoting and increasing
regional cooperation, since it is in the common interests
of the countries in the region as well.

In order to preserve documentation pertaining to
the ICTY, we have proposed that the information centre
be located in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The centre would
serve future generations and be a constant reminder
that violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law should never be repeated.

It is very important that the Tribunal's completion
strategy and its transition to the Residual Mechanism
be successfully achieved. We welcome the decision
that, among other countries, the Residual Mechanism
staff will also include persons from the countries of the
Western Balkans region. However, we are surprised
and very much regret that at present no staff members
will be from Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that
the issue deserves further consideration in the spirit,
good practice and inclusiveness of the United Nations.

Finally, the establishment of the ICTY and ICTR
was not a random experiment, but rather the result of the

efforts of the international community in strengthening
human rights and international humanitarian law.
After the tragic experiences in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, we need to contribute to the creation of
international legal systems that will be able to punish
those responsible for the violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law, regardless of the
persons' rank or position. We hope that the experience
of the ICTY and ICTR will be expanded in the work of
the ICC. We know that it is difficult to achieve the ideal
of justice, but we should never stop trying.

