Mr. Nishida (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for choosing this important
theme for today's open debate at the Security Council.

We cannot avoid discussing securing borders
against illicit flows if we are to maintain international
peace and security, because the illicit cross-border flow
of materials, funds, goods and people causes instability
in our societies at both the national and international
levels. Securing borders is a cross-cutting issue that
encompasses organized crime, terrorism and
proliferation.

Every sovereign State has the primary
responsibility for securing its borders, as well as
responsibility not only for inflows but also for outflows
from it. While such individual effort is necessary for
diligent border control, it alone is not sufficient. To
secure borders from illicit flows, we, the international
community as a whole, need to take a holistic and
synergistic approach to our efforts. In that regard, we
highly value the active roles of the United Nations and
its bodies - such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the various sanctions
committees, including the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, INTERPOL and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime - in
helping States act in a coordinated manner.
Although the traditional scope of our efforts to
control illicit flows is centred on land borders, we have
been witnessing rapid expansion in the field. We must
begin to recognize that efforts to control illicit flows
have to include the sea and the air as well. As a nation
bordered on all sides by the sea, Japan has vital
interests in securing sea borders to block illicit flows.
In addition, although it has no physical boundaries,
cyberspace is a frontier that urgently requires greater
attention in terms of illegal transactions, transfers of
technology and classified information that may be
usurped for purposes of organized crime, terrorism and
proliferation.

Our success in the fight against illicit flows
depends upon how we can best close loopholes that
allow such flows. To that end, we need coordinated
efforts, at both the international and the national levels.
In that regard, we would like to encourage States that
have not done so to ratify the relevant conventions, as
well as to urge States to fully implement their
obligations, including those under Security Council
resolutions.

We also believe that combating the transfer and
transport of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),
missiles and related materials contributes to the
improvement of the security of the entire international
community. The Proliferation Security Initiative is an
international effort to halt WMD proliferation. Japan
has actively participated in activities of the Initiative,
including by hosting several of its maritime
interdiction exercises. Japan has also conducted
outreach activities for non-participating countries,
particularly in Asia, to enhance the inclusiveness of
international non-proliferation efforts.

At the national level, securing borders involves
complex coordination of multiple entities, such as
customs, immigration and law enforcement bodies.
Since they have their own authorities and jurisdictions,
even in a country with sophisticated systems it is
difficult to make such coordination function in an
effective way. Each State needs determination to
achieve active coordination. For its part, Japan has
operated strict border control in order to prevent illegal
inflows and outflows, by means of a cross-
organizational and multilayered response that relies on
cooperation between our relevant ministries and
agencies, the training of personnel and outreach to
exporters.

In addition, we recognize that there is an urgent
need to improve the capacities and awareness of
developing countries to further coordinate our efforts
to fight against illicit flows. Every year, Japan holds
the Asian Export Control Seminar in Tokyo to deepen
understanding of the importance of export control and
to exchange views and information in the region,
recently with the active participation of sanctions
committees, including the 1540 Committee.

Japan has also implemented various programmes
aimed at assisting developing countries in building
their capacities in the areas of immigration control, air
and sea port control and customs. Those programmes
include organizing a series of seminars, dispatching
experts from Japan, organizing training programmes in
the respective countries and providing equipment, such
as X-ray inspection tools.

Securing borders extends to people, goods and
funds, each of which is covered by its own relevant
Government agencies. What is critically important is to
connect the distinct bodies responsible for different
aspects of border security into a cohesive and
comprehensive strategy, and to close any gaps or
loopholes. Although we need to avoid any duplication
and to continue our discussion on more efficient ways
to tackle the issue, we believe that, in some cases, it is
beneficial to address the threats generated by illicit
flows with a multilayered approach, without being
afraid of superimposing our efforts.

Finally, the spread of globalization is making
border security more urgent than ever before. Once
again, I thank you, Madam President, for your
leadership in drawing our attention to this important
issue in a very timely manner. Japan will continue to
proactively contribute to ensure that every border is
secured from illicit flows that could pose serious
threats to international peace and security.

