Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for their valuable briefings. Viet Nam is closely following the situation in Yemen. We are deeply concerned over the recent military escalation in Al Jawf governorate, which has claimed the lives of dozens of civilians and displaced tens of thousands of people. We were alarmed by the report of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on the humanitarian situation that has prevailed in the country since the beginning of this year, with 24 million people requiring assistance, including about 14.3 million in acute need. The new wave of hostilities in northern Yemen has worsened the humanitarian crisis. Furthermore, this escalation is undermining the hope of the Yemeni people for national reconciliation and peace. We share the Special Envoy's concerns, which arose during his recent visit to Ma'rib province, about the potential risk of Yemen slipping back into a large-scale conflict. The pursuit of any military solution in Yemen will only prolong the suffering of the people and further weaken the whole country for many years to come. There is no military solution to this conflict. In this vein, at today's meeting allow me to suggest the following points. First, all parties involved in the conflict must immediately stop military action and return to the de-escalation process towards an unconditional and long-lasting ceasefire. We join other delegations in calling for additional efforts to be made by the concerned parties to implement all aspects of the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, and we reiterate that only a comprehensive and negotiated solution with United Nations mediation can bring sustainable peace to Yemen. Secondly, the parties to the conflict, especially the Houthi, must take the immediate and necessary steps to protect civilians and further facilitate the humanitarian work of the United Nations and its relevant partners, so that international aid can reach the Yemeni people in need in a timely manner. We are grateful to the United Nations, the World Health Organization and countries of the region for their collaboration in the launch of the medical air-bridge, and we are looking forward to a more regular operation of those flights. We welcome OCHA's humanitarian commitment toYemen amid concerns on operation hindrances. In that connection, we urge all parties concerned to facilitate the inspection and maintenance of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, in accordance with resolution 2511 (2020), in order to avert possible severe consequences. Thirdly, the United Nations and countries of the region should continue to encourage the Yemeni parties to engage in constructive dialogue. In this regard, we commend the organization of the consultative meeting of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Yemeni public and political stakeholders in Amman, Jordan, two weeks ago. We fully support the work of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the Redeployment Coordination Committee, and we call on all parties in Yemen to further cooperate with UNMHA so that it can effectively carry out its mandate. Finally, let me join other members of the Council in expressing our gratitude to Ambassador Karen Pierce for her excellent contribution to the work of the Council. Her dedication and constructive engagement truly set an example for new members like us. As the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, I would like to express our thanks for her cooperation and very strong support for Viet Nam and myself so far, and I wish her all the best in her next assignment in Washington, D.C.
