Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month of April. I also thank you for organizing this
meeting on such an important and vital subject. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/ 189), which has given us a thorough analysis
of the importance of mediation activities. We recognize
that the report was requested by the Security Council
last September, a fact that underscores the importance
the Council is placing on mediation in its overall
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security in the continuum of prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
in establishing the Mediation Support Unit and urge
continued support to it by the Council and all other
Member States, in terms of both financial and human
resources. It is also important that the work of the Unit
continue to be coordinated within the Department of
Political Affairs to ensure coherence and coordination.
We also call upon the involvement of more women to
support mediation work in the Secretariat and the field,
pursuant to resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

The role of mediation in the overall architecture
of international peace and security is now getting the
attention it deserves in relation to other aspects of the
equation, especially peacekeeping and humanitarian
response. Of course, more needs to be done by
focusing appropriate attention on the three distinct but
related areas of mediation.

Mediation has a crucial role to play in preventing
the outbreak of conflicts through the timely defusing of
simmering tensions, as indicated by early warning
systems, if they are in place. Mediation must therefore
be linked with early warning mechanisms at all levels:
national, regional and international.

The second area of mediation is in securing the
cessation of hostilities and negotiating ceasefires and
peace agreements. This role has been the most
prevalent and has been closely related to the work of
the Security Council, as it entails the eventual
deployment of peacekeeping missions. Experience has
shown that this stage demands coordinated action
between the Security Council, the good offices of the
Secretary-General and regional and local actors. The
framework for this coordinated action needs to be
strengthened through political action and capacity-
building.

Mediation should also follow through on the
implementation of peace agreements. Several peace
agreements have faltered before being implemented or
have stalled and fallen apart halfway through the
implementation stage. Mediators with different
abilities and sometimes in different combinations have
to intervene to shore up peace processes and put them
back on track. The Security Council has to be actively
engaged and must provide its needed leadership and
political leverage to rescue and resuscitate peace
processes where such faltering is taking place.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, there has been a new peace agreement
between the Government and the Congres national
pour la defense du people. In Darfur, there is a need to
negotiate a new peace agreement. We have witnessed
several peace agreements in several situations within
ongoing peace processes where the Security Council
has already deployed peacekeeping mission. Mediators
with different skills and backgrounds may be needed to
continue negotiating as the need arises within a single
peace process where several peace agreements may be
needed, involving different mediators.

The third area is related to mediators in situations
where they are acting as reserves or facilitators
in the process of peacebuilding, as in Burundi
currently. This takes the form of efforts to create
favourable environments for reconciliation, political
accommodation and related tasks to prevent post-
conflict situations from relapsing into conflict.

These are all different variations of mediation
tasks, which the Secretariat and the Security Council
need to develop and put into the form of workable
tools within the United Nations and in partnership with
regional organizations.

Tanzania has, over the years, built experience in
mediation and peace facilitation in East and Central
Africa. We have seen gaps that need to be filled by
strengthening institutional links between the Security
Council and regional and subregional institutions in
conflict resolution. The work of the Council would be
greatly improved and strengthened if the United
Nations were to invest more in political partnerships
with regional organizations, such as the African Union,
which are equipped to face the political challenges and
opportunities and which need to be supported by the
Council and the Secretary-General.

