Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
should like to thank the Pakistani presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important meeting.
It provides us all with an opportunity to update ourselves
on the situation in the Middle East, particularly with
regard to the Palestinian question. We would also like
to thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert Serry,
for the valuable report he has submitted. We also
thank Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine, for his important statement to the Security
Council.

The 29 November debate in the General Assembly
and the vote on resolution 67/19, giving Palestine
non-member observer State status, was an important
step in achieving its legitimate ambitions (see A/67/PV.44). The resolution reflects the unanimous
desire and support of the international community to
see a Palestinian State that is independent within the
framework of the two-State principle. That historic
event shows that there is no alternative to peace and
stability and to open new horizons for the people of that
region. However, Israel, the occupying Power, still does
not understand that this is an opportunity for peace,
which is founded on this international decision. Israel
has categorically rejected that resolution and the new
State that it represents in the region.

That resolution opens the way to genuine peace
negotiations. However, Israel has not only refused but
has defied the international community by imposing
collective punishment on a large scale, withholding tax
and customs revenues and continuing its occupation.
Because of its negative reaction in response to the
Palestinian step, which has been supported by the
majority of the international community, Israel is
showing the world that it does not want peace. The
Israeli response in the face of this international
consensus was to continue to build settlements and to
step up the building of new ones.

The Israeli decision has negative implications for
peace and does not provide the necessary conditions
for negotiations. Israel is continuing to neglect its
international commitments and is trying to change
the facts on the ground. The decision of the Israeli
Government to build new settlements is a flagrant
violation of the provisions of international law
governing the situation for occupied territories, all the
more so given that this step changes the character of
the occupied territory and threatens to fragment the
territory and foreclose the chances for establishing
a Palestinian State. Israel is trying to isolate East
Jerusalem from the surrounding Palestinian territories
of the West Bank so as to make it a Jewish city and
prevent a just and comprehensive peace from being
achieved. That is a flagrant violation of the two-State
solution that is based on international consensus.

It is our hope that in this new year and in the coming
months it will be possible to break the deadlock, instead
of merely managing the crisis as has been the case in
previous years, and to focus attention on resolving it.
There should be a new dynamism so as to deal with the
real issues underlying the conflict.

It is our hope, in this context, that the leading role
of the Security Council, and of the United Nations as
a whole, will come into play; it has the responsibility
under the Charter to maintain international peace and
security. It is our hope that the positive change in the
position of a number of States, including members
of the Security Council, will continue and that this
change will promote the voice of international legality,
which we hope to see come into play so as to enable the
Palestinian people to enjoy their historical, legitimate
right to establish their own independent State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

