Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): First of all, I
should like to congratulate you, Madam President, your
country and your delegation for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I also wish to express my appreciation to you
and the other members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to address this Chamber on a matter that is
of grave importance to us all - the peace, security and
stability of the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his useful briefing, which set
the tone for today's open debate.

At the outset, the Philippines associates itself
with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, but at the same time it
wishes to stress certain points.

The timing of the Security Council's open debate
today is indeed apt and well chosen. As we enter the
new year, with renewed hope and resolve to work
harder to attain international peace and security, there
is no better choice than to start by discussing the
situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine, inasmuch as it is one of the most sensitive
and long-running issues on the agenda of the United
Nations. Since it has become a permanent fixture of the
United Nations agenda, however, there is a danger that
we sometimes deal with the issue in a ritualistic and
mechanical manner, thereby losing the urgency and
relevance that it truly deserves. Despite years of debate
and the substantial energy and resources spent, the
resolution of this problem still remains elusive. I think
it is time to change gear, and give peace and security in
that region a chance.

In our highly interdependent and networked
world, geographical distance and remoteness no longer
isolate countries and regions from developments in
others. The Middle East is a major source of oil and a
big market for the exports and services of many
countries, including the Philippines, and its stability
and progress are essential for world peace and security.
More than 2 million of my countrymen and women live
and work in the Middle East. That is why the
Philippine Government has an additional reason for
attaching the utmost importance for peace and security
to prevail in that troubled land.

The Road Map to peace between Israel and
Palestine has so far been hampered by obstacles and
difficulties. Time and patience seem to be running out.
If this issue is not addressed, it could unfortunately
lead again to greater tension, hostility and, worse,
armed conflict. This impatience is reflected by the
growing View that if Israel and Palestine cannot come
to terms, then the outside world or other forces that
may come into play have no choice but to impose
peace on them. But we know all too well, and history
teaches us, that durable and long-lasting peace must
come from within and not from without.

The Philippines shares with the Palestinian
people their legitimate aspirations to achieve justice,
peace and freedom. For many years, the Philippines
has joined in the global clamour for the establishment
of a Palestinian homeland to help alleviate the dire
situation of the Palestinian people. In that regard,
similar to other like-minded States, the Philippines
considers the two-State solution to be an effective
answer to the peace problem. The Philippines has also
repeatedly expressed its support for the complete and
unconditional lifting of the blockade imposed by the
State of Israel on the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially Gaza. The embargo is counterproductive,
and it serves only to collectively punish the hapless
civilians, particularly women and children, in Gaza.

As the international community anxiously awaits
any breakthroughs in the peace talks between Israel
and Palestine, I wish to point out one important
building block, or a direction, of the foundation for
long-lasting peace and stability in the Middle East. I
am referring to the goal of making the region free of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction.

One of the tangible achievements of the
successful 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) regarded how to make progress on the
1995 Review Conference resolution on the Middle
East, which called for the establishment of a zone free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. The Philippines views the road to the
establishment of this nuclear-free zone as a critically
important confidence-building measure. We are
convinced that the process can coexist with the
ongoing peace process or initiatives, including those
being undertaken by the Quartet for the region.

The Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol.I)) states:

"The Conference reaffirms its endorsement
of the aims and objectives of the Middle East
peace process, and recognizes that efforts in this
regard, as well as other efforts, contribute to, inter
alia, a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
as well as other weapons of mass destruction."
(Part 1, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions, section IV, para. 2)

In that regard, I wish to highlight key points agreed to
at the 2010 NPT Review Conference with regard to the
1995 resolution on the Middle East.

First is the convening by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the sponsors of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, in consultation with the
States of the region, of a conference in 2012, to be
attended by all States of the Middle East, on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction.

Second is the appointment by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the sponsors of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, in consultation with the
States of the region, of a facilitator with a mandate to
support the implementation of the 1995 resolution by
conducting consultations with the States of the region
in that regard and undertaking preparations for the
2012 conference.

Third is the designation by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the sponsors of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, in consultation with the
States of the region, of a host Government for the 2012
Conference.

Time is ticking away and 2012 is just around the
corner. The Philippines therefore urges the Secretary-
General and the three depository States to carry out the
tasks that have been assigned to them by the 2010 NPT
Review Conference with haste, while at the same time
taking the utmost care to ensure that these tasks are
done well and, of course, in consultation the countries
of the region, as stated in the consensus Document.

The 2012 conference presents a rare chance to
show the seriousness and goodwill of stakeholders. In
essence, all concerned countries must be well prepared
to make peace or to give a chance for peace in that
region. The conference is a fresh start for all. Once
again, I urge all concerned Member States to seize this
rare opportunity.

