Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): The Philippines
congratulates Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month and appreciates
its initiative in organizing today's debate on children
and armed conflict.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

As a manifestation of the steadfast commitment of
the Philippines to the protection of children, especially
in situations of armed conflict, our Government
continues to take steps in that area with the cooperation
and support of various agencies in Government, civil
society and our partners in the United Nations system.
Last year, after 40 years of bloody conflict and 16 years
of a difficult peace process, the Government concluded
peace negotiations with the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front (MILF) and signed a comprehensive agreement on
the Bangsamoro. Draft legislation designed to become
the legal framework and governing law for the new
Bangsamoro entity is now under consideration in the
Philippine Congress. Last Tuesday we implemented the
first phase ofthe decommissioning of MILF combatants
and their firearms. With those confidence-building
developments, we now have lasting peace in the
southern Philippines within our grasp, so that our
children may wake each day and end each day in a safe
and peaceful environment whether they are at home, at
play or at school.

Council members will recall that in 2009 the MILF
signed a United Nations action plan aimed at addressing
the issue of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces'
recruitment and use of child soldiers. That agreement
was renewed in 2013, and UNICEF's child-protection
specialist based in the southern Philippines remains
confident that the MILF will continue to cooperate
in order to secure its removal from the list of groups
that exploit children in armed conflict. UNICEF has
also completed its orientation and training on child
rights across 31 MILF base commands and seven
front commands in Mindanao for Bangsamoro Islamic
Armed Forces commanders and troops. We hope that
the second phase of the action plan, which seeks to
implement a communication campaign, will get under
way soon. Other activities under the action plan, such
as ensuring the United Nations unhindered access for
verification purposes and separating former MILF
combatants found to be under 18 years of age, will also
continue.

In his report (S/2015/409), the Secretary-General
notes a decline in cases of child-soldier recruitment in
the Philippines, from 20 in 2013 to seven in 2014. The
Philippine Government is continuing to work hard to
bring that number down to zero. On behalf ofthe armed
forces of the Philippines, it has submitted a strategic
plan on preventing and responding to grave children's
rights violations in situations of armed conflict, as well
as a draft circular on child protection during armed
conflict situations. It has also issued guidelines for
the conduct of activities by the armed forces of the
Philippines inside or within the premises of schools and
hospitals.

In that context, the Department of Education
of the Philippines has implemented its guidelines
on the protection of children during armed conflict
by requiring school heads, as well as teaching and
non-teaching personnel, to report within 24 hours any
information about or incident of grave child-rights
violations to the Council for the Welfare of Children,
providing information on the date, time and location
of the incident, the name, number, gender and age of
the children affected and the armed groups involved.
We have also established an inter-agency committee
on children in armed conflict, which serves as a
monitoring, reporting and response system on grave
child-rights Violations in situations of armed conflict.
The team works with the United Nations Development
Programme as part of the technical working group of
the United Nations country task force on monitoring
and reporting grave child-rights violations in armed
conflicts.

The Philippines remains committed to keeping our
children safe and will continue to engage and cooperate
with all stakeholders in the prevention of grave child-
rights violations, as well as in monitoring, reporting
and responding to such violations committed in the
context of armed conflict.

