Mr. Dauth (Australia): We very much welcome
the opportunity today to address this open meeting of
the Security Council on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) - the 1267 Committee - and, by doing
so, to show our support for the important work of the
Committee in preventing threats to international peace
and security caused by terrorism. We particularly want
to thank Ambassador Mufioz for his comprehensive
and informative briefing and for his commitment to
making the Committee's work more transparent. The
fight against terrorism is a collective endeavour, and it
is substantially assisted by the ready availability of
information such as that provided by Ambassador
Munoz this morning.

The bombings in Bali on 12 October 2002
exposed Australians to the horror of terrorist attacks on
our own doorstep. But Australia stands defiant against
the perpetrators of those crimes in their efforts to foster
fear. We remain committed to ensuring that justice
prevails and to preventing further attacks.

The recent terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia and
Morocco have shown us that Al Qaeda and associated
entities remain a threat to international peace and
security. Terrorists also continue to challenge the peace
and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. In these
circumstances, we acknowledge the continuing
importance of the work of the Committee.

We recognize, too, the importance and utility of
the consolidated list, which provides a valuable
database of the Committee's decisions on the listing of
individuals and entities associated with the Taliban and
with Al Qaeda. Australia used that important
mechanism to join with 50 other countries in listing the
J emaah Islamiyah terrorist group following the terrorist
attacks in Bali last year.

We welcome the report of the Monitoring Group
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1455 (2003) and the focus it has provided on the
continuing threat posed by Al Qaeda. As the Group's
report notes, major challenges for the Committee lie
ahead. Ensuring that charities, non-conventional forms
of money transfer and the proceeds of crime do not
support terrorist activity is a particular problem that
still need to be addressed.
It is also important for the 1267 Committee to
work effectively with other arms of the United Nations
system to ensure a comprehensive and integrated
approach to preventing further terrorist attacks. In that
regard, we welcome the closer working partnership
between the 1267 Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, as encouraged by resolution
1455 (2003) and as is being so energetically pursued by
the Chairmen of the two Committees, Ambassadors
Mufioz and Arias.

Australia, for its part, continues to attach a very
high priority to the fight against terrorism. We have
created the position of Ambassador for Counter-
Terrorism to promote, intensify and coordinate our
international counter-terrorism efforts. Australia has
also recently streamlined its procedures for freezing
terrorist assets, pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We
are working bilaterally through our network of counter-
terrorism arrangements, regionally through forums like
the Association of South-East Asian Nations Regional
Forum and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) forum, and multilaterally in the United Nations
system to ensure a future free from terrorism.

The 1267 Committee is assured of Australia's
continuing support for its work in the period ahead.

