Ms. Rice (United States of America): Today, the
Security Council has responded to the Libyan people's
cry for help. The Council's purpose is clear - to

protect innocent civilians. On 26 February, acting
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the
Security Council demanded a halt to the violence in
Libya and enabled genuine accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity by referring the
situation to the International Criminal Court. We
adopted strong sanctions that target Libya's leadership.
We have also strongly supported all aspects of United
Nations Special Envoy Al-Khatib's mandate. But
Colonel Al-Qadhafi and those who still stand by him
continue to grossly and systematically abuse the most
fundamental human rights of Libya's people.

On 12 March, the League of Arab States called on
the Security Council to establish a no-fly zone and to
take other measures to protect civilians. Today's
resolution is a powerful response to that call and to the
urgent needs on the ground. The resolution demands an
immediate ceasefire and a complete end to violence
and attacks against civilians. Responding to the Libyan
people and to the League of Arab States, the Security
Council has authorized the use of force, including the
enforcement of a no-fly zone, to protect civilians and
civilian areas targeted by Colonel Al-Qadhafi, his
intelligence and security forces, and his mercenaries.

The resolution also strengthens enforcement of
the arms embargo and bans all international flights by
Libyan-owned or operated aircraft. The resolution
freezes the assets of seven more individuals and five
entities, including key State-owned Libyan companies.
The resolution empowers the newly established Libyan
sanctions committee to impose sanctions on those who
violate the arms embargo, including by providing
Al-Qadhafi with mercenaries. Finally, the Council
established a panel of experts to monitor and enhance
short- and long-term implementation of the sanctions
on Libya.

The future of Libya should be decided by the
people of Libya. The United States stands with the
Libyan people in support of their universal rights.

