Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): First of all, I would
like to express my delegation's gratitude to you, Sir,
for having convened this important meeting and for
your contribution to putting the HIV/AIDS issue high
on the agenda of the Security Council. I would also
like to express our thanks to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and to Mr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on AIDS (UNAIDS), for
their comprehensive and enlightening statements.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General, which is in itself a
proof of the importance of the issue we are discussing
today.

The massive and rapid spread of HIV/AIDS is
truly alarming and a cause for justified concern. The
epidemic causes tremendous human suffering,
especially in those countries that lack sufficient
resources for treatment, care and support. The
HIV/AIDS epidemic is not just a health-care issue. It
truly has demographic, economic, social and ethnical
dimensions. The AIDS pandemic has become the cause
of a severe development crisis that is destabilizing
entire societies and posing threats to peace and
security. My delegation fully recognizes - as reflected
in Security Council resolution 1308 (2000) - that
there is a clear link between the AIDS pandemic, peace
and security. Movements of people resulting from
conflict fuel the spread of HIV/AIDS, but the epidemic
itself also causes social and economic crises that can
threaten stability and security. Fighting the spread of
HIV/AIDS is therefore linked to preventing armed
conflict. It needs the coordinated response of all
relevant United Nations bodies, including the Security
Council.

Resolution 1308 (2000) addresses not only
peacekeepers' health and the dangers of spreading the
disease, but also their advocacy role as promoters of
responsible behaviour. Bulgaria is convinced that
peacekeepers can contribute to the work of prevention.
We welcome the ongoing discussions in the United
Nations system on the ways in which conflict and
humanitarian situations sometimes bring about an
elevated risk of HIV transmission for refugees and host
communities, as well as for the personnel of the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations in the
field.

In this regard, we agree that there is a need for
continued efforts to be made to implement the plans of
action on HIV/AIDS that already exist. My country
fully supports the goals set in the Declaration of
Commitment adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth special session on HIV/AIDS. Bulgaria
has implemented the major objectives of the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS for 2003
and has pledged its political, civil and personal
commitment to attaining the goals set for 2005 and
2010.
Bulgaria is fortunate to rank among the countries
with low HIV/AIDS prevalence. Nevertheless, the
Bulgarian Government has clearly shown that there is a
strong political will and readiness to undertake the
necessary actions to maintain the low HIV/AIDS
prevalence in the country. Furthermore, my country
considers national strategies to be crucial to coping
with HIV/AIDS and encourages the development of
long-term national strategies that include education,
prevention, voluntary and confidential testing, and
counselling. In 2001, the Bulgarian Government
adopted a national strategy and a national action plan
for prevention and control of AIDS and sexually
transmitted diseases for the period 2001-2007.

We are well aware that national Governments
have the primary responsibility for ensuring that
peacekeepers are adequately trained and educated. In
that respect, I would like to point out that Bulgarian
military personnel receive regular training on all
aspects of HIV/AIDS prevention. It is an established
practice in Bulgaria to offer peacekeeping personnel
voluntary and confidential counselling and testing.
Bulgarian peacekeepers in the field are offered
counselling and testing. Furthermore, focal points on
HIV/AIDS are included for Bulgarian peacekeeping
personnel. In 2003, a series of information campaigns
on HIV/AIDS have been held for the Bulgarian armed
forces. Bulgarian military personnel have taken part in
education programmes on HIV/AIDS strategic
planning in Monterrey, in the United States. In this
regard, we would recommend that all nations that
contribute troops to United Nations peacekeeping
operations offer voluntary and confidential counselling
and testing, both pre- and post-deployment.

My delegation commends UNAIDS and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
efforts in the area of HIV/AIDS and peacekeeping. We
note with satisfaction the broad approach taken by
UNAIDS and the Department in addressing the
HIV/AIDS problem with respect to military and
civilian peacekeeping personnel, as well as to
humanitarian workers and vulnerable populations.
Bulgaria strongly supports the aforementioned
approach and urges all United Nations bodies to
cooperate fully and at all levels with UNAIDS and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

The HIV/AIDS pandemic can be addressed
appropriately only if the entire United Nations system
acts on a global scale and in a holistic manner.
Openness, global solidarity and firm political
leadership are essential if we want to bridge the gap of
stigma, discrimination and denial. The world is now
facing a formidable challenge. It must stand up for the
protection of human rights and dignity to successfully
combat the pandemic of AIDS, a disease that is
undermining the economic development and social
prosperity of every affected nation.

