Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths for his briefing on the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs a, for his briefing. Russia very much commends the courageous efforts of all humanitarian agencies working in the country. We would also like to thank Ambassador Rhonda King for her briefing on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). We continue to closely follow the situation in Yemen. It is volatile. There are glimmers of hope for progress in the settlement process, as well as signs of escalating violence anda perpetuation of the crisis. Sides in Yemen are again in a stage of heated confrontation. We are concerned that stabilization efforts have stalled. Whereas at the beginning of the year we welcomed with hope the decrease in hostilities and airstrikes, today we have to note that armed hostilities have once again intensified, with dire humanitarian consequences. We are convinced that there can be no military solution in Yemen. We agree with Mr. Griffiths and the Yemeni parties that the final settlement formula should be based on mutual compromise. We support the Special Envoy in all the tracks of his mediation efforts. We welcome peace initiatives to help assist the Yemeni parties in their dialogue. We consider it important for the United Nations to play the central role in the settlement of the conflict and for that role to be respected by the parties. The guiding principle should be that of respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. We note the steps taken by Saudi Arabia to transform the active phase of the conflict in Yemen into the negotiations phase. We consider it importantand necessary for all parties to strictly uphold its provisions. Let us not forget that the unity of Yemen is the achievement of the Yemeni people. We are convinced that the way forward to solving problems is possible through an inclusive dialogue among all Yemeni forces without exception. As is the case with other regional conflicts, we believe that the Yemenis themselves should determine the future of their country, taking into consideration the opinions of all segments of society. We will continue to provide assistance to United Nations mediation efforts in Yemen, including through our contacts with all political forces in the country and interested parties, both in our national capacity and as a permanent member of the Security Council. Our work is facilitated by the historical friendly relations that Russia has with Yemen and its people. We note the agreement between the parties to start a medical air bridge to transport Yemenis needing medical care. We deem this effort to be an important humanitarian initiative that not only provides practical assistance to a population in need but also can serve to be an important channel to build trust between the parties. Another similar measure was the progress achieved in the agreements on prisoner exchanges, which need to be built on. The parties to the conflict need to continue to move in that direction. We welcome the efforts of everyone involved in ensuring those agreements are successful. At the moment there is a ceasefire in the Al-Hudaydah region. There is the continuing practice of entry of commercial ships and the unloading of their cargo in that harbour. We must not allow the positive operation undertaken in Al-Hudaydah, which was the result of long-term and gruelling effort, to fall victim to another wave of destabilization. The international community must continue to make collective efforts to put the conflict on a political track and provide the necessary assistance to the Yemeni people, who are in dire need of humanitarian assistance. We are convinced that such a development will serve not only to benefit Yemen but to ensure security for all neighbouring States, because terrorist groups are the only beneficiaries of armed hostilities in Yemen. We call on all Yemenis to pool their efforts to fight the terrorist threat. In April we will mark the fifth anniversary of the start of the bloody war in Yemen. The conflict needs to be brought to an end. This tragic date should encourage all Yemeni parties to engage ina comprehensive political process and find a compromise on a set of fundamental conflict-settlement issues, as Mr. Griffiths just outlined in his briefing. We agree with the Special Envoy: all of these matters can be solved with the necessary political will. The Yemeni parties must find the strength to come together for the sake of the future of their own State in order to forge a modern, prosperous State that provides opportunities for sustainable development. The five-year-old war in Yemen must also inspire external players to consolidate their positions and more actively assist the Yemeni parties and the United Nations in finding a compromise. Instead of pointing fingers, it is better to return to impartial diplomatic work, specifically to support the work of Mr. Griffiths in both word and deed. We consider it harmful and counterproductive to employ anti-Iranian rhetoric. In that regard, we would like to remind Council members of resolution 598 (1987), which requested the Secretary-General, in cooperation with States of the region, to develop a security architecture in the region. We therefore draw attention to the relevant Russian concept for collective security in the Persian Gulf region. We urge everyone to study it and develop joint measures to de-escalate tensions in the region. French diplomats have proposed constructive ideas. We should take a closer look at them. We are all well aware of the proposal made by the leadership of Iran. A creative synthesis of those ideas would enable us to establish a genuine basis for international cooperation. Starting such cooperation would help to stop the war in Yemen, improve the situation in the Persian Gulf and establish dialogue between Arab States and Iran. We see no alternative to such an approach.
