Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretaries-General Herve
Ladsous and Ameerah Haq for their thorough briefings.

The theme of inter-mission cooperation remains
very topical. We support the desire of the Secretariat to
be prepared for the last-minute deployment of missions
and negative developments in the field, especially
when, in many areas of support to peacekeeping
operations, there truly is a shortage ofresources. We all
remember the Syrian experience, when United Nations
observers had to be deployed on short notice. We
thank the Secretariat for its promptness and the troop-
contributing countries for their flexibility in providing
personnel.

It is our View that United Nations peacekeeping
operations must have enough of their own resources
to execute their mandates. In that regard, the relevant
United Nations bodies must adopt a responsible
approach. The Security Council must give missions
realistic mandates; the Secretariat must make balanced
proposals on the composition of missions, based on
objective assessments and forecasting of developments
in the field; and the Fifth Committee must meet
resource requirements by approving sufficient but not
inflated budgets.

Inter-mission cooperation, as a temporary
mechanism, has shown its effectiveness in a number
of emergency situations. However, broad application
of those methods, and especially the standardization
of parameters of such cooperation, requires a number
of political, legal and financial conditions to be met.
Among those, we would include the consent of the
receiving country for a change, even a temporary
change, of the configuration of an international
presence, the preparedness of the troop-contributing
countries for troop redeployments to other missions,
and the harmonization of existing United Nations
administrative and budget procedures.

Of great significance is the consent of the Security
Council to the transfer of personnel and resources.
Strengthening the military component of one mission
and weakening another in fact means altering their
mandates. The necessary legitimacy for such processes
can be granted only by Council decision.

Inter-mission cooperation has already been
consolidated in existing practices of work in
peacekeeping operations. However, in order to move
forward, we need a detailed work-up of all general,
non-specific parameters of inter-mission cooperation
as well as inter-State coordination of them in the main
United Nations bodies.

From the political and operational standpoints,
it is important to calculate all possible scenarios for
developments in countries where those missions are
deployed. Every peacekeeping operation must be
prepared at any time to fully execute its mandate. There
should be no threat to the safety of the Blue Helmets.
Indeed, in the majority of cases, peacekeepers and
equipment will be redeployed into even more tense and
dangerous circumstances.

With respect to logistical support of missions,
relevant reform proposals must not have an impact
on the quality of services provided by peacekeeping
operations. The desire to optimize the use of resources
or to broaden opportunities for their more flexible
application must have a reasonable limit.

