Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French): The French delegation voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted. This resolution will make it
possible for the International Commission of Inquiry to
continue its investigations and to shed light on the
rumoured arms traffic that is poisoning the political
climate in the Great Lakes region.

The report of the Commission emphasizes the
existence of recent arms trafficking in violation of
resolutions 918 (1994) and 1011 (1995) of the Security
Council, which established an embargo against the former
Rwandan forces. There is every reason to be worried at
these revelations of events that are happening in a region
where the tensions are still running high. For that reason
it is necessary to enable the Commission to inquire into
these facts. We are aware that the very existence of this
body has had a deterrent effect on illicit trafficking in
central Africa. We hope that this resolution will prolong
this effect.

The French delegation would like to recall that from
the beginning France has done everything in its power to
provide assistance to the Commission, headed by

 

Ambassador Kassem, whose work and tenacity deserve our
praise. The idea of creating an International Commission of
Inquiry was introduced in resolution 1011 (1995) of the
Security Council on 16 August 1995, as the result of an
amendment submitted by France. We gave our full support
to resolution 1013 (1995) of 7 September 1995, which
established the Commission.

The Commission was invited by the French
Government to Paris. The results of that visit are covered
at length in the report of the Commission of 14 March
1996, and I shall not go into them now. The report
establishes the total absence of substance in the allegations
advanced by those who have not been able to provide the
slightest evidence to back up what they say.
We consider also that the Commission, if it is to
succeed, should enjoy the full cooperation of the countries
of the region. We therefore call upon those countries to act
responsibly, as requested by the resolution.

The French delegation has also heard the information
provided by the Secretariat on the funding of the
Commission. It is our understanding that it will be unable
to function unless provision is made for additional
resources. We hope that if voluntary contributions prove to
be insufficient to cover the functioning expenses of the
Commission, appropriate decisions will be taken on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee so that the
International Commission of Inquiry can successfully
conclude the mission which has been unanimously entrusted
to it today by the Security Council.

Many serious issues remain unresolved in central
Africa. First and foremost is the question of refugees. There
is also the problem of national reconciliation, which in
several countries has not been proceeding as we had hoped
it would. These two matters are related to a lack of
confidence in the entire subregion, which has given rise to
a disturbing re-emergence of violence.

Renewing the mandate of the Commission is likely to
reduce these tensions and to encourage the main actors in
the Great Lakes region to resume their dialogue to ensure
the people of central Africa the peace, security and
development that are so sorely lacking in that region.

