Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I should like to thank Ambassador Ward of
Jamaica, who successfully presided over the meetings
of the Working Group and made unremitting efforts to
achieve consensus on the draft resolution in the
Working Group. Today, on the basis of the work of the
Working Group, the Security Council has reached
consensus on strengthening peacekeeping operations.
This is an important first step in strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping operations and lays down
foundations for future actions. At present, there is a
widespread call by Member States for the
strengthening of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. However, translating the consensus for
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping operations
into action will require us to take practical and solid
measures, as will the attainment of the goals set out in
the Millennium Declaration.

The success of United Nations peacekeeping
operations depends, in the final analysis, on whether
the vast membership of the United Nations is willing to
make lasting political commitments and provide
sufficient and dependable resources and support.
Otherwise, talking about strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping operations will ultimately be no more
than empty words.

We have always supported effective measures to
overcome the problems faced by peacekeeping
operations and to improve and strengthen the capacity
of United Nations peacekeeping so as to enable the
Security Council to fulfil its responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security more
actively and effectively. For these reasons, we have
given serious consideration to and actively supported,
the relevant recommendations contained in the Brahimi
Report. I sincerely hope that those recommendations
that are realistic and feasible will be implemented as
soon as possible.

However, we also recognize that that
strengthening of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a process, and that many questions need
to be further explored, not all of which can be fully
resolved by one document, or even several. We are
prepared to continue to work towards the strengthening
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

