The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Croatia, Kenya, Rwanda and
Serbia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis Byron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: S/2010/270, which
contains the text of a letter dated 31 May 2010 from
the President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; and S/2010/259, which contains
the text of a letter dated 28 May 2010 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of those two International Tribunals.

I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson.


