Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation finds itself obliged to take the floor at the
end of the meeting to address the false information
provided by the representative of the Syrian regime,
which was an insult to my country, instead of
addressing the topic of our meeting, which is the threat
of terrorist groups - an important issue for everyone
in the Chamber.

Those lies and accusations against my Government
accusing it of funding terrorism are a repetition of the
false information that we are used to hearing from those
who speak on behalf of the Syrian regime in an attempt
to distract us from its actions. Member States well know
the paradox as we meet today to address this dangerous
issue and the reasons behind the terrorism threats in
recent years, namely, the Da'esh terrorist group. It is a
paradox to hear the representative of the Syrian regime
speaking about playing a key role in fighting terrorism,
while the regime's policies gave rise to a climate
conducive to the emergence and proliferation of Da'esh
over the past years before other responsible countries
made genuine efforts to address and eliminate that
terrorist group, which has threatened the entire world
from the territories under its control in Syria.

Were it not for the State terrorism practised by
the Syrian regime against its population and the use
of weapons against protesters, including chemical
weapons being repeatedly used against peaceful
civilians on many occasions, we would not be here
today at this meeting to discuss the threat of Da'esh and
its financing. It is unacceptable to see the representative
of the internationally illegitimate Syrian regime, which
was the main reason behind the emergence and the
proliferation of Da'esh and other terrorist groups in
Syria, such as the Al-Nusra Front and other groups that
controlled some Syrian lands, preaching to us today
about the threats of terrorism.

The representative of the Syrian regime spoke today
about Qatar's violation of Security Council resolutions.
Those accusations are a figment of the imagination.
We can no longer keep count of the United Nations
reports that document the Syrian regime's violations
of all Security Council resolutions on Syria, which
continue today. Everyone here knows that Qatar's
efforts to fight terrorism are clear for all to see, in
particular within the relevant United Nations bodies
and international anti-terrorism forums, such as the
Global Counterterrorism Forum. We have also played
a key role in the Global Coalition to Counter Da'esh.

The close cooperation of the State of Qatar with
the relevant United Nations bodies to combat terrorism
has had a significant impact and tangible results that
are in complete contrast to the destructive role played
by the Syrian regime. It is therefore quite usual to
see the representative of that terrorist regime falsely
accusing the State of Qatar after it played a key
role in establishing the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes Under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We are keen
to achieve justice and the rule of law and to protect the
rights of the victims of war crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated by both the Syrian regime and
the terrorist groups in Syria.

In conclusion, despite the failed attempts against
us, the State of Qatar will continue to play its effective
role in fighting terrorism as a responsible and effective
partner of the international community in order to
uncover all violations against international law and
all forms of terrorism that threaten the region and
the world.

