Mr. De Aguiar de Patriota (Brazil) (Spoke in Spanish): I thank the presidency of Spain for having
organized today's debate.

(spoke in English)

I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing. Brazil wishes to acknowledge the
statements made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the State of Palestine, Mr. Riad Malki, and by the
Permanent Representative of Israel. The Secretary-
General's trip to the Middle East was timely and
underlined the sense of urgency that the issue at hand
deserves.

Brazil is seriously concerned about the severe
upsurge in violence in Palestine and Israel. We call
upon the authorities of both countries to do their utmost
to halt the current escalation. It is about time for the
Security Council fully to assume its responsibilities
under the United Nations Charter and actively support
and steer the peace process towards a two-State solution.

Unfortunately, we cannot say that this tragic
deterioration was unexpected. Many delegations,
including Brazil, have repeatedly called for an end
to illegal and provocative actions, in particular
the expansion of Israeli settlement activities. The
spontaneous and mostly uncoordinated nature of the
many violent incidents does not render them justifiable.
Taking into account the present disturbing state of
affairs, Brazil deems it important that the international
community respond to the request made by President
Mahmoud Abbas by carefully examining different
modalities for international protection. We also believe
that the United Nations membership at large should
discuss alternative approaches to engage the parties in
negotiations and support avenues leading to a peaceful
solution to the conflict that is based on international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

Brazil remains convinced that effective prospects
for peace require the establishment of a Palestinian
State that is sovereign, economically viable and
territorially contiguous, side by side with Israel within
internationally recognized borders based on the 1967
lines.

The spiral of violence and destruction in
Syria continues to worsen, leading to a continuous
deterioration in the humanitarian situation, despite the
general recognition that there is no military solution to
the conflict. A genuine and inclusive dialogue based
on full respect for human rights and the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
is as urgent as ever. We reiterate our support for the
work of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura as well as
the Human Rights Council's international Independent
Commission of Inquiry on Syria, headed by Professor
Paulo Sergio Pinheiro.

Brazil condemns in the strongest terms the use of
any toxic chemical as a weapon and firmly supports the
establishment of the joint investigative mechanism by
the Security Council. The attacks against the civilian
population, including the use of barrel bombs, are
inhumane and intolerable. Brazil urges all parties to
the conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

We applaud the work done by the United Nations
agencies to help the millions of people in need and the
generosity of many countries in the region which have
been receiving the bulk of Syrian refugees. Brazil is
contributing to these humanitarian efforts. We have
issued more than 8,000 entry visas for Syrian residents
affected by the crisis and provided food and medicine
through United Nations agencies to help alleviate the
dire situation faced by refugees and displaced persons
in the region. We will continue to welcome, within our
capacity and resources, those who have had to flee their
home country and need a place to restart their lives.

We are glad that in Yemen the Government of
President Hadi Mansour has agreed to participate in a
new round of consultations, under the auspices of the
United Nations, in order to seek understanding on how
to put an end to the conflict. Brazil supports United
Nations efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating
table and engage them in the process of seeking a
diplomatic solution without any further delay.

Brazil is united by both historical and cultural ties
with Lebanon, where peace and stability must be firmly
upheld by the international community. We underscore
the instrumental role played by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, whose Maritime Task Force
has been led by a Brazilian navy admiral since 2011.

We urge all Lebanese political actors to embrace the
path of understanding and end the presidential vacuum
without further delay.

The dire humanitarian situation in Libya and
the negative impact of the Libyan crisis on regional
stability requires our continued attention. We call on
all parties to the Libyan conflict to cease hostilities and
favour dialogue by remaining engaged in constructive
political negotiations, under the auspices of the United
Nations, with a view to achieving a Government of
national accord.

