Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I, too, would
like to begin with some brief remarks about the passing
of President Yasser Arafat. We know that the
Palestinian people are today feeling a tremendous loss.
Yasser Arafat was a significant figure in the Middle
East who played an important role. He led the
Palestinians to acceptance of a two-State solution.
Negotiations are the way to achieve that. We are
determined to continue our efforts to reach that goal,
and we hope and expect that all concerned in the region
and in the international community will remain
similarly determined.

Turning to our discussion on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I should like first to associate myself
with the statement to be made later by the Netherlands
on behalf of the European Union. I would like to thank
both Lord Ashdown and the Foreign Minister of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for their very helpful, focused
briefings to the Council this morning. What they had to
say to us is a sharp reminder of just how very
extensive, detailed, delicate and painstaking the work
is to build a post-conflict State. I want particularly to
thank Lord Ashdown's team, and Lord Ashdown
personally, for his role in the significant achievements
of the past two years. Much of the progress that we
have seen and that we have had catalogued for us this
morning would not have been possible without the
drive, determination and dedication of Lord Ashdown
and his team.

Given the comprehensive nature of the two
briefings and the European Union's statement to be
made later, I would like to limit my remarks to just
four brief points. The first concerns the issue of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). The extent of the progress made in the past
two years - progress to which I referred earlier - is
reflected in the fact that two key milestones of Euro-
Atlantic integration - membership of NATO's
Partnership for Peace and negotiations on a
stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union - are within Bosnia's grasp. But as
Lord Ashdown has made eloquently clear, Bosnia and
Herzegovina's failure and, much more specifically, the
Republika Srpska's failure, to grasp the nettle of ICTY
cooperation represents a fundamental barrier to the
realization of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Euro-Atlantic
aspirations. More immediately, it represents a
fundamental barrier to membership of the Partnership
for Peace and to the opening of negotiations on a
stabilization and association agreement.

The statistic that Lord Ashdown gave us, that not
one single fugitive indictee has been arrested in the
course of nine years in the Republika Srpska, is a very
sobering one. Until the ICTY issue is resolved, the path
to the European Union and to NATO - where we
firmly believe Bosnia and Herzegovina's future lies -
will remain blocked.

The Security Council has made clear on a number
of occasions the obligation on all Member States, in
particular those in the region, to do all they can to

bring fugitive ICTY indictees - in particular
Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina - to trial in The
Hague.

I would like to say to the Foreign Minister that it
is important that Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
Serbia and Montenegro and Croatia, be in no doubt
about the importance that the Security Council attaches
to this issue.

Turning to my next point, the developing
relationship between NATO and the European Union-
led force (EUFOR), we believe that we are on track for
a smooth transition from the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) to an EU military mission, which will be led
for the first year by my country, the United Kingdom.
The remaining NATO presence will also continue to
play an important role. The rate of progress to date
reflects, among other things, the excellent relationship
between the EUFOR Commander, Major General
Leakey, and the current SFOR Commander and future
senior NATO military representative, General Schook,
and we are certain that that close cooperation will
continue to the benefit of the effectiveness of both
organizations on the ground.

The fact that NATO has made clear its continued
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina is very
important. The presence of NATO troops has been key
to all that has been achieved since 1995, and NATO
will continue to play a vital, although different, role
after EUFOR takes over the main peace stabilization
role. We should all welcome that.

I would like next to say a brief word on police
decertification. I had not intended to speak about this
matter today, but Lord Ashdown has spoken with
feeling about it. It sounds as though the United Nations
needs to get more of a grip on this issue. Lord
Ashdown spoke of the eventual phasing out of the
Office of the High Representative. We agree that he is
right to highlight the fact that the use of the Bonn
powers has evolved and should continue to evolve. In
conclusion, I would like to underline our feeling that
important changes in the role of the High
Representative and his Office should reflect progress
on the ground, rather than any preconceived idea of
what should come next. The Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board will, I know, be considering
those issues in due course.

