Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway members of
the European Economic Area align themselves with
this statement.

Allow me once again to congratulate you, Sir, for
the strong leadership Angola has shown during its
November 2003 presidency of the Security Council,
especially on African issues. I also wish to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for the
comprehensive and well-structured report of the
multidisciplinary assessment mission to the Central
African subregion which he headed in June 2003.

As appropriately noted in the report, Central
Africa is potentially one of the richest subregions in
Africa, but it also contains the largest number of States
at the bottom of almost any human development index.
Moreover, seven of the 11 countries Visited by the
United Nations mission are either in conflict or post-
conflict situations, and the subregion as a whole
continues to suffer from the proliferation of small arms
and armed groups; high unemployment among young
people, which pushes them into banditry or armed
mercenary activities; underdeveloped infrastructures;
great numbers of displaced persons and refugees; poor
human rights records; and the HIV/AIDS pandemic.

As stressed during last week's public debate on
the Great Lakes region, the European Union strongly
shares the View that the fundamental problems
affecting the Central African subregion can be tackled
only through an integrated regional approach to the
main cross-cutting issues. Such an approach requires
more effective subregional cooperation and integration
to be promoted by strengthening the mechanisms set up
by the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa, the early warning mechanism for
Central Africa and the Central African multinational
force. We are fully aware of the importance of African
ownership in that process. The coordination and
consistency of ECCAS with the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) and African Union
policies and mechanisms, as well as with other relevant
subregional organizations in the area, is also of the
utmost importance.

In addition to ensuring regional ownership within
the processes of stabilization and economic growth in
Central Africa, we must continue to mobilize
international support. While the Governments of the
region bear the primary responsibility for consolidating
peace and ensuring development, the international
community has a duty to assist them at all levels. The
European Union stands ready to perform this task.

The European Union notes with satisfaction the
recent positive developments in the main crisis areas of
the subregion, namely the Great Lakes countries, as
stressed a few days ago during the public debate.
Moreover, the quick restoration of constitutional rule in
Sao Tome and Principe after the attempted coup d'etat
in July 2003, and the partial improvement of the
situation in the Central African Republic, attest to the
fundamental role of regional organizations and the
growing determination of African leaders to promote
democratic governance and the rule of law.

The European Union is fully committed to
continue boosting the peace and stabilization process in
Central Africa. As you know, operation Artemis
succeeded in stabilizing security conditions, improving
the humanitarian situation and protecting the civilian
population of Bunia in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The rapid deployment of the European
multinational force, the first ever outside European
boundaries, we must recall, halted the dangerous
downward spiral of security conditions and helped
reactivate the peace process in that country. This
European Union-led military operation provides further
tangible evidence of the European Union's
commitment to stability and security in the Central
African subregion and on the African continent as a
whole.

On the other hand, the report stresses that in the
Great Lakes region alone, there are more than 1 million
illegal small arms in circulation and that disarmament,
demobilization and the reintegration of former
combatants are proceeding at a very slow pace. We
believe that without a comprehension regional solution
to those problems, any peace and stabilization effort
will inevitably fail in the long term. In this regard, the
European Union welcomes all national, subregional
and international initiatives to strengthen the capacities
of the Central African countries, particularly the
initiative to convene the international conference for
the Great Lakes region.

As a result of the intimate link between poverty
and conflict, the international community must help the
Central African countries enter the path of durable and
sustainable development, thereby eradicating the
economic sources of political instability, civil unrest
and conflict. Unemployment, heavy external debt and
poor infrastructure in the Central African countries can
be tackled through good governance and international
assistance.

The European Union stands ready to cooperate
with the United Nations, the African Union and
ECCAS on peace and stabilization processes and the
economic development of the Central African
subregion. We entirely agree with the report that a
global and integrated approach is needed and reiterate
our strong support to the Secretary-General for his
commitment.

