Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing today. I am also pleased to welcome to the
Council His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/675), which tallies
with much of the European Commission's own
assessment of progress in Kosovo. A central theme of
both reports, with which we agree, is that while
Kosovo has made progress, substantial reforms are still
required. Areas where Kosovo has made particular
progress this year are judicial reform and migration. In
his report, the Secretary-General notes the positive
trend of the Kosovo authorities' increased efforts to
fight organized crime, notably through coordinated
actions against human trafficking, smuggling, money
laundering and drug trafficking. The European
Commission's offer of a formal dialogue on visa
liberalization is testament to much hard work by the
Kosovo Government with respect to judicial reform
and migration. I also commend Kosovo's constructive
engagement in the European Union (EU)-facilitated
dialogue with Serbia.

But major challenges remain. The Commission's
report correctly highlights that the rule of law and
minority rights are areas where further effort is needed.
I welcome the Kosovo Government's commitment to
securing concrete progress on these issues, and its
commitment to the task of preparing for eventual EU
accession.

The Secretary-General's report notes the
continuing challenges in northern Kosovo, and the
briefing by Special Representative Zarif highlighted
very worrying events over recent days. Many citizens
there are still unable to lead normal lives. They face
high levels of crime, unemployment and insecurity. We
encourage the Kosovo Government to intensify efforts
to demonstrate its commitment to its citizens in
northern Kosovo, and the concrete benefits - for
example, in the rule of law, education and
unemployment - it is able to bring. I urge Mr. Hoxhaj
and his colleagues to pursue this with vision and
energy.

But others also share the responsibility for
addressing current challenges. It is imperative that all
actors refrain from taking any actions that threaten the
stability and security of those living in northern
Kosovo. As the Secretary-General's report notes, the
two northern crossings authorized by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in
2001 remain effectively closed by illegal roadblocks.
Those who have erected those roadblocks are
undermining the welfare of their fellow citizens and
should remove the roadblocks immediately. Let me be
clear - there can be no excuse for any attempt to
restrict freedom of movement in northern Kosovo.

Nor can there be any place for violence. We
deeply regret the injuries and loss of life in recent
months, and express our sympathies to the families of
those affected. We also condemn in the strongest
possible terms the attacks on NATO peacekeepers on
27 September, 23 November and, most recently,
28 November near Zubin Potok, where protesters used
explosives and small arms against Kosovo Force
(KFOR) troops. Two soldiers received gunshot wounds
and more than 20 others were injured as a result of
Monday's violence.

It is the responsibility of all who exercise
influence in northern Kosovo, including the
Government of Serbia, to work actively to deter
violence and restore freedom of movement. They must
also give consistent and unequivocal backing to both
KFOR and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) in the exercise of their legitimate mandates
to guarantee security and freedom of movement.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General referred to the steps taken to investigate
allegations of organized crime, including organ
trafficking, in Kosovo. The United Kingdom welcomes
the appointment of United States war crimes
Ambassador Clint Williamson as head of the EU
Special Investigative Task Force investigating
allegations of organized crime, including organ
trafficking, in Kosovo. We are also pleased that
Ambassador Williamson has already been able to visit
Pristina, Belgrade and Tirana. He and his Task Force
have the United Kingdom's full support and confidence
as they take forward their investigations in a thorough
and professional manner. We are clear that EULEX has
the appropriate authority and jurisdiction to take this
important work forward.

The EU-facilitated dialogue is crucial to the
European futures of both Kosovo and Serbia, and for
the well-being of their citizens. Regional cooperation
such as this is essential to the future stability and
prosperity of the Western Balkans. Many of the
challenges that Western Balkans countries face today,
such as organized crime, can be effectively addressed
only through close cooperation at both the technical
and political levels.

The 21 November meeting of the dialogue was a
welcome incremental step forward. Agreement was
found on the mutual recognition of university
diplomas, and constructive discussions were held on
customs arrangements and Kosovo's participation in
regional forums. Regional cooperation is an integral
part of the EU accession process. That is why the
United Kingdom welcomed the European
Commission's emphasis on the importance of
normalization of relations with Kosovo in its recent
opinion on Serbia's application for EU membership.
The United Kingdom is a firm supporter of Serbia's EU
accession; we will do all we can to support that
ambition.

There is much to welcome in the capture and
extradition of Mladie and Karadzie, which served as
historic moments for international justice and for the
region and a testament to firm leadership. Serbia's
legislative reform programme has been impressive. But
it is how Serbia chooses to respond to the
Commission's recommendations on Kosovo that will
determine the next steps on its path towards the
European Union.

Serbia must demonstrate that it is making
progress in normalizing its relationship with Kosovo if
EU member States are to be able to grant Serbia
candidate status in December. That means, among
other things, implementing fully those agreements
already reached in the dialogue, engaging
constructively with a View to securing agreements on
other issues already under discussion, and taking
concrete steps towards resolving the current tensions
and restoration of freedom of movement in the north of
Kosovo, including through cooperation with EULEX.

I referred a moment ago to the centrality of the
dialogue to both countries' futures. I echo the call by
the Secretary-General in his report for both Pristina
and Belgrade to continue to show confidence in the
dialogue. It is important that further progress be made
at the next round of talks tomorrow. We urge both
Kosovo and Serbia to work intensively and creatively
towards achieving further agreements. Compromise
and commitment will be essential.

Kosovo's progress as a viable independent State
is irreversible. Its future belongs in the European
Union along with all other countries in the Western
Balkans. My Government will continue to work
tirelessly towards that goal.

