Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I should like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing.

My delegation welcomes the progress that has
been achieved so far in Kosovo. However, we are also
very concerned about the growing confrontational
attitude in Kosovo towards the international
community, and in particular against the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). That attitude is manifested, for example, by
violations of the reserved powers of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, mostly by
Kosovo Albanian politicians, as well as by the
continued existence of illegal parallel structures within
the Kosovo Serb communities in the northern parts of
Kosovo.

We demand full respect for resolution 1244
(1999) by all sides, and we reject any attempts to
question UNMIK's authority to administer Kosovo. We
particularly condemn any attempts to force UNMIK
into any kind of so-called co-governance, as well as
any interference with the reserved powers of the
Special Representative.

The question of Kosovo's final status will be
addressed at the appropriate time and through the
appropriate process. Only the Security Council has the
power to assess the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999), and it has the final word in settling the status
issue. No unilateral move or arrangement intended to
predetermine Kosovo's status - either for the whole or
for parts of Kosovo - can be accepted.

Germany expects the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Kosovo to meet the benchmarks
set by the Special Representative, by advancing
legislation and developing policies for all Kosovans in
order to promote the economy and the development of
the social system. We therefore urge the Kosovo
leadership to guarantee minority rights, particularly the
right of freedom of movement. In Kosovo, an
environment must now be created both through
legislative and administrative acts and through public
awareness campaigns - an environment conducive to
the sustainable return of minority refugees and
internally displaced persons.

Like other delegations, we were shocked by the
news of the brutal murder of a Kosovo Serb family on
4 June. The German Government strongly condemns
those acts of violence. As I have stated in previous
meetings of the Council, no act of violence or atrocity
committed against the Kosovo Albanian population in
the past can justify violence today. Any form of violent
revenge or ethnic hatred is absolutely unacceptable. We
welcome the immediate, strong condemnation of that
act of barbarism by the Kosovo President and the
Kosovo Assembly, and the fact that 6 June, last Friday,
was designated a day of mourning in Kosovo. We
believe that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has taken the appropriate steps, and
we hope that the perpetrators will soon be brought to
justice.

Germany supports the Special Representative in
his efforts to transfer in a sustainable process non-
reserved competencies from UNMIK to the Kosovo
Institutions by the end of this year. That process of
handing over responsibilities requires a further increase
in capacity and determination on the part of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. Only then
will they be able to fulfil their new role in a
responsible and accountable manner.

We support the efforts of the Council of Europe
to present, as early as feasible, a strategy on
decentralization in order to create the basis for multi-
ethnic coexistence, with the aim of improving
integration, participation and collective rights for all
minorities, notably the Kosovo Serbs.

Germany supports the Special Representative in
initiating a trilateral direct dialogue at the expert level
with Belgrade and Pristina as early as feasible. That
dialogue should address technical, non-status-related
issues with the aim of building confidence, normalizing
relations and consolidating regional stability.

My delegation fully subscribes to the statement
that Greece will make shortly on behalf of the
European Union. We fully stand behind the European
Union's intention to confirm, at its forthcoming summit
with South-Eastern European countries in Thessaloniki
on 21 June, the European perspective for the Balkan
region. Kosovo is part ofthat process.

