Mr. Gomez-Acebo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like at the outset to thank the United States
for the opportunity to participate in this timely and
necessary meeting.

Contemporary terrorism, including in its jihadist
form, from which Spain has long and painfully suffered,
is a multifaceted and mutable phenomenon. However, it
has one defining characteristic - it is a crime against

humanity, rooted in the fanatical and absolute denial
of the very idea of human rights. The threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters illustrates the changing nature
of terrorism. It is not a completely new phenomenon,
but its current features have intensified, requiring us
to come up with urgent decisions and solutions that are
also well considered and effective yet that consistently
maintain respect for human rights.

Spain is taking up the fight against the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters in solidarity with the
countries most acutely affected, but also because Spain
itself is directly affected by the problem. My country
is experiencing this problem most immediately as a
country of origin. We have already identified at least
50 individuals who have exited our borders in order
to join terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq. We are also
aware that human trafficking networks may try to use
our territory along their routes in order to transport
foreign terrorist fighters, which would make our
country a transit point. In addition, Spain is exposed to
the security threat posed by returning terrorist fighters.
For all those reasons, we fully identify with and have
actively participated in the efforts of the international
community to address this serious problem.

First of all, Spain has actively focused on preventive
approaches aimed at preventing the radicalization that
can lead to terrorist violence, promoting alternatives
based on education and dialogue. Spainhas been applying
that approach for several years. It is at the heart of the
Alliance of Civilizations promoted by Spain, which is
now an integral part of United Nations mechanisms.
The same approach underlies other regional measures
and programmes we have encouraged, such as the
Mediation in the Mediterranean initiative.

Where we have been unable to prevent radicalization
and terrorist recruitment, we have been forced take
other measures to prevent the movements of terrorist
fighters. In that regard, we are preparing to modify
our legal statutes so that the movement of individuals
seeking to leave Spain to join terrorist groups in a third
country would be punishable as a crime under our penal
code. That is a measure that is in line with those taken
by other countries and is recommended by the codes
of best practices we are putting in place. Moreover,
Spain aims to foster information exchanges to prevent
the relocation of foreign terrorist fighters, as we have
begun to do with some neighbouring countries, as part
of a cooperation effort that has already yielded very
positive results.

Spain has always supported international
multilateral cooperation to face the great challenges
of our times, among the terrorist threat. For that
reason, my country was one of the proponents of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee and has
supported the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted in 2006.

Against that backdrop, Spain commends President
Obama for his initiative to convene this high-level
Security Council meeting. We welcome the important
resolution 2178 (2014), adopted unanimously by the
Council. We joined as a sponsor of the resolution,
and we are ready to participate with the greatest
degree of commitment in its immediate and effective
implementation.
