Mr. Butagira (Uganda): First of all, I take this
opportunity to congratulate the French Republic for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July and wish the delegation the best in
their tenure. I wish to thank the President for
organizing this very important meeting and, through
him, other members of the Council.

Before proceeding, I am compelled at this
juncture to refer to Canada's statement this morning, to
the effect that the situation in northern Uganda should
be put on the agenda of the Security Council. For
reasons best known to themselves, Canada has led a
relentless and aggressive campaign to put Uganda on
the Council's agenda, as if to do so would produce
some magic wonder. What is even more amazing is the
fact that Canada has accepted to be part of the joint
monitoring committee mechanism that is addressing
the alleged concerns of Canada - that is, improving
the humanitarian situation in northern Uganda and
promoting a lasting solution to the conflict. As I speak,
2

Uganda is engaged in peace talks with the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) in Juba. As a result, we
strongly object to this persistent and uncalled-for
campaign by Canada.

On a positive note, Uganda joins the rest of the
speakers in welcoming the appointment of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy. This came at a time when the
international community craved someone to breathe
fresh air into that Office. For Uganda, her appointment
has even more importance and significance, not only
because of the conflict that has dragged on with the
Lord's Resistance Army, but also because it marks a
new beginning of much-needed cooperation between
the Ugandan Government and the Office of the Special
Representative. She will have all the support and
cooperation from my Government, and I wish her the
best in her new assignment.

The need to protect and promote the rights of
children in armed conflict cannot be overemphasized.
Often children constitute the majority of innocent
victims of armed conflicts, wherever they may occur.
They are the most vulnerable to indiscriminate killing;
they get maimed, raped or defiled, and they are
recruited as combatants. Still others get displaced and
suffer terrible consequences.

The war instigated by the Lord's Resistance
Army in northern Uganda over the last 19 years has
been a source of concern with regard to the topic under
discussion today and to the international community.
Over the years, its method of work was characterized
by the abduction of children for use in its rebel ranks,
summary killings and various forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, such as rape and defilement.
This morning the representative of the United States
referred to those gruesome acts carried out by the LRA.

I am glad to point out that during the last couple
of years, particularly since the signing of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudanese People's
Liberation Movement, marked progress has been
achieved. For now, the threat posed by the LRA in
northern Uganda has been drastically reduced, and the
Government is now closely collaborating with the
international community to devise a mechanism that
will deal a decisive blow to it. It is hoped that the Joint
Monitoring Committee launched by His Excellency
06-44100

President Yoweri Museveni on 4 May 2006 to deal
with humanitarian and security concerns, among other
things, will go a long way towards addressing most of
the problems, such as that of children and armed
conflict.

The Government has already increased security in
the area to avoid abductions and killings and is in the
process of establishing a special unit to deal with the
remnants of the LRA. While these initiatives are going
on, the Government has embraced peace talks with the
LRA under the auspices of the Government of southern
Sudan in Juba; these talks started last week. It is our
hope that the talks will come to fruition, culminating in
the demobilization of the LRA combatants and their
reintegration into society. The Government takes
cognizance of the fact that the majority of these
fighters were abducted children, whose reintegration
into society is of paramount importance.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict visited
Uganda recently, as was mentioned this morning.
During her visit, a four-principle understanding on the
way forward on the question of recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict was reached, as a basis for
strengthening the existing legal and policy frameworks.

The Government of Uganda and UNICEF will
agree on an action plan to sensitize various
stakeholders about the national laws, international
conventions and protocols against the recruitment and
use of children; to monitor implementation of the
various national laws, international conventions and
protocols against the recruitment and use of children in
armed forces; and to remove children, if and when
found in the armed forces.

While the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General acknowledges the existing legal
framework and the fact that the Government of Uganda
has no policy to recruit and use children, my
Government reiterates its commitment to the
appropriate disciplinary action against those military
officers and officials who knowingly recruit and use
children.

With the above understanding, together with the
Joint Monitoring Committee, the institutional and legal
framework for addressing the most challenging aspects
of dealing with the question of children and armed
conflict is in place.
06-44100

Lastly, in November of 2001, Uganda ratified two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. One of them was on the prohibition of the
conscription of children into the army and the use of
child soldiers below 18 years. This is also reflected in
our Constitution, Articles 25 and 34, as well as the
Children's Act of 1996.

