Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I would like to thank
the Italian presidency of the Council for convening this
open debate and to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the adoption of today's resolution 2388 (2017), which
my country co-sponsored and which builds upon the
momentum created by resolution 2331 (2016).

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons and the African Union's Commissioner
for Peace and Security for their comprehensive
presentations this morning.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement already
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
serious violations of human rights and constitutes an
offence to the dignity and integrity of the human being.
Every year, millions of men, women and children are
victims of human trafficking for exploitation, including
slavery, forced labour, the removal of organs and
prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation.

It is a complex reality, transnational in most cases.
Trafficking in human beings is often exacerbated
in situations of conflict and in humanitarian crises
and is aggravated by poverty, gender inequality,
unemployment, weak rule of law and poor governance.
In recent years, and very acutely also some days ago,
there have been disturbing reports about realities like
slave markets that we would prefer to situate in the
darkest corners of human history. We also note with
concern that trafficking in persons, particularly women
and girls, in situations of conflict has become an
increasing trend and is often used as a war tactic.

In our world today, individuals are turned into
commodities and their inherent human dignity is wiped
out. Any intervention deemed effective must be based
on common and coordinated efforts in the fields of
prevention, awareness-raising, support and repression
at the international, regional and national levels. It is a
critical global issue that demands effective collective
action. and those responsible must be submitted
to justice.

Portugal urges all delegations that have not yet
done so to accede to and ratify the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. The
Protocol provides a broad basis for action against traffickers,
as well as protection and assistance to victims.

Portugal developed its first national plan against
trafficking in human beings in 2007, with the
involvement of the public sector and civil society. The
third national plan against trafficking is currently
being implemented and entails policy measures focused
on prevention, awareness and research, education and
training, criminal investigation and cooperation.
Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
abominable crimes against human dignity. Preventing
and punishing trafficking in human beings is crucial
to achieving a future of dignity and freedom for all our
countries and all our peoples.

