Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation pays
tribute to the men and women of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) for the
dedication with which they have successfully completed
their mission under trying conditions. We also express our
deep appreciation to the troop-contributing countries for
their commitment and invaluable service to the cause of
the peace, stability and rehabilitation of Rwanda.

As the mandate of UNAMIR finally draws to a
close, we are pleased to note the relative calm and
stability prevailing in Rwanda. While acknowledging that
the credit for this progress goes to the people of Rwanda,
who have now assumed full responsibility for their own
future, to paraphrase the representative of Rwanda,
UNAMIR's indispensable role in consolidating peace and
stability in Rwanda should not be overlooked. It is the
climate of confidence and security created by the very
presence of UNAMIR that has facilitated the rapid
economic rehabilitation and the return to normalcy
reported by the Secretary-General.

However, the improvement of the situation in
Rwanda should not be taken for granted. There is a lot to
be done if peace and stability is to take firm root and be
made irreversible. Among a number of outstanding issues
that need to be addressed, the most serious challenge
confronting Rwanda today lies in the return and
resettlement of the 1.7 million refugees sheltered in
neighbouring countries. This is a matter which requires
the firm commitment of the Government of Rwanda and
continued international support. Lasting peace and
stability will be elusive as long as the issue of refugees
remains unresolved.
We underline the vital role and responsibility of the
Government of Rwanda in fostering a climate of
confidence, security and trust so as to facilitate the safe
and voluntary return of refugees. We also consider it most
important that States act in accordance with the
recommendations adopted by the Conference on
Assistance to Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons
in the Great Lakes Region, held at Bujumbura in
February 1995, the Summit of Heads of States of the
Great Lakes region held at Cairo in November 1995 and
the follow-up conference of 29 February 1996 held at
Addis Ababa.

My delegation attaches great importance to the rule
of law, justice and security as central issues in rebuilding
the social fabric of Rwanda. In this context, we welcome
the assistance of the United Nations Development
Programme in the rehabilitation of the justice system and
the police training programme, as referred to in
paragraphs 33 and 35 of the Secretary-General's report
contained in document S/ 1996/ 149. The effective

 

operation of the International Tribunal for Rwanda is also
essential in putting an end to the culture of impunity.

Peace and stability in Rwanda will remain fragile
unless the country's socio-economic needs are properly
addressed. Given that Rwanda cannot meet this challenge
alone, we attach great importance to continued international
support for Rwanda's economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction. In this connection, the role of donor
countries and United Nations agencies is essential.

In view of those challenges of the post-UNAMIR era
confronting Rwanda, we believe that the United Nations has
a vital role to play in Rwanda even after the expiration of
UNAMIR's mandate. In this regard, we welcome the
agreement of the Rwandan Government to the establishment
of a United Nations office for the purpose of supporting
that Government's efforts to promote national
reconciliation, strengthen the judicial system, facilitate the
return of refugees and rehabilitate the country's
infrastructure. We believe that the maintenance of even a
small United Nations office will have symbolic as well as
practical significance, especially in demonstrating the
United Nations commitment to lasting peace and stability
and to the post-conflict reconstruction of the country. We
request the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements for the establishment of a United Nations
office in full consultation with the Government of Rwanda.

We also welcome the Rwandan Government's wish to
maintain the presence of the Human Rights Field Operation
in Rwanda (HRFOR) after the withdrawal of UNAMIR. We
believe the continued role of HRFOR is essential in
creating an environment of security conducive to the return
of refugees and to their resettlement.

The withdrawal of UNAMIR raises concern about the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and other
international staff serving in Rwanda. We would like to
remind the Government of Rwanda of its responsibility for
their safety and security. The protection of the personnel
and premises of the International Tribunal for Rwanda is a
matter of particular concern to all of us. My delegation
would like to request the Secretary-General also to make
the necessary arrangements to that end.

Regarding the disposition of UNAMIR's non-lethal
equipment, arising from the withdrawal of UNAMIR, we
would like to request the Secretary-General to give due
consideration to the needs of Rwanda and to exert
maximum flexibility in the application of the relevant rules
in submitting his recommendations to the General
Assembly.

Noting with satisfaction that the foregoing points are
adequately reflected in the draft resolution before the
Council, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

