Mr. Banbury: I thank members of the Council
for this opportunity to provide the Council with an
overview of operational developments related to the
Ebola crisis and of the establishment of the first-ever
United Nations system-wide mission and the first-ever
emergency health mission - the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER). This is a
unique mission designed to confront an unprecedented,
deadly and growing crisis. Since the Secretary-General
announced the creation of the Global Ebola Response
Coalition on 1 September, a number of important steps
have been taken to accelerate the response to the Ebola
crisis and to galvanize the international community,
among them the establishment of UNMEER on
19 September.

I am inspired by the leadership of President Alpha
Conde' of Guinea, President Ernest Bai Koroma of
Sierra Leone and President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of
Liberia. I am humbled by the hard work and dedication
of national and international personnel fighting Ebola
on the front lines as health-care workers, members of
burial teams, contact tracers, logisticians and many
other functions. I am grateful for the commitments by
Member States of their civilian and military personnel,
material and money. But I am deeply worried that all
of that combined is not nearly enough to stop Ebola,
which got a head start on us. It is far ahead of us, it is
running faster than us and it is winning the race. We
cannot let Ebola win, for if it wins, we the people of
the United Nations will lose so very much. We will lose
things that we cannot lose. We cannot let that happen.

The World Health Organization (WHO) advises
that the four things we collectively must do to stop the
Ebola virus are to identify and trace contacts, manage
cases, ensure safe burials and provide people with
information they can use to protect themselves. Each
of those things is critical, and each involves complex
operations on the ground. If we fail at any of them,
we fail entirely. The WHO also advises that within 60
days we must ensure that 70 per cent of infected people
are in a care facility and that 70 per cent of burials are
carried out without causing further infection. We need
to do that within 60 days from 1 October. If we reach
those targets, then we can turn this epidemic around.
The excruciating challenge is that, with each passing
day, as more people are infected and the number of
people infected grows exponentially, the absolute value
of those targets grows rapidly and thye become more
distant and more difficult to achieve.

If we do not reach the targets within 60 days and
the numbers spike, many more people will die. This
is what we are fighting for now: we are fighting to
prevent unavoidable deaths. We are fighting for people
who are alive and healthy today, but who will become
infected by Ebola and die if we do not put in place the
necessary emergency response. That is the entire focus
of everyone in UNMEER. Our plan to stop the crisis.
To do the four things I mentioned that the WHO says
we must do is the right plan for the current crisis. But
if we do not get ahead of the crisis, if we do not reach
our targets and the number of people with Ebola rises
dramatically, as some have predicted, the plan we have
is not scalable to the size of such a new crisis. We either
stop Ebola now or we face an entirely unprecedented
situation for which we do not have a plan.

To illustrate that challenge we can look at the
expected number of new Ebola infections per week at
the 60-day mark, namely, 1 December. My colleague
Dr. Bruce Aylward, of the WHO and UNMEER,
stated today that we can expect a new caseload of
approximately 10,000 people per week by 1 December.
That means that we need 7,000 beds for treatment.
Under current planning and projections, we expect
to have approximately 4,300 beds in Ebola-treatment
centres by that date. However, many of those beds have
no staff to operate them under current plans. To make
up for the gap in beds, we must build about 2,700 beds
in community care centres, or about 300 such centres.
We will also need staffto manage the facilities and care
for the people in the beds. Those staffneed to be trained
so they themselves do not fall sick, and they need to be
paid and properly equipped. Those projected numbers
also assume that all the facilities and beds will be used
to maximum efficiency, with no beds left unfilled,
regardless of the geographical location of the facility.

The disease is spreading most rapidly in urban
concentrations. Over half of the new cases will be in
one urban centre alone. We will need to provide tailored
special assistance to urban settings. The same expansion
of activity to achieve the same intended effect is true
for all the other interventions that are necessary to turn
the epidemic around. For example, we estimate that we
need approximately 15 more diagnostic laboratories
capable of processing 100 samples per day each. We
also need to go from about 50 burial teams to about
500, and we need to equip those teams with about 1,000
vehicles. The workers and the burial teams need to be
given protective suits and chlorine Sprayers, and they
need to be trained and paid. We need to do all of that
before 1 December.

With every day that passes the number of sick
people increases, creating the need for this greater
response. As time passes, we need to do more contact
tracing, and that means more trained staff with more
motorcycles and more cell phones. Time passing
means a more robust supply chain. It means more
transportation assets. It means more United Nations
international and national staff. It means more medical
support to the staff and security arrangements for them.
It means more partners on the ground. It means more
generators and laptops and bandwidth. It especially
means more money, and many more things. It means
more complex crisis management.

Time is our biggest enemy. We must use every
moment of every day to our advantage, and that is
what UNMEER is doing. Since its establishment by the
Secretary-General 25 days ago , UNMEER has set up
a headquarters in Accra and deployed an operational
presence to the three most-affected countries. We
have deployed a total of 84 international staff,
including personnel from the WHO, the World Food
Programme, UNICEF, the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Department
of Field Support, the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Public Information, the Department
of Safety and Security, the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General, the Regional Service Centre in
Entebbe, eight field missions and the United States
Centers for Disease Control. Soon we will also have
an expert from the Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention. We also have liaison officers from the
United Kingdom, the United States and Germany.

We have deployed a plane and five helicopters. We
have deployed 69 vehicles, and 140 more are coming
soon. We have put in place robust telecommunication
and Internet links. We have done all of that in record
time. Never before have I seen the United Nations, so
many ofits parts, move so fast in such a unified manner.
The Secretary-General has given clear instructions:
Move. Move fast. Do not let discussion and red tape
slow us down. I am grateful to the heads of United
Nations departments and agencies who have embraced
this approach. The United Nations system is throwing
all its might and capability into the fight against Ebola.

We have been empowered by the Secretary-General
with special authority to hire staff quickly, transfer
assets, purchase materials and take action in the best
interests of the Organization and in furtherance of our
commitment to bring the Ebola crisis to a conclusion.
More broadly, UNMEER is playing the critical role
of crisis manager. Much good and great work has
been done by national Governments, United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
civil society actors and others these past few months.
But responding to a complex crisis, especially one
that cuts across multiple national boundaries and is as
difficult and fraught with risk as this one, requires an
overall perspective, and it requires a comprehensive
operational plan.

UNMEER is working with partners to put in place
such a plan, one that sets clear objectives, identifies
all the lines of activity necessary to achieve those
objectives, assigns responsibility for each activity and
puts in place metrics and reporting systems to measure
performance. The operational plan will ensure that
no gaps are left unfilled and that scarce resources are
officially allocated to the highest priority requirements.
The plan will be in support of national efforts and
will show national authorities what support they can
expect from the United Nations and when. National
Governments will always retain ownership of the Ebola
response in their countries.

This planning process is operationally and
organizationally complex due to the multiplicity of
actors. For example, something seemingly so simple
as community care centres needs detailed planning. I
mentioned earlier that we needed to build about 300 of
them. Who will speak to the community about Ebola
and about putting a care centre in the community? Who
will build the centre? Who will staff it and who will
train the staff? Who will pay the staff and how will
they be paid? Where will the money come from? What
supplies will the centre require? How often will they
need to be resupplied? Who will deliver the supplies
and how? How will the hazardous waste be disposed
of and who will do that? What will be the source of the
clean water that is necessary for washing? Who will
test the patients in the centre for Ebola? How far away
will the testing laboratories be? How will the samples
be transported. Et cetera.

Community care centres are just one issue that
needs such detailed planning and commitment by
partners. For each major line of activity within an Ebola
response plan, there are an equal number ofvital actions
that need to be properly addressed. The operational
response is especially challenging, because we need
to put all elements of the response together correctly
everywhere. The contact identification and tracing, case
management, safe burials and community engagement
all need to be done properly wherever Ebola is. Ebola
is spread across a very broad geographical area. If we
fail in any one area, then the microscopic virus will
find that chink in our armour and continue to spread.
As long as there is a single case of Ebola anywhere in
any of the three countries, then the deadly virus is a
threat to all countries and all peoples. The very best
way to protect the people of non-infected countries is
by helping the people of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone to stop Ebola now where it is. As recent events
have shown, however, Ebola represents a risk today
to people in non-affected countries. It is urgent and
essential that all countries, especially those identified
by the WHO as highest priority and high priority, take
immediate steps to prevent the spread of Ebola to their
countries and steps to prepare themselves to act quickly
in the event of a local case to prevent further spread.

UNMEER will support the WHO and national
efforts at prevention and preparedness where
appropriate. We will also put in place a rapid response
capability with reserve stocks of equipment and
materiel and pre-identified medical personnel and
transportation assets to move quickly to the site of an
outbreak if so requested by national authorities. But
those efforts must be bolstered by bilateral assistance.

Today the United Nations lost a member of our
family when a United Nations volunteer working in the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) died of
Ebola. He is the second United Nations staff member
to have died from the disease. I am very grateful to the
medical team in Germany that worked so valiantly to
try to save his life. We all mourn his passing and the
passing of his colleague. I pay tribute to the dedication
and commitment of the members of the United Nations
country teams and UNMIL who have been working on
the front lines of the fight against this disease from the
beginning. I am deeply grateful to the United Nations
personnel who are literally flocking to UNMEER to
join this fight. We all owe a debt of gratitude to the
national and international personnel on whose bravery
and skills we now collectively depend. We also owe it
to the national personnel that they get paid a decent
wage for the work they are doing and that they get
paid on time. The world must not punish its own first
responders by stigmatization based on hysteria and a
misunderstanding of the facts of Ebola.

There is much bad news about Ebola. The good
news is that we know how to stop it. We know what
needs to be done, and we can do it. But UNMEER
cannot do it alone. The affected countries cannot do it
alone. Even the combination of all the actors now on the
ground - national and international, United Nations,
bilateral and NGOs - cannot stop Ebola by themselves.
We need more NGOs to send trained Ebola treatment
and unit managers and health workers. We need more
Governments to build and operate Ebola treatment
units and diagnostic laboratories. We need more
foreign medical teams. We need logistics and transport
support. And we need money to pay for the rapid
acceleration of the operational response. We especially
need - and we owe it to the personnel working on
the front line - reliable, high quality medical care
for any person engaged in Ebola response, including
medical evacuation where appropriate. We need all of
that urgently. The penalty for delay is enormous. The
penalty for failure is inconceivable and unacceptable.
We must act now. We must act together. We must defeat
Ebola, and we must do it fast.

