Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me to express our congratulations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are confident that you will lead
the Security Council successfully and skilfully. I should like
also to express my thanks and appreciation to Ambassador
Legwaila of Botswana, President of the Security Council
last month.

At the outset, I wish to express our appreciation to the
members of the fraternal Arab Group and to its Chairman
for this month, the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Emirates, for their request to convene this meeting of
the Security Council in order to consider the grave situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.
Further, I should like to express our appreciation to the
members of the Security Council for responding to this
request, as well as to all other Member States that have
shown interest and concern with regard to the situation.
I should like also to thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, for the interest he has expressed and for
his good offices in this regard, including his transmittal of
the letter of His Excellency President Yasser Arafat to the
Security Council, contained in document S/1996/233.
The Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem, have been enduring a very
difficult situation. Their daily suffering has increased and
become unbearable because of a set of policies and
measures adopted by Israel, the occupying Power, in
several fields.

The first field involves Israeli policy and measures
with regard to the movement of persons and goods within
the Palestinian territory, as well as movement into and out
of the territory. These policies and measures in reality
represent a siege of the Palestinian territory and the
strangulation of the Palestinian people and their economy.
The policy has various aspects, including preventing or
restricting movement between Palestinian cities and
villages within the Palestinian territory itself, including
some restrictions in the Gaza Strip. Another aspect is the
division of the Palestinian territory as a consequence of
Israel's non-compliance with the establishment of safe
passage between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip,
which, according to the 1993 Declaration of Principles,
represent a single territorial unit. Another aspect is the
imposition of restrictions on the entry of the Palestinian
people into occupied East Jerusalem, despite the special
status of that city as the religious, cultural and economic
centre of the Palestinian people.

Yet another aspect of this Israeli policy is the
closure of the Israeli border to the Palestinian people and
to Palestinian goods, as well as the prevention of the
entry of Israeli goods into the Palestinian territory or
some parts of it. These restrictions have also been applied
to goods destined for, or originating from, a third party.

The final aspect of this policy is the closure of the
borders of the West Bank and Gaza with Jordan and
Egypt respectively, or the imposition of serious
restrictions on the movement of goods and persons across
those borders.

The various aspects of this Israeli policy were
presented in detail in the letter from the Permanent

 

Observer Mission of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/1996/235). It is clear
that this policy goes far beyond preventing Palestinian
workers from earning a daily living after the many long
years of exploitation to which they were subjected by Israel
in this regard. In truth, it represents the elimination of any
possibility of creating a viable Palestinian economy,
including preventing the development of external trade and
a free market. Furthermore, this policy has amounted to
isolating the Palestinian territory from the outside world,
which has caused serious pain and suffering and has
sometimes led to the death of ill individuals and to severe
shortages of certain goods and basic necessities of life. In
addition, these measures were taken by Israel unilaterally,
without consultation with the Palestinian side, and they
were illegally imposed by military means.

The second field involves a set of Israeli measures
with multiple aspects, which began with the occupying
Power's resumption of the practice of demolishing
Palestinian homes and its threats to revert to deportation. It
also includes several incidents of political assassination
which have occurred in a number of places, including in the
territory under the control of the Palestinian National
Authority and the territories of other countries as well. Also
among these measures are Israel's continued confiscation of
Palestinian land, the continued construction of new bypass
roads to serve Israeli settlements, and the expansion of
these settlements, which all aim at the creation of more
illegal facts on the ground.

The third field basically concerns Israel's non-
compliance with some relevant provisions of the
agreements reached between the Israeli and Palestinian
sides. Perhaps the most striking examples of this are
Israel's failure to implement the redeployment of its forces
from the city of Hebron, which was scheduled to take place
by 28 March 1996; the continued detention and
imprisonment of Palestinians in Israeli gaols, despite the
agreements reached in this regard between the two parties;
the failure to officially withdraw the Israeli military
government and dissolve the civil administration following
the inauguration of the elected Palestinian Legislative
Council; and, as I have said, the failure to implement
provisions concerning safe passage between the West Bank
and Gaza to connect the Palestinian territory.

This briefly outlines the essence of the situation with
regard to recent Israeli policies and measures against the
Palestinian people. The intensity of these policies and
measures has oscillated several times. However, in the last
few weeks it has reached an unbearable level, which
constitutes a very real threat to the overall fragile
situation.

At this time, we wish to express our strong
condemnation of all these policies and measures, on the
basis that some of them Violate the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which is applicable to all the
Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including Jerusalem. These include the collective
punishment of our people. Some of them violate
provisions of agreements reached between the
Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, and they all constitute a violation of the
spirit of peace. They threaten the peace process and the
prospects for its continuation. The real issue is not the
volume or intensity of these policies, which leads some to
express satisfaction when their severity is lessened. The
real issue is the mere existence of such policies and
measures in principle and the necessity of putting an end
to them once and for all, if we wish to be consistent with
ourselves and with the peace process and its essence, and
if we want to respect the contractual obligations entered
into by the parties.

Some have said that these Israeli policies and
measures are dictated by Israeli security requirements,
particularly following the recent bombing attacks in Israel.
We understand Israeli concerns in this regard. However,
we do not agree with the diagnosis of the situation or
with the remedy prescribed for it, and we reject the basis
of these policies. Some of these measures have absolutely
no relation to security considerations. Some were in place
before the bombings, and others cannot be justified even
from an Israeli security point of View.

We believe that what is more important is a political
understanding of the matter. We believe that maintaining
security should involve the security of all parties and that
under no circumstances should one party take unilateral
measures and impose them by force. We further believe
that Israel cannot separate itself from Palestinian territory
and at the same time impose on that territory isolation
from the rest of the world, as if the territory and its
people were its hostages. In other words, if Israel chooses
separation, regardless of its reasons and despite its
obligations and commitments, Israel should bear the
consequences of that decision and accept complete
political separation at the same time. In any event, the
basis should remain commitment to the agreements
between the two parties, to international law and to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

 

Some have been saying that these Israeli measures and
policies are connected to the upcoming Israeli election and
their complexities. We are cognizant of the importance of
the elections and the various sensitivities in this regard and,
of course, we have our political preference: a preference for
the continuation of the peace process and for stability in the
region. However, we cannot accept that the suffering of our
people should become a commodity in the feverish Israeli
election period or at any other time. Once again, what is
crucial here is basic commitment to the agreements reached
between the two parties, to international law and to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Now what of the Palestinian position? Since the
Palestinian side made the peace process a strategic option
it has taken a clear position against all acts of terror and
violence. The Palestinian side has expressed its clear
condemnation of the recent bombing attacks in Israel and
of all similar operations. Likewise, the Palestinian side has
condemned terrorist acts committed by Israelis, such as the
massacres at al-Haram al-Ibrahimi and at al-Haram al-Quds
al-Sharif, and the assassination of the late Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin.

The Palestinian National Authority has chosen a clear
course towards securing Palestinian national interests in this
regard. This entails the maintenance of security, order and
the rule of law, and the barring of all illegal groups from
operating in its territories. The Palestinian Authority has
taken definitive measures to guarantee the implementation
of this course, within the resources available to it. The
Authority is doing this based on overwhelming popular
support, which was crystallized in the historic election
process conducted by the Palestinian people in January of
this year, during which our people voiced their political
choices clearly in favour of the peace process and gave a
vote of confidence and constitutional legitimacy to the
Palestinian leadership. We will fulfil our duties in exchange
for our people's confidence in order to fulfil our contractual
obligations and to preserve the peace process towards the
achievement of our national goals in building the
independent Palestinian State with Holy Jerusalem as its
capital.

At the same time, we wish to stress our belief that a
complete and absolute solution to the problem of extremism
and terrorism is linked to bringing an end to the unfair and
unjust practices against our people, to the achievement of
further political progress in the peace process and to
improvements in the living conditions and the difficult
economic situation of our people.

The peace process has indeed generated several
significant achievements, and has brought many important
changes to the landscape of the region. We believe that
we should work to maintain these achievements and that
we must not allow their destruction or the interruption of
the continuity of the process, whether as a result of
actions by those forces working against peace or as a
result of policies and measures which are not compatible
with this peace and its essence, and which cause a great
deal of harm.

We came to the Security Council because we believe
that the Council bears responsibility towards the situation
in the Middle East and towards the question of Palestine,
as a part of its permanent and continuing responsibility
for international peace and security. We believe that the
Council should not be prevented from assuming its
responsibilities and duties in this regard. The engagement
of the Security Council cannot but serve the goal of
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. It cannot but support the ongoing peace
process in the region. This would be in the same direction
as other efforts such as the Summit of Peacemakers held
at Sharm El Sheikh.

We had hoped that the Security Council would be
permitted to express an official position with regard to the
situation in the Palestinian territory. Nevertheless, despite
the lack of such an achievement, the very convening of
an official meeting of the Council is a clear indication of
the serious concern of the international community with
regard to the situation and its negative impact on the
peace process.

It has been our duty, in the light of continued Israeli
policies and measures against our people and our inability
to change the prevailing situation through the available
mechanisms provided for in the agreements between the
two parties, to bring before the Council, and through the
Council before the international community as a whole,
the true picture of the dangerous situation prevailing in
our land and to ask for help in bringing an immediate end
to this situation, in support of right and justice and in
support of the peace process and its continuation.

I cannot end this statement without mentioning the
continuing and escalating Israeli aggression against
Lebanon, which is causing great suffering to the fraternal
Lebanese people in addition to the great harm it is
causing to the Middle East peace process. We condemn
the Israeli attacks on Lebanese villages and cities,
including Beirut, the capital. We reiterate our expression

 

of solidarity with the Lebanese people in their steadfastness
and determination to bring the occupation of their land to
an end. We reaffirm the need for the Security Council to
bring an immediate end to the Israeli aggression, thus
helping towards the implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 425 (1978).

