Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative Ghassan Salame for his very
enlightening briefing and welcome his continued
efforts in the quest for a political solution, which,
needless to say, is the only way forward in Libya. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden for his
helpful briefing on the ongoing work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

For France, success in Libya depends on two
complementary requirements. We must maintain
unity within the Security Council in support of
Mr. Salame's efforts in order to strengthen the current
political momentum, while affirming that it is the joint
responsibility of all the Libyan stakeholders to assume
ownership of the political process and take their destiny
into their own hands.

On the political front, we will continue giving
our full support to the Special Representative in
his difficult task. I would like to commend his
exemplary commitment. The consultations between
the two chambers begun in Tunis in September enabled
a consensus to be reached on key points, including
reform of the Presidency Council. The progress made
in Tunis still has to be finalized in the next stages of
the action plan, and our joint support to Mr. Salame
will be crucial for that. As I have said, for the action
plan to succeed, every Libyan stakeholder has to take
on more responsibility. We encourage dialogue among
all stakeholders within the Mr. Salame's framework,
which represents the only valid mediation effort.
We hope that everyone in Libya who has clout in the
national reconciliation process will engage sincerely
and resolutely with the Special Representative in order
to implement the various stages ofhis action plan - the
review by the High Statae Council and the House of
Representatives of the Skhirat Political Agreement,
the holding of an inclusive national conference,
the preparations for elections and the adoption of
the Constitution.

In that connection, France condemns the
individual strategies that have led some key players
to hold the Libyan Political Agreement review process
hostage, as France's Foreign Minister Le Drian had the
opportunity to remind stakeholders. The international
community must exert all its influence on Libyan
officials to engage responsibly and unambiguously in
the political process. In that regard, we reiterate that
the Skhirat Agreement remains the only valid and
legitimate framework for any negotiations aimed at
completing the transition and eventually establishing
a constitutional framework and holding elections. We
must continue to hammer home the fact that there can
be no military solution in Libya. Defeating terrorism
in the country in the long term and responding to the
challenges presented by migration demands a political
solution that allows for national reconciliation and the
restoration of a State in full control of its territory.

We are very concerned about the increasing number
of violent acts and the deteriorating security situation
across Libya, from the recent strikes on Derna to the
discovery of a mass grave in Al-Abyar in the Benghazi
region. Fighting groups identified by the United
Nations as terrorists is a priority, but so is ensuring
the protection of civilians. Only the unification of
all Libyan forces will effectively combat terrorism,
secure borders and dismantle migrant trafficking
networks. That is why building a unified national
security architecture under the civilian authorities is
a top priority.

It will also be essential to address economic and
humanitarian issues as well as those on the security
front, as Mr. Salame emphasized so eloquently in
his briefing. The situation for Libyans, particularly
the middle class, is deteriorating rapidly and is not
sustainable. Libya's oil resources must remain under
the exclusive control of the Government of National
Accord and the National Oil Corporation of Tripoli,
the only legitimate authorities, in order to benefit all
Libyans in accordance with Council resolutions. We
must preserve and strengthen the sanctions regimes
within the framework of the arms embargo and the
fight against illicit oil flows in order to support the
political process. We must also put an end to the
parallel economy that Mr. Salame' called "the economy
of predation", which is fuelled by political divisions
and conflict. We reiterate that the Council must be able
to take all necessary measures against any individuals
or entities threatening Libya's stability. We must also
continue to encourage dialogue between the Presidency
Council and economic and financial institutions.

We are appalled by the deplorable treatment of
migrants travelling through Libya. While the issue
is yet another challenge for the Libyan authorities, it
is also one for the international community. France
therefore calls on the Libyan authorities to make every
effort to ensure that migrants are treated with dignity
and to strengthen officials' cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration. The
violence and abuse that has been inflicted on migrants
in Libya is intolerable. Our top priority must be to
protect human rights and combat organized crime.
Strengthening national institutions and developing
economic alternatives to trafficking are essential
to that.

Lastly, we want to stress that it is important for
Libya to fulfil its obligation to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court in handing over persons
for whom arrest warrants have been issued. That would
represent an important sign of the Libyan parties'
commitment to the fight against impunity, which
is vital if they are to preserve the confidence of the
Libyan people in their own State. The crimes that
persist in Libya must not go unpunished. That is one
of the necessary conditions not only for justice but also
for reconciliation and peace.

In conclusion, on behalf of France, I would like
to stress how urgent it is to continue implementing
Mr. Salame's action plan, and all our joint efforts
should be geared to that. It is in the best interests of
Libyans, as well as the international community,
to work for national reconciliation and a political
consensus. Our unity and common commitment
are more necessary than ever for achieving that and
completing the various stages ofthe action plan. In that
context, it will be important to maintain the resources
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya so that
it can effectively discharge its mandate.

