Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In these unconscionable activities in flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is exceeding all
limits. Every day we hear reports of further civilian
casualties and of destruction of civilian structures, social
and economic infrastructure and mass-communications
facilities in Yugoslavia. All norms of international law are
being flouted.
On 7 May we witnessed a new tragedy: a NATO
strike on the Embassy of the People's Republic of China
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Some of its
personnel were killed. Serious material damage was done
to the mission.

Russia expresses its deepest condolences to the
Government of China and to the families of the victims
of the NATO strike. We are outraged by this barbaric
action. We are outraged and demand an immediate
investigation. The Security Council cannot let this go
without consequences.

By now it is clear to everyone that NATO's military
adventurism bears absolutely no relation to efforts to
protect the civilians in Kosovo and to prevent a
humanitarian crisis. In fact, it is quite the contrary: the
fate of the Kosovars has become entirely incidental, and
the humanitarian banner is being used as a cover for
NATO's attempts to destroy the present world order,
which is based on respect for international law and for the
Charter of the United Nations.

This, in fact, is the big picture, not the fact that one
single person is responsible for all of this. How many
people must be killed, how many people must be left
homeless, how many countries must be destabilized in
order to punish one single person?

We appeal to the members of NATO to think before
it is too late and to immediately halt their military action
which has already brought such untold suffering to
hundreds of thousands of people, created a humanitarian
catastrophe and thrown Europe backwards into the distant
past.

It is essential to shift immediately to a political
settlement, as was stated once again on 7 May by the
Secretary-General. This is what Russia has advocated
from the very beginning of the crisis in Kosovo. We have
advocated a peaceful settlement within the context of the

 

United Nations, and the Russian leadership has been doing
all it can to work towards that end.

This goal can and must be reached. However, a
necessary prerequisite is halting the NATO strikes
immediately.

