The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing and offer of support from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.

Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): The
Conference e'piscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO)
sincerely thanks you, Madam President, for having
invited it to brief Council members on developments
in the electoral process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This demonstrates the confidence of
the Security Council in the Conference e'piscopale
nationale du Congo. CENCO welcomed the invitation to
participate in today's meeting, which is very important
to the country in its quest for a peaceful solution to
the sociopolitical crisis that began in 2016. That is why
CENCO eagerly seized the opportunity to brief the
members of the Security Council on developments in
the electoral process under way in our country.

CENCO has duly noted the significant steps taken
in the electoral process, such as the filing of candidacies
for the presidential and legislative elections. Overall,
the candidate nominations took place in a peaceful
climate and a patriotic spirit, with the exception of the
nomination of Mr. Moi'se Katumbi. With regard to his
nomination, we encourage the Government to respect
the New Year's Eve agreement.

The appointment of candidates for the presidential
election by the Majorite presidentielle was another
positive step. CENCO commends the President of
the Republic, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the political stakeholders and the people
of the country as a whole for having contributed to the
successful completion of that step, which facilitates
peaceful dynamics at the highest level of the State.

The Government is committed to financing the
electoral process. CENCO encourages the Government
to continue financing to the end of the process within
a time frame that will guarantee the effective holding
of the elections on 23 December. Nonetheless, our
current joy will have been illusory and fleeting if the
ongoing electoral process does not lead to the holding of
credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections,
because ifthe elections are biased we will remain mired
in crisis. We run the risk of such an outcome if we do
not take into account the following concerns: first, the
lack of clarification of the situation of the millions of
people who have been registered without fingerprints;
secondly, the lack of consensus concerning the use of
voting machines; and thirdly, the failure to implement
the important political de-escalation measures
stipulated within the New Year's Eve agreement.

In view of the aforementioned facts, CENCO
reiterates the following recommendations to the
Independent National Electoral Commission and to
the Government.

First, the provisional list of registered individuals
should be published as soon as possible so that the
Congolese people can be assured of the validity of
individuals genuinely registered without fingerprints.

Secondly, consensus on the use of voting machines
should be sought in order to promote the holding of
tripartite talks between the Independent National
Electoral Commission; the Majorite' presidentielle,
which is now called the Front commun pour le
Congo; and the opposition, including national and
international experts.

Thirdly, the New Year's Eve agreement should be
fulfilled, inter alia, through the implementation of the
remaining de-escalation measures aimed at preventing
the misinterpretation of the law and the manipulation
of justice to arbitrarily exclude certain candidates from
running in the elections. Non-inclusive elections would
be an obstacle to the process of achieving peace in
the country.
Fourthly, the observation of the elections by national
and international organizations that have relevant
experience and express their wish to participate in the
electoral process on 23 December should be facilitated.
That would demonstrate that we have nothing to hide
throughout the electoral process. The credibility of the
elections depends to a great extent on the observation
of those elections by national and international groups
that are interested in doing so.

CENCO intends to contribute to the observation
of the coming elections and hoprd to deploy 1,026
observers over the long term and 40,000 observers
over the short term. It is counting on the support of the
Independent National Electoral Commission to accredit
all of those observers, who will be well trained, and to
facilitate their important work, which will undoubtedly
contribute to reducing tensions following the elections.

CENCO is very much counting on the involvement
and commitment of the international community,
in particular the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, to help the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to peacefully overcome the
crisis by respecting the stipulations of the New Year's
Eve agreement.

The President: I thank Monseigneur Utembi for
his briefing.

I now give the floor to Ms. Furaha.


