Mr. Samvelian (Armenia) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to say how pleased we are to
see Luxembourg presiding over the Security Council,
and to express our gratitude to you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate on an issue that is so
important to the United Nations and its Member States.
We are also grateful to Luxembourg, and its Permanent
Mission in particular, for launching the "Children, not
soldiers" campaign.

(spoke in English)

My delegation would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Anthony Lake, the Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for their briefings earlier
today.

In recent years the evolving character of armed
conflict has created unprecedented threats to children.
They have become more vulnerable, particularly due to
new tactics in warfare - an absence ofclear battlefields,
the increasing numbers and diversification of parties to
conflicts, which add to conflicts' complexity, and the
deliberate targeting of safe havens such as hospitals
and schools. Conflict deprives children oftheir parents,
caregivers, basic social services, health care and
education. Civilians, including child soldiers, should be
spared war's devastation, and no civilian losses should
be forgotten or overlooked.

There was no outright ban on child soldiers under
international law until fairly recently.

Both the additional 1977 Protocol I of the Geneva
Convention and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child prohibit States from recruiting soldiers under
the age of 15. However, there was no prohibition
against children choosing to fight in conflict. The
situation changed from the year 2000 and onward
when the United Nations authorized a special tribunal
to prosecute those with the greater responsibility of
violations of international humanitarian law, including
the use of child soldiers. Compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law, with their emphasis
on special protection for children, remains the key to
preventing grave violations against children. In that
resepct, in 2005 Armenia ratified the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and strongly
supports the activities of the Committee and the wider
United Nations system in that regard.

However, it is regrettable that, notwithstanding the
fact that the legal regulation of the rights of children
and their involvement in armed conflict has been
significantly strengthened and affirmed, the substantive
use ofchild soldiers in armed conflicts still continues to
take place. Children in conflict are separated from their
families, are forced to kill and experience violence and
abuse. Ending impunity for grave violations against
children is crucial. Recruiting child soldiers constitutes
a war crime and the perpertrators of such crimes must
be held accountable.

While the promotion and protection of the rights
of all children is a priority concern of States Members
of the United Nations, Armenia believes that particular
attention should be paid to projects specifically related
to disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation,
including psychosocial work. The promotion of peace
is in the overriding responsibility of all countries, as
well as of the Council. As long as armed conflicts are a
reality, we have a duty to promote the protection and to
defend the rights of the most vulnerable - the children.
The United Nations system as a whole has a role to play
in that regard, and we owe it to the children of the world
to mobilize the full potential of that system.

In conclusion, let me commend the efforts of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. The Office
does impressive work in raising awareness and in
mobilizing strong support for the protection of children
affected by armed conflict.

In that connection, let me also make a reference
to the statement of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Leila Zerrougui made during
the presentation of her annual report in the autumn of
2013 to the General Assembly, which fully reflects the
position of Armenia on the issue discussed. She said
that constructive engagement with Member States
in collaboration with child protection partners was
crucial to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children; no one could single-handedly accomplish the
difficult task of addressing the impact of conflict on
children; and that Member States, the United Nations
and civil society partners had to support each other for
the sake of children affected by conflict and to include
children's needs in peace agreements and in broader
peacebuilding recovery and development initiatives.

