The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.

As we have all witnessed, North Korea has been
escalating its outrageous acts ofprovocation, in flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Over the past two years, North Korea has launched 40
ballistic missiles, and two of those missiles flew over
Japan. They have also conducted three nuclear tests.
North Korea purported the one in September to be a
hydrogen bomb test; the test's scale was far larger than
those previous. Their defiance of the authority of the
Council is totally unacceptable.

Most recently, on 29 November, North Korea
launched a ballistic missile with the range of an
intercontinental ballistic missile, which appears
to be a new type of missile. It demonstrated, once
again, that North Korea poses a clear global threat to
all Member States. The advancement of its nuclear
programme represents a fundamental threat to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The most
recent launch was conducted 75 days after North Korea's
provocations in September. Some optimistically viewed
those 75 days of silence as a positive signal. However,
the missile launch in November made it clear that North
Korea had been continuing its relentless development
of its nuclear and missile programmes while seeming
to be silent. It is increasingly evident that it is nowhere
near ready to abandon them, nor is it interested in
returning to meaningful dialogue.

The visit of Under-Secretary-General Feltman has
simply reconfirmed the dire reality of the situation. The
international community should be increasingly alarmed
by the fact that North Korea is continuing its nuclear
and missile development even as we are holding today's
meeting. North Korea claims that its programmes are
for its own security, including the maintenance of its
regime. On the contrary, however, they are extremely
dangerous. They run counter to the international order
and could affect the safety of any other State Member
of the United Nations. In that connection, I would
like to point out that Japan has never attempted to
achieve regime change in other countries or regions by
force. We believe that a peaceful solution is desirable.
However, North Korea has consistently rejected the
possibility of such a solution and instead has continued
to escalate its acts of provocation. It ignores the so-
called Agreed Framework, of 1994, and the 2005 Joint
Statement of the Six-Party Talks, betraying the good
faith of all the countries concerned. North Korea has
used those talks as a pretext for continuing its nuclear
and missile development.

How has North Korea rewarded our efforts to
achieve dialogue and provide assistance over the past
two decades? It has employed brinkmanship and tried
to win concessions. It is our responsibility not to repeat
past mistakes such as engaging in dialogue for the sake
of dialogue. That has done nothing but enable North
Korea to continue to stall for time for its nuclear and
missile development. The relevant Security Council
resolutions have already clearly stipulated that North
Korea must abandon its programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner, and we should not
retreat from that goal. Commitment and concrete action
towards denuclearization on the part of North Korea are
prerequisites for meaningful dialogue.

The international community must seek greater
unity and cooperate closely in order to put maximum
pressure on North Korea through every available means.
That is the only way we can make North Korea change
its policy. The United Nations sanctions are an effective
way to achieve that goal. In that regard, the Council
should also recall the determination it has expressed in
its resolutions to take further significant measures in
the event of further nuclear tests or launches by North
Korea. Sanctions are the tools that can make North
Korea understand that the only path is to change its

policies. The measures that the Security Council has
adopted are unprecedentedly strong and very close to
a full-fledged sanctions regime. Sanctions are most
effective when they are fully implemented and put
robust pressure on North Korea to curb its nuclear and
missile programmes by drastically reducing its foreign
currency earnings. We therefore strongly urge all States
Members of the United Nations to fully implement
such sanctions and close all potential loopholes. In that
regard, Japan is ready to assist countries experiencing
difficulties in implementing sanctions measures.

In addition, we welcome the more autonomous
measures targeting North Korea that are being
introduced or reinforced in many countries and call on
all Member States to take further additional measures
to stop the movement of persons, goods and funds to
North Korea, including by severing diplomatic ties.
Japan has been implementing its own strict measures.
I would like to inform the Council today that we have
just introduced additional autonomous measures,
designating 19 North Korean entities for an assets
freeze. I call on other States to adopt similar measures.

Regrettably, the threat posed by North Korea
also includes its capacity to produce other weapons
of mass destruction, such as biological and chemical
weapons, as well as its activities in cyberspace.
North Korea may reportedly be acquiring funds to
further develop its nuclear and missile programmes
by selling weapons or through cybertheft. We should
strengthen our international information-sharing and
cooperation network so that we can better cope with all
possible threats.

Even as we speak, nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles are being steadily developed at the expense
of the welfare of the North Korean people. We cannot
overlook the reports of grave violations of their human
rights. Some years ago, North Korean agents infiltrated
Japan and abducted a number of Japanese citizens,
including a girl as young as 13 years old. Only five of
the abductees have returned, while many of the Japanese
who were abducted have remained in custody in North
Korea. This week the mother of one of the abductees
passed away, having not seen her beloved daughter for
nearly 40 years. Another family member also passed
away recently. The families cannot wait forever. It is
deeply regrettable that only a few of the abductees
have been able to return home to their waiting families
and friends. We must underscore our serious concerns
about the human rights Violations and abuses that
North Korea has committed, including those against
citizens of other countries both within and outside the
territory of North Korea, as happened in the case of
the United States citizen Otto Warmbier. The only way
to achieve the core United Nations goal of maintaining
international peace and security - including in North
Korea itself - is through a comprehensive settlement
of these abduction, nuclear and missile issues.

North Korea may be able to dramatically boost
its economy and improve the welfare of its people if
it chooses the right path. But it will be able to enjoy a
bright future only by resolving its nuclear and missile
issues and cases of abduction. Since it has yet to fulfil
its commitment to denuclearization and take concrete
actions to that end, let us send a clear and unified
message that the international community will never
accept a nuclear-armed North Korea.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now invite the Secretary of State of the United
States of America to take the floor.

