Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express is profound gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for the opportunity to offer its
views on the unresolved border dispute with Eritrea and
the remaining 13 prisoners of war still unaccounted for.
It further wishes to thank Mr. Kairat Umarov, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
751 (1992) concerning Somalia, and lauds his efforts to
continue with faith and perseverance in the execution
of his mandate. We of course commend Ambassador
Karen Pierce of the United Kingdom and her team for
all the efforts they have made in the process leading to
the drafting of resolution 2444 (2018) adopted today.
Most importantly, Djibouti expresses its gratitude to the
members of the Council for their unanimous support of
its legitimate security concerns, aspirations and goals.

First, on Somalia, Djibouti is heartened by the
progress made in the implementation of the political
road map, the national security architecture and the
transition plan, and supports the call for the acceleration
of these efforts. Djibouti welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2431 (2018), extending the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) until
May 2019. AMISOM's continued enabling role and
support is vital to the implementation of the transition
plan and the strengthening of the capacities of the
Somali security forces.

However, it notes with the utmost concern that
Al-Shabaab remains a threat to peace and security in
Somalia, as evidenced by the latest terrorist attack in
Mogadishu, in which dozens of innocent men, women
and children were killed or injured. Al-Shabaab
routinely commits brazen terrorist attacks at home and
abroad and carries out targeted political assassinations.
It is therefore urgent to accelerate efforts to implement
the national security architecture, and we should
collectively mount, in earnest, a meaningful effort to
weaken and defeat Al-Shabaab.

Djibouti remains committed to peace in Somalia
and will continue to contribute in any way it can.
In that regard, I wish to inform the members of the
Security Council that the African Union Peace and
Security Council, currently chaired by Djibouti,
will be conducting a field visit in Somalia on 27 and
28 November. The Council will have an opportunity
to gather information at first-hand and conduct an
in-depth analysis of the security situation in the country.
It will therefore be in a position to articulate practical
action-oriented recommendations on the way forward.

On Eritrea, Djibouti welcomes the lifting of arms
embargoes, travel bans, assets freezes and targeted
sanctions on the country. As the Council is aware,
Djibouti's paramount interest is to secure a peaceful,
permanent resolution of all boundary and territorial
differences, in accordance with international law.
Those differences, which arose in 2008 and led to an
armed conflict that year, have remained unresolved and
constitute a threat to Djibouti itself and to international
peace and security. Direct negotiations and mediation
by third parties have been attempted, but have failed to
make significant progress towards a settlement.

Djibouti has called upon the Council, with the
assistance of the Secretary-General, to facilitate an
agreement of the parties to voluntarily submit their
boundary and territorial differences for full and final
settlement by an impartial third party, such as an
international arbitration tribunal or the International
Court of Justice, in accordance with Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. What Djibouti seeks
are impartial, forward-looking measures that assist
the parties in settling their prolonged conflict by
recommending a specific means of settlement from
among those identified in Article 33 and establishing a
mechanism leading to agreement on those means.

In that regard, Djibouti reiterates its gratitude
to the members of the Council for the unanimous
support for resolution 2444 (2018), just adopted. It
underlines the importance of continuing efforts aimed
at normalizing relations between Eritrea and Djibouti
for regional peace, stability and reconciliation; the
settlement of disputes in a peaceful manner, consistent
with international law; and support for the good-faith
resolution of these matters.
As noted in paragraph 3 of the resolution, the
Presidents of Djibouti and Eritrea met in Jeddah on
17 September and agreed to continue efforts aimed
at the normalization of relations between the two
countries. Djibouti is committed to deepening dialogue
and negotiating in good faith with Eritrea until an
amicable resolution is achieved on all outstanding
issues. Continued stalemate is not an option; we need
to expedite the process. In that regard, we welcome
paragraph 57 of the resolution, which underscores the
importance of the Council's continued engagement,
guidance and oversight. Djibouti is committed to
working with Eritrea until the parties reach a full and
final agreement on the international land boundary, the
sovereignty of Doumeira Island, the maritime boundary
and the status of the prisoners of war.

On the prisoners of war, 13 prisoners, who remain
unaccounted for, are still in Eritrean custody. As we
have stated before in the Chamber, the release of our
remaining prisoners of war from the cruelty of their
captivity has been uppermost in our thoughts. We will
engage meaningfully with Eritrea to clarify the fate of
the remaining prisoners of war and will work tirelessly
to ensure their prompt repatriation. We express hope
that, after nine years of stonewalling about them, Eritrea
is at last willing to comply with Council decisions and
will engage in good faith on the issue of the Djiboutian
combatants missing in action, as called for in paragraph
6 ofresolution 2444 (2018). The Government of Djibouti
has authorized the High Commissioner for Refugees
to review all of the individual histories of Eritrean
prisoners of war held in Djibouti since the clashes of
2008 and to make recommendations with respect to
their status and need for protection.

Finally, Djibouti welcomes the reporting
mechanism, as provided for in paragraph 57. We are
looking forward to the report of the Secretary-General
to be presented to the Council no later than 15 February
2019. Indeed, progress can be made, and it can be made
swiftly, if there is commitment to the process by the
disputing States.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm the readiness
of Djibouti to contribute to strengthening good-
neighbourly relations among the countries of the region.
We must do all we can to ensure that the metaphor that
we often use to describe the current dynamic in the
region the "wind of peace that blows in the Horn
of Africa" - is not a mere cliche and an empty slogan
or, at best, a catchphrase without any concrete, tangible
basis in reality. Peace in the region must be total,
inclusive and must generate a transformative force that,
we hope, will enable the countries in the Horn of Africa
to reach their economic potential for the sake of the
peoples living there.

 

