Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin my statement by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Chad and
the Central African Republic, Mr. Victor Da Silva
Angelo, for his briefing this morning. I also welcome
the presence in the Council today of the Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad.

My delegation acknowledges that the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) has made significant progress for
the benefit of the region. First of all, it assisted in the
complete deployment of the Detachement inte'gre de
securite in April 2009, in spite of the limitations that
have been pointed out today. Similarly, MINURCAT
has contributed to the agreements between the
Government of Chad and the opposition with a view to
adopting an electoral legislative framework and
establishing a National Independent Electoral
Commission in that country. Lastly, it has participated
very actively in the verification of 1,077 kilometres
free of mines and unexploded ordnance in eastern
Chad.

Despite these significant advances, we view with
concern the delay in the deployment of the authorized
force for MINURCAT. In particular, we are concerned
about the effects that a mission operating at less than
half of its strength may have when it comes to
fulfilling its humanitarian activities. We ask the
Secretariat to keep us informed on progress in this
area.
I hardly need to point out that the political
situation in the region is delicate. I hardly need to add
that the situation is complicated even further by the
close interrelationship that exists among the situations
of the countries of the region, chiefly Chad, the Central
African Republic and the Sudan. This complexity,
however, should not serve as a pretext for inaction.

My delegation, following the approach that we
have successfully advocated in other conflicts around
the world, takes the View that peace in the region
requires political dialogue in order to normalize
relationships between Chad and the Central African
Republic, as well as between Chad and the Sudan.
Similarly, we believe in the need to take measures that
will build a climate of trust to ensure that these States
refrain from providing support to armed rebel groups
operating on their territories against their respective
neighbours.

My delegation underscores the importance of
developing measures to fulfil the Doha agreement of
May 2009 and the Dakar agreement of March 2008
between Chad and the Central African Republic. It
might be useful to consider the possibility of
establishing a tracking and monitoring mechanism for
those agreements and for the conflict.

The security situation in MINURCAT's area of
operations continues to be tense owing to the stepped-
up activities of armed groups to the detriment of
relationships between the Governments of Chad and
the Central African Republic, and also to the mutual
accusations of support being given to opposition armed
groups.

It is disquieting to see the worsening in the
human rights situation in the area. We need to address
the complaints of incidents directed against
humanitarian workers of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations, as well as their
facilities and violations directed against vulnerable
groups, particularly women and children.

The violation of the rights of the child in the
Central African Republic and in Chad continues to be
of great concern to my delegation. For this reason,
through our work in the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we shall seek
to appeal to armed groups and both Governments to
develop plans of action that will help to prevent the
recruitment, the re-recruitment and the use of children,
as well as accountability mechanisms on the basis of
resolution 1612 (2005).

I take this opportunity to commend the activities
of MINURCAT that led to the handover into the
custody of UNICEF 84 children who were pressed into
service by the Chadian forces during the recent
hostilities.

I would like to conclude by indicating that my
delegation supports the strategic workplan proposed by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/359),
which appears to us to be quite complete as it includes
aspects of protection for civilians and humanitarian
agents, humanitarian assistance and the strengthening
of the legal framework in order to enhance access to
justice, security and the rule of law.

