Mr. King: We welcome the Secretary-General's
report and today's meeting. The United Kingdom
recognizes the influential and significant role to be
played by the Security Council in supporting the
General Assembly and the United Nations Programme
of Action in the fight against the proliferation and the
misuse of small arms and light weapons. The United
Kingdom is committed to the full implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. Indeed, we have
contributed some £20 million to the programme over
recent years.
We fully support the development of an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons and believe the establishment of an
open-ended working group is an important step
towards that goal.

Export controls are an essential tool in helping to
curtail illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. One measure to improve such controls would
be to enhance the effectiveness and verification of end-
user certificates. The United Kingdom strongly
believes some evaluation of the environment in which
an end-user certificate is issued should also be taken
into consideration, for example, taking account of
whether the end-user is a realistic destination for the
type and quantity of goods listed.

Looking ahead, we attach great importance to the
biennial meeting of 2005 which will be a crucial step
towards the preparation of the 2006 review
conference- an evaluation of the programme of
action. Leading up to the 2006 meeting, the United
Kingdom aims to work with others to promote
progressive policies on small arms internationally.

Last year, the United Kingdom launched two very
relevant initiatives. The first was the transfer control
initiative, which seeks to raise awareness and build
consensus subregionally, regionally and internationally
on the need to develop harmonized guidelines on small
arms transfers, with a view to developing international
agreement by the United Nations small arms review
conference in 2006. The second was the armed
violence and poverty initiative, which aims to
document the impact of arms on poverty and to
encourage donors, the international financial
institutions and developing countries to design
development programmes which take account of and
seek to address the root causes of armed violence.

But much more needs to be done if these
initiatives are to have a lasting impact. On the transfer
control initiative, the United Kingdom will use the next
year as an opportunity to build consensus with, we
hope, others in Central and South America, South-East
Asia and East, West and Southern Africa. Next year,
we and our partners will try to build consensus within
the European Union, the United Nations and possibly
also the Group of Eight. While we do not expect the
task to be easy, if we sustain our efforts from now until
the United Nations review conference takes place in
2006, we believe that the initiative stands a real chance
of success.
We welcome the recent decision to expand the
scope of the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms as a global transparency and confidence-building
measure. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Council call for the strict
enforcement of embargoes to countries or regions
threatened by, engaged in or emerging from armed
conflict. We welcome the Security Council focus on
practical measures, including further consideration of
financing and improving disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and incorporating the process into the
mandate of peacekeeping operations. We believe that
this could make a real contribution on the ground. We
support these and other practical measures and believe
that they will have an impact.

As you know, Mr. President, we support efforts
by the international community to tackle the problems
of weapons of mass destruction. In large parts of the
world, small arms and light weapons are weapons of
mass destruction, killing perhaps as many as half a
million people a year. We shall continue to support
United Nations efforts to tackle this terrible blight with
all our energy.

