Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Prosecutor for her twentieth report and for her
briefing.

Prosecutor Bensouda reminds us yet again that,
nearly 10 years after the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 1593 (2005), the civilian population of
Darfur remains the target of both the Government and
armed militias, and that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is not
fully able to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians.

We share the concerns reiterated in the Prosecutor's
report, as reflected in resolution 2173 (2014), which
include continuing aerial bombardments by the
Sudanese Air Force, with direct and indirect civilian
victims; attacks on civilians by the Sudanese security
forces, whose ranks have expanded and may include
minors; continuing clashes among tribes due to poor
access to natural resources, both in Darfur and because
of interference from the armed janjaweed militias;
continuing rapes and sexual violence by Government
armed forces; threats against members of the political
opposition, humanitarian personnel and personnel of
non-governmental organizations; numerous obstacles
to the delivery of aid to the civilian population by
organizations in charge of humanitarian assistance and
by UNAMID in the exercise of its mandate; and the
continued forced displacement of civilians because of
ongoing violence and the escalation of armed conflict.

As Ms. Bensouda also recalls, the arrest warrants
issued by the International Criminal Court have not
always been executed. Five individuals accused of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and, in one case,
genocide, continue to evade the Court's jurisdiction.
Most of them continue to hold high office in the State
bureaucracy of the Sudan. A situation of such impunity
can only encourage further abuses.

The responses to that situation have long been well
known to the Council. Putting an end to the multiple
forms of violence and crime presupposes, first of all,
the successful conclusion and implementation of a
political settlement that includes both the Government
and rebel groups. In that regard, the opening of
negotiations in Addis Ababa in November between
the Sudanese Government and the Darfur rebels was
encouraging. However, those talks have not yet led to
a single specific advance despite the efforts of a high-
level group from the African Union, which we support.
We hope that will lead to a ceasefire that will lead to a
political solution as expected by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union.

The second requirement is enabling the effective
protection of civilians and UNAMID's ability to
execute its mandate. The continuing violence and
insecurity preclude any prospect of stabilization or
long-term reconstruction. The human consequences
of the crisis remain exceedingly serious, with more
than 430,000 people fleeing their homes since January
because of the fighting in Darfur, in addition to more
than 2 million long-term internally displaced. Violence
continues against civilians, especially women, as well
as looting, and UNAMID peacekeepers also continue
to be attacked.
The third requirement is unhindered humanitarian
access to civilian populations and the displaced. In that
regard, we regret that UNAMID is still subject to access
restrictions in its investigation into the allegations of
mass rape in Thabit in late October. It is essential that it
be guaranteed free and unrestricted access to the area,
as well as to the entire territory of Darfur.

The fourth is going after the perpetrators and
combating impunity effectively. In that regard, the new
semi-annual briefing emphasizes that the Office of the
Prosecutor has not ruled out any measures for fighting
impunity in the Sudan, whether through investigations,
arrest warrants or scheduling the first suit to be brought
against a rebel leader, with a trial originally set for
November this year for attacks on peacekeepers in
Haskanita. As the Council knows, the trial could not
take place, owing to the absence of the accused, against
whom an arrest warrant had duly been issued. As the
Prosecutor noted, the Sudan, required to cooperate with
the Court and combat impunity, has taken no action to
prosecute those responsible for crimes in Darfur. A
new ruling is expected from the Court on the Sudan's
non-cooperation, despite the fact that the provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005) require such cooperation.

The final requirement is limiting contacts with
persons subject to arrest warrants of the Court to those
deemed essential, in accordance with the policy of the
Secretary-General. France calls on the entire United
Nations to work to implement these guidelines. In this
context, the Council should continue to mobilize on two
fronts. First and foremost, it should induce the parties
to cease all violence against civilians. That requires
agreement on the part of all Council members on the
deterioration in civilians' situation that the Prosecutor
has portrayed yet again in her report. It also requires
enabling UNAMID to fully carry out its mandate,
with its total and unfettered freedom of movement
guaranteed. It must also be able to carry it out more
effectively. In order for that to happen, it must continue
to implement the strategic review that the Council
endorsed in April, which made protection a main focus
of UNAMID's action, along with support to a political
solution and local mediation. Once the Secretariat's
recommendations on the next phases in UNAMID's
development are again submitted in February, the
Council should also consider the adjustments that
will be required if UNAMID is to make a genuine
contribution to improving the situation of civilians on
the ground.

Secondly, our cooperation with the International
Criminal Court has to made effective and we must ensure
that arrest warrants are executed, an essential condition
if the Court is to be able to carry out its mandate. It is
up to the Council to respond when the Court notifies
it of cases of non-cooperation, and to the Assembly of
States Parties and international organizations to remain
ready to react to such cases.

