President Nikolie (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): I would
first like to greet you, Mr. President, and thank you
for convening this meeting of the Security Council on
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) from 21 January
through 15 April, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). Serbia has full confidence in the United
Nations and greatly appreciates the contribution it has
made to resolving numerous open issues in Kosovo
and Metohija. The Council's quarterly meetings on
UNMIK, such as this one, convened under resolution
1244 (1999) - the sole valid legal framework for the
international presence in this part of the territory of the
Republic of Serbia - also contribute to this.

Since I am taking the floor in the Security Council
for the first time, I would like to present an overview,
in some detail, of the events underlying the problems
under consideration today so as to be able to decide
which of them we can work out together.

I am very pleased to be addressing the Council
as the Head of a State which, through its concrete
actions and reasonable and patient policies and by its
continuing to engage in thoughtful dialogue with the
provisional institutions in Pristina during this period,
has affirmed the sincere and willing compromise
solutions aimed at ensuring the peaceful coexistence
of the inhabitants of Kosovo and Metohija. The work
of the State authorities has been extremely difficult
due to the unfavourable circumstances in which the
negotiations have been conducted - that is, intensive
promotion of Kosovo's independence, which presents
a unilateral act of secession to Belgrade. The Council
will agree that for a small country like Serbia there
can be no greater challenge than the violation of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The dialogue with Pristina took place in an
atmosphere inherited from the sponsorship of Kosovo's
independence, which is unfortunately advocated by
some influential States. However, the dialogue with
representatives of the provisional institutions of self-
government in Pristina, held under the auspices of the
European Union (EU), has yielded remarkable results.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank, in
particular, Baroness Catherine Ashton, who on behalf
of the European Union mediated the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina with wisdom and patience. April
marked the anniversary of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations, a
true watershed and a new chapter in relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, progress that was welcomed by
the entire world. Serbia has unequivocally demonstrated
that it is a constructive partner and that it is ready to
compromise in order to stabilize the situation and take
the whole region forward.

UNMIK's continuing 15-year, status-neutral
presence under resolution 1244 (1999), which is as
binding today as it has ever been, is the last bulwark
against the policy of promoting the unilaterally
declared independence for Kosovo. As we have warned
on a number of occasions, the precedent set by the
declaration of Kosovo's independence has resulted in
porous State borders and potential new focal points for
crisis that have also affected the continent of Europe
more generally. All this testifies to the importance
of abiding by the fundamental principles on which
the United Nations was founded and to which many
United Nations Member States, including Serbia, are
committed to respecting and defending.

International law is based on sources derived from
international conventions, customary law and generally
accepted rules. Any decision, just or unjust, must follow
particular rules or regulations. The very existence of
international law is a guarantee of legal certainty that
precludes voluntarism and arbitrariness as well as
ensuring legality. Without it. civilization today would
be no different from that of medieval times, and we
would have learned nothing from the past.

International relations, however, also depend on
precedents imposed by some countries, possibly even
by force. Such a precedent was created by Kosovo
and Metohija's unilateral secession from Serbia.
Paradoxically, in this case, a precedent was established
that, it was claimed, was in fact not a precedent. And
then came Crimea, where the people and authorities
of that peninsula, in declaring their independence,
referred to the famous precedent of Kosovo, which
, they said, Western countries themselves helped to
create. Western officials immediately responded that
the Kosovo precedent was sui generis, thus de facto and
de jure denying the essence of a precedent, which is a
decision creating a new rule that can apply to similar
or analogous cases in the future. To sum up, we will
have to coin a new way to define a precedent that is
not a precedent. In my opinion, such a phenomenon is
contrary to logic. It negates scientific achievements,
respect for international law and the fact that all
countries of the world, big or small, are equal.

Serbia's territorial integrity is defined in article 8
of its Constitution, which states that the territory of
the Republic of Serbia is integral and indivisible and
its borders inviolable, and that the Province of Kosovo
and Metohija, as an autonomous entity, is an integral
part of the territory of the sovereign State of Serbia.
That would still be the case had it not been for the
creation of the Kosovo precedent, which launched an
era of consistency in the inconsistent application of
international law.

A great many countries have recognized Kosovo's
unilaterally declared independence, which split off part
of a sovereign territory that had no right to secede.
And yet other nations' identical decisions, in identical
situations, have been declared null and void. Is this
justice and equity, or an exhibition of might-is-right?
We who represent small nations seek justice. Serbia
has always respected, without exception, the territorial
integrity of United Nations Member States. Might,
where there is no right, is reprehensible. It should thus
go hand in hand with justice - in other words, what is
mighty should be just, and what is just will be mighty.
Serbia expects that justice and equity should be equally
applied in its case, no more and no less than for other
countries.

Serbia does not recognize the unilaterally declared
independence of Kosovo and Metohija, but it is engaged
in negotiations with it and will continue to do so,
with a View to ensuring peace and prosperity for all
the inhabitants of Kosovo and Metohija. That is the
unwavering position of the current Government and
will be the position of any future Governments.

Let me clarify - Serbia will not be forced to
recognize the unilaterally declared independence of
Kosovo and Metohija by attrition. No one will win an
election in Serbia if he or she makes such a commitment
or accepts Kosovo and Metohij a's independence as a fait
accompli. Such an attitude is not evidence of rigidity;
rather, it is the result of an aspiration to survive. No
one should expect us to willingly and passively submit
to our own destruction. Serbia is resolutely against
the promotion of Kosovo's independence. If that were
not the case, the survival of the Kosovo Serbs would
be at the mercy of the so-called altered situation on
the ground. No one would be spared assimilation or
final exodus, which would result in all traces of their
existence being wiped out.

Serbia's wealth and strength lie in its unity in
diversity and in the respect and understanding it has
for others. With more than 27 nations, cultures and
languages, it is both unique and diverse, and under
Serbia's Constitution minorities have even more rights
than do citizens of Serbian nationality. That wealth is
the result of Serbia's geography. Because we are at the
crossroads between East and West, we have always been
the setting for confrontation between interests from the
outside. Whether orchestrated or organic, incidents
from those confrontations have become triggers for
war, suffering and loss of life.

In the recent past, circumstances have become
extremely complicated, with ethnic cleansing and
pogroms against Serbians and the destruction of their
holy places and of cultural heritage sites inscribed on
the UNESCO World Heritage List. At the same time, we
have been identified as the sole party responsible. Does
the greatest responsibility lie in defending people, even
members of the Albanian community who were not
ready to commit crimes and hate others, and in trying
to protect territories? Can foreign policy missteps
and misunderstanding of international relations and
geostrategic interests be considered responsibility?

Serbian forces withdrew from the country's own
territory of Kosovo and Metohija pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999) after 78 days of a NATO bombing
campaign that took place without the Security Council's
authorization. During the air strikes, 2,300 missiles
were dropped, with the use of prohibited depleted
uranium ordnance, cluster bombs and electromagnetic
fibre weapons against thermal power plants and other
power transmission systems. The bombing of oil
refineries provoked black and acid rain, while oil and oil
derivatives and toxic chemicals contaminated the water
supply systems in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and other Balkan countries. More than 5 million people
lived without electricity and water.

Some 200 industrial plants, eight power stations
and infrastructure facilities, including 82 bridges, seven

railway stations, six airports and a multitude of roads,
were destroyed or seriously damaged. More than 40,000
buildings, 422 educational institutions - schools,
universities and dormitories - 48 medical centres,
including hospitals and clinics, the building housing
the national television broadcasting company and
74 television relays were demolished. Also destroyed
or demolished were around 90 cultural, historical and
architectural places of interest, including 16 Christian
Orthodox and Roman Catholic monasteries.

During the bombing, nearly 2,000 civilians were
killed and 7,000 wounded; 30 per cent of these were
children. More than 750,000 inhabitants of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia left their homes in search of a
normal life beyond the borders of their own country.
One in every four inhabitants was deprived of his or
her livelihood. The final figures of the damage done
are still not known; according to various estimates, the
damage amounts to dozens of billions of United States
dollars.

I am not complaining today about the pain and
suffering inflicted upon us. I do not deny individual
responsibility for the crimes committed against the
Albanian population and I insist that those responsible
be held accountable. But I disagree that in a conflict
between a State and separatists, there could be only
one responsible party, namely, the sovereign State. I am
not complaining and I am not asking for the payment
of war reparations in the classic sense, but as long as
I am President of Serbia I will remind the Council
of its obligation to compensate us for the enormous,
irreparable damage caused to our civilian facilities
and to the economy as a whole. The international
community can redress that historical wrong only if it
helps Serbia alleviate the consequences of bombing by
repairing and rebuilding the damaged infrastructure,
economy and public and cultural institutions. Every day
an ever greater number of officials of the countries that
took part in the bombing of Serbia also demand justice
for Serbia. The damage is too high to be remedied by
Serbia alone.

By engaging in negotiations with Pristina at the
highest level, by acting responsibly and patiently, and
by signing the Brussels Agreement, we have made it
possible for the first time since the bombings for Serbs,
Albanians and other nations in Kosovo and Metohija to
live together. It is more now important than ever that
both parties be truly committed to dialogue; otherwise,
the idea of a tranquil life together will become a dead
letter.

I am sure that the European Union will provide
valuable assistance to us in building confidence, in
particular in the further course of Brussels negotiations
and in the framework of European integration. We
also see the start of the accession talks with the EU
as an impetus to further work on improving living
conditions for Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, as we are
convinced at present that a constructive approach to
fostering European values will be fully embraced by
Serbian society. The fact that accession negotiations
were opened on 21 January 2014 and that a screening
for Chapter 35 negotiations was held shows that
Serbia has fulfilled its obligations resulting from the
Brussels Agreement in a timely manner and that it has
approached the dialogue itself in a constructive spirit.

However, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/305) states that Kosovo is conducting
negotiations on the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU. Serbia has no mechanisms
at its disposal to prevent that, but it may ask certain
questions. Is the European Union a union of States or
a union of States with a para-State? Will it once again
set a precedent without a precedent? According to that
precedent, provinces of all Member States will also be
eligible to become Member States. Serbia considers
that, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), only
UNMIK may, on behalf of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, conduct negotiations on stabilization
and association.

The European Union must see to it that international
law is respected and observe the rules on the basis
of which it came into existence; otherwise, its very
foundations will be at risk. If a decision is made to the
effect that Kosovo and Metohija may negotiate with
the European Union independently, it would lead the
European family to lawlessness and chaos, with each
party acting in its own individual interest.

In order to be able to ensure the best possible results
in the implementation of the Brussels Agreement we
must establish much clearer rules and build much greater
confidence. In parallel with negotiations, the Albanian
side has worked to strengthen their independent State
through so-called low-intensity terror against the Serb
population, which is totally unacceptable to Serbia.
Low intensity ethnic crimes may suffice to impose
serious constraints on the freedom of movement of
Serbs and other non-Albanians whose life is defined by
a complex number of minor restrictions - prohibitions
on travel alone or by night, choice of time and place
to do errands, restrictive use of Serbian language in
public, safe attendance of schools, and so on. Public
condemnation of ethnically motivated incidents could
definitely contribute to inter-ethnic dialogue and
tolerance, including the raising of awareness that the
future lies with multi-ethnicity and acceptance of
returnees from other ethnic groups.

The introduction of procedures and administrative
obstacles has prevented the return of Serbs. Since 1999,
less than 5 per cent of the expelled Serbs have returned
to Kosovo and Metohija. The demographic picture
is far from the much vaunted multi-ethnicity of our
southern province, which is best illustrated by the fact
that there have been only 50 voluntary returns to the
province. That is far below any acceptable minimum.
The international community has not discharged one
of the main tasks entrusted to it under resolution 1244
(1999) - the free and unimpeded sustainable return of
all refugees and displaced persons to their homes.

Serbs and other minority communities in the region
of Kosovo and Metohija still face problems. Their
freedom of movement continues to be restricted and
impeded. Their security and the free use of their own
language has not been respected, nor have their access
to institutions and the right to participate in elections
and their right to vote. There are no appropriate
mechanisms for the restitution of dispossessed property
or mechanisms for preventing property from being
repossessed following eviction of occupants. Entry into
possession is also prevented. Returnees are not given
free choice of place of return nor are there conditions
for the sustainable return of internally displaced
persons. Even if they somehow decide to return, local
communities go out of their way to make them feel
unaccepted and unacceptable.

Eighteen incidents and attacks on temples and
property of the Serbian Orthodox Church have been
recorded, including the latest wave of threats against
Orthodox places of worship ranging from the graffiti
scribbled on the monastery of Visoki Deeani to the
announcement that the Church of Christ the Saviour in
Pristina will be razed. At the same time, we welcome
UNMIK's resolute response to declare null and void the
decision of the municipal authorities of Pristina to deny
the Serbian Orthodox Church the right to use land on
which the Church of Christ the Saviour had been built
in the centre of the city.

Lastly, constant attempts at renaming and
obliterating the existence of Serbian cultural and
religious heritage, coupled with unlawful sales of the
property owned by the Republic of Serbia, continue
unabated.

The current discriminatory treatment of minority
communities makes it impossible for their members
to lead normal lives, especially with respect to
the enjoyment of all rights legally provided for in
instruments in force in Kosovo and Metohija. The
non-discrimination law promulgated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General himself
provides special protection to minority communities,
bans all forms of discrimination and protects
individuals not only against discriminatory acts of
public authorities, but also against discriminatory acts
of legal and natural persons. Regrettably, UNMIK and
the Pristina institutions have not followed up on the high
quality of that legal text with concrete and appropriate
measures to implement it, which has allowed gross
violations of the law and everyday instances of dramatic
discrimination.

We highly appreciate the constructive approach
taken by the United Nations and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, as well as by the organizations working under
the United Nations umbrella, including the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). They
have created conditions for all sides to work together
on improving the living conditions and respect for the
human rights of all inhabitants ofKosovo and Metohija,
regardless of their ethnicity. I believe that the Council
will agree that disagreements with regard to the question
of the status of Kosovo and Metohija should not stand
in the way of efforts aimed at working together towards
finding practical solutions to issues that Pristina
has been sweeping under the carpet for many years.
Therefore, I believe that a decision to downsize UNMIK
and reduce the number of international personnel would
have an outright negative effect on the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija and affect the execution of the functions
entrusted to the Mission.

Consequently, I call on the Council, under the roof
of the United Nations, to resist attempts to marginalize
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and Metohija and
to attach relative importance to its role within the overall
international and security presence in the province. I
ask the Council to make itself both more visible and
more effective in the discharge of its mission, as it
works together with other international players, such
as EULEX, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK,
which are also active under United Nations auspices. In
the light of the intended modification of the mandates
of those missions under the pretext of a changed actual
situation on the ground, allegedly as a result of the
reaching of the Brussels Agreement, I draw attention to
the argument that this cannot alter the binding nature of
resolution 1244 (1999).

In that context, I am opposed to the resort to such
excuses as being overburdened and focused on other,
more urgent matters instead of convening Security
Council meetings devoted to considering the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija more frequently. Great
expectations and the increasing requests of Belgrade
and Pristina concerning the implementation of the
Brussels Agreement require the Council's meetings be
held with undiminished momentum so as to ensure that
its members are regularly provided with insight into
the situation on the ground. The coming period will
be crucial for the implementation of the arrangements
made and for the further normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. That process must take
place in full sight of the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo and Metohija and the Security Council.

We support the initiative to set up a special court and
an office of the prosecutor based outside the territory
of Kosovo and Metohija to try all cases resulting from
the investigations carried out by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force. Serbia will lend its full
support to the efforts to bring all those responsible to
justice, as it has done in the past.

However, stability has not been promoted by the
arrest of Oliver Ivanovic', a mayoral candidate for North
Mitrovica. We expect the problem of secret indictments,
which we have warned about for years, to be resolved.
With witness accounts as the only evidence, witnesses
must testify in an orchestrated manner 15 years after
the crimes were allegedly committed. Mr. Ivanovie,
who is being detained in a prison in Mitrovica, was
arrested on the basis of such testimony. In addition, the
appellate court failed to provide an explanation as to
why the legal deadline to act upon his arrest appeal was
allowed to lapse. The Republic of Serbia once again
most vigorously protests the arrest of Oliver Ivanovie
and demands his release from prison along with an
explanation as to why he was arrested in the run-up to
the mayoral elections in northern Mitrovica, where he
stood as one of the candidates.

Although the overall situation, as indicated in the
report for the period from 21 January to 15 April, has
been described as relatively stable, I believe that this
limited period of time does not reflect the general
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. The circumstances
are characterized by the substantial gap between the
professed benchmarks and respect for human rights
and the actual situation. In considering the generally
made assessments presented as fact for a limited period
of time, it seems to me that we forget that it only takes
a spark like the one in the pogrom of March 2004 to
escalate dormant tensions.

Despite the continued international presence,
impunity, relative importance and depersonalization of
the crimes committed from 1999 onwards send a bad
message, that of fear to the Serbs and other peoples in
Kosovo and Metohija. This means that crimes are not
punished, while further attacks are encouraged because
they remain outside the reach of justice. We note that the
Pristina institutions and the international community
have done next to nothing to protect Kosovo Serbs and
other non-Albanians, particularly the most vulnerable
people like internally displaced persons.

Serbia has encouraged its compatriots in Kosovo to
go to the polls in the local elections. It encouraged them
to do so in order to strengthen their legitimacy, under
the roof of the community of Serbian municipalities,
the establishment of which is envisaged in the Brussels
Agreement, therefore guaranteeing their survival and
the realization of their rights. Despite having lived in
fear and uncertainty for years, they are still ready for
reconciliation and have faith that their coexistence with
Albanians is possible after all.

However, in preparing themselves for the elections,
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina, preparing themselves for the elections, have
done all they could to challenge the voting right of Serbs.
Calling the internally displaced persons to mark their
vote on the forms with the symbol of an independent
State, which has gained its independence by driving
them out of their ancestral homes - a quarter of a
million of them - is an example of the utter hypocrisy
and provocation.

By manipulating the voting registries, Pristina

attempted to put in place a new, forcibly changed ethnic
structure and therefore directly influence the result of
the vote. For all the pledges made and emphasizing the
commitment to multi-ethnicity as democratic values
and human rights, Pristina in practice consistently
applied measures discouraging and dissuading Kosovo
Serbs to participate in the public life of Kosovo.

Unilateral actions by Pristina announcing the
revision of electoral rules at the expense of Serbs and
displaced persons are unacceptable and undermine
the legitimacy of the forthcoming general election
scheduled for 8 June. This time, Belgrade will, after
careful consideration, decide whether to call on Kosovo
Serbs to go to the polls or not. We demand that Pristina
fulfil the basic precondition of enabling the equal
right to vote without discrimination to Kosovo Serbs
and other minorities in Kosovo and Metohija, as also
indicated in the report on the work of UNMIK that is
under consideration today. The actions of Pristina, as
observed by UNMIK, is in direct contravention of its
declared readiness and openness to increase mutual
trust among all communities in Kosovo and Metohija.
That is the purpose of the ongoing dialogue in which
Serbia has invested considerably.

Therefore, we call on our partners and friends at the
United Nations to support wholeheartedly and use their
influence and authority to create conditions conducive
to the equitable representation of numerous minority
communities in all institutions without being overruled
by the majority, as required also in the Declaration
on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or
Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, where
it is recognized that the promotion and protection of
the rights of persons belonging to national, ethnic,
religious or linguistic minorities "contribute to the
political and social stability of States in which they
live. Cases involving forged sales agreements have
remained unsolved. Serb claims for compensation for
the damage caused to their property have been refused
on a massive scale. All this indicates a discriminatory
implementation of regulations and rules.

The issue of minority rights also implies the
restitution of property belonging to non-Albanian
communities in Kosovo and Metohija, among which
Serbs constitute a majority. Moreover, there is the open
question of the property owned by the State of Serbia and
the Serbian Orthodox Church. The legal mechanisms
established by UNMIK and EULEX to address property
issues, assistance to courts to reduce the backlog of
cases and provide adequate protection to individuals
in cases of human rights violations have, regrettably,
not produced results. Such litigation accounts for 40 per
cent ofthe unresolved cases before the courts in Kosovo
and Metohija. Furthermore, the large number of forged
ownership documents also impedes the upholding
of property rights. The Kosovo Property Agency has
iniated approximately 40,000 proceedings for the
restitution of usurped land, while almost 700,000 plots
of land have been occupied, according to unofficial
data. One of the problems affecting property restitution
is the lack of appropriate protection against eviction
owing to unlawful repossession.

Also of interest is the observation with regard to
the expropriation of Serbian property in Kosovo and
Metohija based on the decision of the so-called Kosovo
authorities for the purposes of highway construction. In
the Gracanica municipality, for example, about 170 out
of 213 expropriated properties belong to Serbs.

We have recently been informed that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government intend to alter the legal
status of the Trepea industrial complex, the majority
owner of which is the Republic of Serbia. The complex
employs many Serbs living in Kosovo and Metohija.
The adoption of a new law designed to amend the
ownership structure and the legal status of the Trepca
complex would undoubtedly be another unilateral act
that could result in altering the rights and the status of
Trepca employees and members of the Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities in Kosovo and Metohija.
That is yet another attempt at illegal disposition of the
property owned by the Republic ofSerbia and a violation
of fundamental property principles. Amendments to
legal regulations would waive the rights of creditors.
At this time, it is unclear how their claims will be
dealt with, bearing in mind that only those creditors
who have filed claims against Trepca company via the
management team in charge of the establishment of the
Community of Serbian Municipalities have claimed to
be owed more than €268 million.

Furthermore, we also note that amendments have
also been proposed in other areas. Such actions by
Pristina show their inconsistency and disregard for the
agreements reached. That is not the only area where
laws are being amended before they have even been
negotiated in Brussels. On the other hand, in areas in
which there is agreement on amendments of the legal
framework to help establish the Community of Serbian
Municipalities, which is binding on Pristina, to date, no
political will has been demonstrated to embark upon
this process as an initial step towards implementing the
agreements.

With the excuse of preserving peace, the Pristina
side has been sabre-rattling. I am referring to the
announced establishment of the so-called armed forces
of Kosovo, which is not only in violation of the dialogue
in which we have patiently invested, but also a gross
violation of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
That resolution states that the international forces bear
the responsibility for maintaining a secure environment
for all inhabitants of the province, and therefore the
possibility of creating the so-called armed forces is
ruled out. Such an announcement poses a threat not only
to stability in Serbia and the region, but also seriously
undermines the authority and role of the United Nations
in safeguarding international peace and security. In
that context, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon pointed
out that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the sole legal
framework for the continued international security
presence in Kosovo and Metohij a, the mandate of which
has been clearly defined.

I recall that the Kosovo security force has been
based on the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), a
paramilitary formation that during the war in Kosovo
and Metohija spearheaded terrorist actions and took
part in organized crime. Even though the international
community intended to calm the situation on the
ground, to demilitarize the KLA and to transform
it into security structures, it made a breach. Instead
of punishing, it supported separatism and spurred
continued political violence and ethnic hatred.

I ask the Council whether the security forces
whose members belong to criminal structures and
international terrorists could be relied on in regional and
collective security frameworks. Will the international
community give the green light to that act, particularly
taking into account the announced establishment of
the special criminal tribunal to hear cases involving
crimes committed by the KLA in organ trafficking, as
reported by the Special Rapporteur of the Council of
Europe, Mr. Dick Marty?

The support of Council of Europe's Parliamentary
Assembly for the Marty report, with a vast majority
of votes of member States, should have served as a
strong warning to the international community and to
all institutions that the inhabitants of Kosovo cannot
see protection in such structures, but see only a threat.
There is no legal basis for the creation and operation of
Kosovo's armed forces. On the other hand, I recall that
in resolution 1244 (1999), the international community
agreed to the return of our forces to Kosovo and
Metohija.

In the light of the intended reconfiguration of
EULEX, I would like to remind the Council that under
resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK is vested with the
sole executive and legislative powers in Kosovo and
Metohija. Consequently, the consent of the United
Nations was needed to engage EULEX. EULEX
received legitimacy in accordance with the Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/44), dated
26 November 2008, provided that it acted in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999), within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations. Although the powers
and responsibilities of UNMIK relating to police,
customs and the judiciary have almost entirely been
transferred thereby to EULEX, it cannot be said that
UNMIK has been replaced by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. Therefore, the EULEX
reconfiguration must be carried out in cooperation with
UNMIK and the United Nations, upon their approval
and consent.

Regarding the transfer of powers to the Provisional
Institutions in Pristina, I am confident that all those
present in the Council will agree that powers reserved
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
can be transferred to the Provisional Institutions only
with his authorization. The fact that those powers were
entrusted to EULEX in no way diminishes the powers
and responsibilities of the Special Representative. The
transfer of EULEX powers to the Provisional Institutions
in Pristina is harmful and unfair because, on the one
hand, it is unreasonable that Serbia would have no say
in it, and, on the other hand, it is considered responsible
for implementation of the Brussels Agreement,

We must not lose sight of the fact that behind all
our speeches, behind all reports and statements made,
there are people whose sole wish is to have normal
living conditions for their families, who wish to work
to educate their children and ensure their safe future
and a happy childhood and who want to enjoy all the
rights available to them. Therefore, the reports on the
situation in Kosovo should not become mere statistics.
People are not mere numbers. Whenever we review
the situation in the province, we should ask ourselves
how much we have helped the local population to live
better. I am not certain that the conditions are ripe for
the Council to remain less actively seized of the matter.
Although significant progress has been made, the final
goal still eludes us.

While appreciating the legitimate interests of the
Albanian, Serb and other populations of Kosovo, and
fully respecting the mandate of the United Nations,
Serbia will resume dialogue, pending a mutually
agreed and sustainable solution. I expect UNMIK and
all international players to continue to work within an
undiminished scope and with the same intensity, and
I urge the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to adopt a more engaging approach. That is the
only way to contribute to the creation of conditions for
lasting reconciliation and find a final solution for the
issue of Kosovo and Metohija.

According to the report of the Council of Europe
entitled "Inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo", hundreds
of Serbs were kidnapped in Kosovo before, during
and immediately after the 1999 conflict, and they
were all sent to clandestine camps in the Republic of
Albania. Many of them were forcibly operated on to
harvest their organs, often in vivo, and later killed.
Their organs were then sold on the international black
market. The chief investigator into the allegations made
in Dick Marty's report, international Prosecutor Clint
Williamson, is in possession ofa voluminous dossier on
the crimes committed by former KLA members, and he
is expected to hand it over to the judges of the special
tribunal. The Prosecutor's dossier contains the names
of 120 KLA commanders expected to be charged with
the enforced disappearance of 320 Serbs in the regions
of Orahovac, Drenica and Metohija.

Given that Serbia has done all it could to elucidate
and prosecute all those who committed crimes against
the Albanian population in Kosovo, we rightfully
expect that the full truth will be known and that all
those responsible for those heinous war crimes against
Serbs in Kosovo will be punished. The families of Serb
victims have an equal right, like other victims of crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia in
the 1990s, to see that justice is done.

For the historical reconciliation of the two nations
and a comprehensive solution for the problem of Kosovo,
it is necessary that both sides make compromises.
We have done our bit and will continue the dialogue
with the same intensity and greatest constructiveness.
However, Pristina must be made aware that there can
be no durable and comprehensive solution without an
agreement with Serbia and a Security Council decision.
Fifteen years have elapsed since the armed conflict
in Kosovo and Metohija. Instead of living in the past
and making mutual recriminations, it is time to reach
a sustainable solution for the future of the two nations.
We reach out a hand to touch the other side. Our hand is
extended for the sake of our children and their children.

Last week, Serbia was hit by catastrophic floods,
among the largest that have affected Europe in the
last 100 years. The natural disaster claimed dozens of
human lives, flooded towns and villages, destroyed
arable lands, devastated the economy and caused
inestimable damage. To diminish the magnitude of
the catastrophe, the citizens heeded the call of their
Government and expressed a high level of solidarity,
fighting courageously and calmly to save what was
possible to save. Unfortunately, notwithstanding an
enormous will and desire, we cannot rebuild alone
what has been destroyed. We need assistance to make it
possible for the citizens to restore what they have lost,
to redo agricultural work where possible and, where it
is not, to help them weather the year and begin the next
year under more normal conditions. The Council has
received DVDs featuring some of the tragedy that hit
Serbia. I would appreciate it ifCouncil members viewed
them. Humans do not demean themselves if they ask for
help, but they are great only if they proffer help.

I express my gratitude to all countries and peoples
that have helped or that will help Serbia in the coming
period to overcome the tragedy and destruction brought
about in catastrophic floods. We do not ask from others
what they do not have, but only part of what they have
in excess of their needs. Their little more is much for
us, and it is necessary. For what is the meaning of life
other than to show empathy and the will to help others.

