Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I should
like to join my colleagues in thanking Ambassador
Grauls for his report and for his work chairing the very
important Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). My delegation will continue to support
him fully in securing the full implementation of

resolution 1737 (2006), resolution 1747 (2007) and
resolution 1803 (2008).

In order to assist in that task, the United
Kingdom, together with our colleagues France and the
United States of America, circulated the list of Iranian
banks referred to in the report. We believe that sharing
information and best practice is a useful and
constructive way to improve overall implementation,
and by providing additional information about Iran's
financial institutions, we believe we can help Member
States make better informed decisions on how to carry
out their obligations under resolution 1803 (2008),
including the call for Member States to exercise
vigilance over certain institutions.

We encourage all members of the Council to be
transparent and to inform the 1737 Committee of the
actions that they have taken to implement the relevant
resolutions. That is particularly important given the
efforts Iran is making to evade the Chapter VII
sanctions.

Last month, the European Union adopted a new
Common Position that will assist the effective
implementation of those resolutions, especially with
regard to financial vigilance, and includes rigorous
reporting requirements for Iranian banks.

As the report of Ambassador Grauls makes clear,
there is no blanket ban on nuclear-related cooperation
with Iran, and it is welcome that his briefing referred to
a Member State following the required procedures
before going ahead with work related Iran's civil
nuclear power programme. We are not trying to prevent
Iran having such a programme. In fact, we have offered
Iran extensive support to develop its civil nuclear
programme in the package provided by Britain, France,
Germany, China, Russia and the United States, the
so-called European Union (EU) 3+3.

However, we do have very profound concerns
about Iran's intentions for its nuclear programme.
Taken as a whole, Iran's nuclear activities make no
sense to us unless Iran's goal is to develop a nuclear
weapons capability.

Three steps are required of Iran. First, Iran must
suspend all of its enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities. Iran continues to flout that legally binding
Security Council requirement for a suspension.
Secondly, Iran must fully implement the Additional
Protocol and the other measures demanded by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Without
that, the IAEA continues to be unable to provide
assurances on the absence of undeclared nuclear
material and activities in Iran, and it will not be able to
determine whether the nature of Iran's programme is
exclusively peaceful. Thirdly, Iran must resolve
outstanding issues of concern to the IAEA, including
what the agency calls "the alleged studies", by
delivering fully on all outstanding issues.

It is self-evident that Iran has not met its
obligations under those three resolutions. The offer of
the EU 3+3 remains on the table, but it is of great
disappointment that Iran has not engaged seriously,
despite the refreshed offer from the EU 3+3 and the
direct participation of a representative of the United
States in the meeting with Iranian officials.

Our objective remains a diplomatic solution to
this matter and for the international community to be
able to build up, over time, international confidence in
Iran's intentions, but that requires a much more
constructive approach from Iran. To date, its
cooperation with the Security Council and with the
IAEA has fallen woefully short. Our offer remains on
the table, but given the absence of cooperation by Iran,
we have no alternative but to start a discussion with
our partners on further measures, as signaled in
resolution 1803 (2008).

