Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union position on the Middle
East peace process has been clear, consistent and
unequivocal for many years and will remain so. The
only realistic way to solve the conflict is through an
agreement between the parties that ends the occupation
that began in 1967, that ends all claims and that fulfils
the aspirations of both sides. A lasting solution to the
conflict must be achieved that would see the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition. The
present regional context makes the urgency of such a
solution even more pressing.

Let me point out that, in the interests of time, I shall
deliver a shortened version of my statement. I draw the
attention of delegations to the full text, which will be
circulated.

The preservation of the viability of the two-State
solution must remain a priority. We are concerned
about developments on the ground that could make
the prospect of a two-State solution increasingly
unattainable. Israel should halt all new settlements
in the West Bank. We continue to urge the parties to
renew their commitment to the two-State solution, to
build trust and to resume meaningful negotiations with
the aim of achieving a comprehensive peace agreement.
The European Union also reiterates its call upon the
Palestinian leadership to use constructively its United
Nations status and not to undertake steps that could
lead further away from a negotiated solution.

The international community must assume its
responsibility in facilitating such a resumption of
negotiations. The Quartet must redouble its efforts
to facilitate a renewed peace process and, in doing
so, reach out to all stakeholders, in particular in the
region. In that context, it must be recalled that the Arab
Peace Initiative - the continued validity of which
was confirmed recently by Arab leaders- remains
of strategic importance for any future comprehensive
peace agreement.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace and security, including with
regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, We therefore
fully support continued efforts within the Council to
find common ground on a draft resolution that would
convey an authoritative message to the parties about
the framework within which to reach an agreement. We
believe that the EU position on final status parameters,
as set out in Council conclusions, can provide a basis
for rapidly steering such efforts towards consensus.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. Basic
infrastructure and services must be restored. Pledges
made by members of the international community
towards the reconstruction of Gaza need to be
honoured as a matter of urgency. We continue to call
for a fundamental change of the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end
of the closure. The parties must urgently make progress
towards a durable ceasefire, based on their agreement
in Cairo on 26 August, and reach an agreement that both
ends the Gaza closure and addresses Israel's legitimate
security concerns. The Palestinian factions should
put aside their rivalries in favour of a real national
reconciliation, restoring Governmental control by the
Palestinian Authority in the Gaza Strip, starting with
a re-opening of the crossing points and Civil service
reform.

The European Union offers its full support to
the Secretary-General's newly appointed Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov. Last week, the Council of the European
Union appointed Mr. Fernando Gentilini as EU Special
Representative for the Middle East Peace Process.
We reiterate our substantial offer to Israelis and
Palestinians ofa special privileged partnership with the
European Union in the event of peace. The EU remains
determined to follow very closely developments on the
ground and their broader implications, and remains
ready to take further action to preserve the two-State
solution. Together, the parties, the neighbouring
countries and the wider international community must
do all they can to engage finally and decisively on the
path of a comprehensive solution to the entire Israeli-
Arab conflict. For its part, the European Union is
firmly intent on being present and engaged at all stages
of such a process.

The European Union remains committed to
achieving lasting peace, stability and security in Syria,
Iraq and the wider region, as well as to countering the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). To that end, on 16 March, we adopted conclusions
on a detailed regional strategy focusing on these
priorities. We reiterate that a lasting solution urgently
requires a Syrian-led inclusive political process, and we
fully support Special Envoy de Mistura's intention to
push for consultations with all the relevant domestic and
international actors, with a focus on the contents of the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). There is an
urgent need to revive the political process and advance
the prospects for achieving a political transition, based
on the Geneva communique and in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We deplore the ongoing violations and abuses
of international humanitarian and human rights
law. Perpetrators of such abuses need to be held to
account. Justice and accountability should therefore be
included in the political process from the outset. We
call on all Syrian parties to show clear and concrete
commitment to such a political process, and we urge
those with influence on the parties - and notably on
the Al-Assad regime - to put pressure on them to end
all violence and to engage constructively in the process.
We also call on all parties to respect their international
obligations to ensure the protection of civilians. The
European Union strongly condemns the escalation of
violence by the Al-Assad regime, whose brutal war
against its own people, massive human rights violations
and systematic obstruction of democratic reforms have
heavily contributed to the flourishing ofISIL in Syria.

The conditions in the Palestinian refugee camp
in Yarmouk have become critical and need to be
addressed with the utmost urgency. The ongoing
denial of humanitarian access to the refugees living in
Yarmouk by the Syrian regime and other belligerents
is unacceptable. All sides should cease their hostilities
in order to ensure immediate and unconditional
humanitarian access to those in need and provide safe
passage for all civilians who wish to leave the camp,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

As the European Union, we commend the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for the important work it
is doing. We will continue to work together with its
Commissioner-General, Pierre Krahenbiihl, and all
other partners to help alleviate the suffering of people
in the greatest need.

We also note with serious concern that humanitarian
needs continue to increase, while access is being
hampered by an increasing number of constraints.
The European Union condemns the Al-Assad regime's
continued intransigence on humanitarian access. We
reiterate our call on all parties, in particular the Al-Assad
regime, to comply with and immediately implement
in full the provisions of the relevant resolutions. We
will seek to accelerate the implementation of those
resolutions to deliver cross-border and cross-line
assistance in order to help those most desperately in
need.

Finally, the European Union is deeply concerned
about the allegations of the use of toxic chemicals in
barrel bomb attacks in the Idlib governorate between
16 and 31 March. If these alleged chlorine attacks
are substantiated, they would violate the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2209 (2015), which envisage further measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in
case of non-compliance. The international community
must ensure that impunity does not prevail.

