Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We are
meeting today in the wake of an important and historic
step, the result of joint efforts at the international and
regional level that have succeeded in putting out the
flames of the conflict that has been raging in Darfur for
a number of years. We wish to express our thanks to
the African Union and our gratitude for the mediation
efforts made by President Olusegun Obasanjo;
President Nguesso of the Congo; and the Special
Envoy of the African Union, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim.
We would like also to pay tribute to the Government of
National Unity in the Sudan for its flexibility and to
the other parties to the conflict in Darfur for their
cooperation. That led to the signing of the peace
agreement, which we hope will be signed by the other
parties.

We would like to express special thanks to the
United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
European Union, as well as to all States sponsoring the
peace process in Darfur, for their efforts. They have
shown that diplomacy is the best means of resolving
chronic conflicts that arms and violence cannot solve.

The achievement registered as a result of this
joint effort is but a first step towards establishing
security and peace in Darfur and in the Sudan as a
whole. That makes it incumbent upon all parties to take
the remaining steps so as to ensure its success and
render it a concrete fact on the ground. The parties
must realize that their interests are intertwined and that
it is in the interest of all to maintain stability.

It is imperative, in order to build on the success
achieved so far, that all parties evince a sense of
responsibility, especially those that have not yet signed
the peace accord. The Council must bring the
necessary pressure to bear to deliver a clear message to
those parties to join the peace process and to refrain
from attempting to derail it.

The crisis in Darfur afflicts primarily human
beings; it is they who pay the price of conflict,
especially women and children. Although we are
convinced that this responsibility is above all a
national one, we believe that the international
community also bears the responsibility for fulfilling
the obligation of ensuring undiminished flows of
assistance, honouring the promise of providing the
support and resources already pledged in order to
consolidate stability, security and peace; achieving
reconstruction; and guaranteeing the voluntary return
of displaced persons to their homes. That may also
require assigning a vital role in this regard to the
Peacebuilding Commission, in coordination with the
Sudan's Government of National Unity.
The spirit of responsibility demonstrated by the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan is the
strongest evidence of its sincere desire to settle the
Darfur crisis. That will require the spirit of cooperation
to be maintained, and we feel that it is important for
the Security Council to work with that Government, in
respect for its sovereignty, in order to secure its
consent and cooperation as regards the expansion of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan to include Darfur.

In conclusion, we pay tribute once again to the
efforts that the African Union Mission in Darfur has
made and continues to make, despite the limited
resources at its disposal.

