Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of the European Union.
Of course I want to pay tribute to Sir John
Holmes, whose last statement to the Council in his
capacity as Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian
Affairs we have heard today. Thanks to his work, the
Council today better understands the situation on the
ground.

I will devote my statement to two points -
peacekeeping operations and the respect for
international humanitarian law.

First, with regard to peacekeeping operations, it
behooves us to continue our efforts to strengthen the
strategic control of these operations. We would like the
informal group of experts, with the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, to
provide a follow-up on the protection of civilians. The
success of the United Nations will be measured by the
significant contribution that our actions bring to the
protection of civilians. Our credibility is at stake here.

That having been said, the responsibility for the
protection of civilians primarily falls to national
authorities. A peacekeeping operation can make up for
a State's weaknesses or temporarily support its actions,
but that does not in any way diminish the responsibility
of host States, first of all with regard to the protection
of individuals and their rights.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
illustrate the challenges confronting us.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
protection of civilians remains the priority of the Blue
Helmets' mandate. The situation remains volatile,
especially in the eastern part of the country. It is out of
the question to consider having MONUSCO leave as
long as the Congolese security forces are not in a
position to take over in good conditions. The training
of the army and police should lead to redeployment of
the forces of order in liberated areas without any
security vacuum, and to the lasting restoration of the
authority of the Congolese State, including in the
judicial field, throughout the territory.

In Chad, we are wedded to the preserving the
continuity of the protection of civilians. That is why
we have ensured that the transfer of the protection
mission of MINURCAT to the Chadian authorities will
be as gradual and coordinated as possible.
Beyond MINURCAT and MONUSCO, civilians
remain a concern of the Council. In Darfur, attacks
against civilians do not come about by chance; they are
organized and have been deemed crimes against
humanity by the International Criminal Court. In the
climate of impunity that prevails in Darfur, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
faces repeated attacks, which prevent it from protecting
civilians in a satisfactory way. The Security Council
will have to look at ways to respond to the situation.

Peacekeeping operations are critical, but so also,
as I have said, is respect for international humanitarian
law.

All the parties to a conflict, States as well as
armed non-State groups, must respect international
humanitarian law. They must spare civilians in the
conduct of hostilities and grant special attention to
women and children. Our primary responsibility is to
ensure that they do not Shirk that obligation.

Indiscriminate attacks against civilians and
attacks against humanitarian actors have become
increasingly commonplace. Humanitarian space is no
longer a sanctuary. The obstacles to access to
humanitarian aid in Sudan, for example, are of a
criminal nature. The blockade of the Gaza Strip must
be lifted. The recent decision of the Israeli Government
constitutes a first step, but nothing more that a first
step, on the path which must lead to the lifting of the
embargo.

We would like to see the Security Council better
and more regularly informed on the scale of
restrictions to humanitarian access, on a country-by-
country basis. The informal group of experts on the
protection of civilians must address those issues as
well as the other threats facing civilians in situations
we are tracking. For our part we are determined to act
against those who deliberately seek to deprive civilians
of humanitarian assistance, including by adopting
sanctions, as the relevant sanctions committee has
already done in the case of Somalia.

Violations of international humanitarian law must
not remain unpunished, which means that impartial and
independent investigations are required. In principle,
they should be conducted by national authorities and
lead to trials of those responsible. In cases where the
authorities are incapable of conducting such
investigations alone, or do not wish to, the United
Nations must act, as a support or in their place.
23

In that regard, we welcome the cooperation of the
Guinean authorities with the International Commission
of Inquiry set up by the Secretary-General following
the massacre of 28 September 2009, as well as with the
International Criminal Court in the context of its
preliminary inquiry. We welcome the appointment of
the members of the panel of experts established on
22 June to advise the Secretary-General regarding
responsibilities relative to allegations of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
during the final stages of the conflict in Sri Lanka. We
urge the Government of Sri Lanka to cooperate with
them and thus to fulfil the commitment it has
undertaken to fight against impunity. There will be no
lasting peace without justice. France has also called for
the establishment of a board of inquiry on the events in
Kyrgyzstan.

Beyond the crises which may draw the attention
of international public opinion, States must resolutely
commit themselves to the fight against impunity. We
call upon all States, especially the Sudan, to ratify the
Statue of Rome and to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court in conformity with Council resolution
1593 (2005).

