Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Palestine welcomes
this open Security Council ministerial debate on
children and armed conflict, and we extend our deep
appreciation to the French presidency for having
convened such a timely debate. We firmly share the
belief that the protection of children in armed conflict
is a matter of immense importance. The interest shown
by the Council is both appropriate and necessary, and
we hope that it will continue to give it priority
attention until sufficient and serious protection of
children in armed conflict is granted in all cases,
without selectivity or inaction based on political
considerations.

Before continuing, Palestine would also like to
take this opportunity to welcome Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
We congratulate her and wish her success in her task of
furthering the cause of protecting children affected by
armed conflicts. We are hopeful that her efforts will
greatly contribute to ensuring that the plight of
children exposed to violations and abuses during armed
conflicts will be more vigorously addressed by the
international community. In this connection, we would
like to thank her for her recent statement, issued on 20
July 2006, calling for the protection of children in the

Middle East. We would also like to thank Ms. Ann
Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF, for her
attendance and for her participation in this debate. We
thank them both for their thought-provoking statements
and hope that their ideas and proposals are given
careful consideration. We also welcome the presence
and participation of the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

For more than 39 years, Israel, the occupying
Power, has been committing serious violations and
grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention in its
policies and practices against the Palestinian people,
including Palestinian children. It continues to
flagrantly and systematically violate their human
rights, in violation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The Israeli
occupation has permeated every level of their lives,
affecting even their most basic rights and gravely
impairing and endangering their lives and their very
future.

I regret to state that it is very difficult for the
Security Council to assert credibility, or claim success,
in dealing with the issue of the protection of children
in armed conflict when it has repeatedly failed to
effectively respond to the protection needs of
Palestinian children and other children in our region.
Here I refer to the increased need for urgent action in
that area during the past several years, and most
recently, over the past several weeks, during the latest
Israeli aggression against the besieged Gaza Strip and
its captive civilian population, including children,
many of whom have been killed, injured, maimed, left
homeless, left motherless and fatherless, terrorized and
traumatized by the occupying forces. The death toll
among the Palestinian people - devoid of protection
by the international community - has, just in the past
few weeks, surpassed 100 people, at least 16 of them
children. Even more tragic is the fact that, since
September 2000, the number of Palestinian civilians
killed by the Israeli occupying forces now totals more
than 4,000 Palestinians, including over 800 children.

These staggering figures do not include the
thousands of innocent and defenceless children
seriously injured by the Israeli occupying forces.
Sadly, the lives of Palestinian children under Israeli
occupation are under constant threat, for there is no
refuge or safe haven, when even their homes,

classrooms, playgrounds and hospitals are not safe
from the excessive and indiscriminate assaults carried
out by the occupying Power.

In that connection, we continue to call on the
international community, especially the Security
Council, to fulfil its obligations and to take the
necessary measures to ensure the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population, including in particular
children, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and not to leave them any
longer at the mercy of the brute force and illegal
policies and practices of the occupying Power.

Another important issue that must be brought to
the attention of the Council is the fact that the deaths of
Palestinian children at the hands of Israeli occupying
forces are usually given only a cursory investigation, if
any. Indictments of members of the Israeli occupying
forces for the killing or injury of civilians are rare, and
convictions are almost unheard of. That has fostered a
culture of impunity among the occupying forces and
heightened their perception that they are immune from
the law and will not be held accountable for their
illegal actions. It is scarcely surprising, then, that
Israeli occupying forces act with an air of moral
immunity, often shooting excessively, unnecessarily
and indiscriminately.

One stark example of the occupying Power's
indifference to the right of Palestinian children to life
is an Israeli military court's decision of 15 November
2005 to clear an Israeli occupying force commander of
a range of charges, including illegally using his
weapon after he fired a stream of bullets into the body
of an already-injured 13-year old Palestinian schoolgirl
in Rafah. At the time of the incident, in October 2004,
transcripts of the occupying Power's radio
communication exchange revealed that occupying
forces in the watchtower had quickly identified Iman
Al-Hems - who was dressed in a school uniform
issued by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East - as "a girl of
about 10 [who was] scared to death". As Iman was
running away from the army post, she was shot in the
leg and fell to the ground. At that point, the occupying
force commander moved in and, standing over the
helpless Iman, shot her twice in the head, walked away,
turned back and fired a stream of bullets into her body,
"confirming the kill", as he termed it.

Indeed, such horrifying actions are a blatant
violation of the right to life - the fundamental right of
any human being and a right which States parties must
expressly recognize under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. But it is not just the right to life
that Israel deliberately denies Palestinian children. The
policies and practices of the occupying Power violate a
countless number of the rights set out in the
Convention and other binding international legal
instruments, including the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949. Accordingly, it is imperative that
measures ultimately be taken to hold the perpetrators
of such crimes accountable and to bring them to
justice, for without such measures the culture of
impunity that we are now witnessing will only grow,
with even more disastrous consequences.

I would like to acknowledge that the concept
paper regarding this debate suggested that we remain
focused on the subject matter and make suggestions. In
our opinion, the issue is clear and can be summarized
in one word: compliance. That includes compliance
with relevant instruments of international humanitarian
law and human rights law and compliance with the
Security Council's own resolutions. That will
ultimately provide the most comprehensive protection
for children in armed conflict. We add to that, once
again, the need to avoid selectivity, be it with regard to
enforcing compliance or in dealing with the matter as a
whole.

In conclusion, we believe that the establishment
of the reporting and monitoring mechanism, as well as
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as outlined in resolution 1612 (2005),
is a good start in providing the foundation for
addressing the issue before us. We invite
Ms. Coomaraswamy to visit the occupied Palestinian
territory, as we have requested in the past of former
Special Representative Olara Otunnu, to examine the
absence of protection for Palestinian children under
Israeli occupation and to make concrete suggestions on
ways to ensure the protection they so desperately need,
as is accorded to them under international law. The
Security Council Group should also play a leading role
in that regard. Serious and urgent efforts must be
undertaken to put an end to the dire situation facing
Palestinian children. They, like all children of the
world, deserve to live in a world in which they can
grow, play and learn in freedom, peace and security.

