Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of Venezuela to convene this
open debate of the Security Council on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. I thank
the Permanent Representative of Kenya, Ambassador
Kamau; the Permanent Representative of Sweden,
Ambassador Skoog; and Ambassador Rosenthal for
their respective briefings.

A few days ago, we mourned with a heavy heart
the passing of Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, former
Secretary-General of the United Nations. In 1992, in
his report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111),
he introduced the concept of peacebuilding. In 2005,
the General Assembly and the Security Council
adopted respective resolutions deciding to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office, marking
a historic step by the United Nations in the area
of peacebuilding.

In recent years, the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture has been actively supporting reconstruction
and State-building in post-conflict countries and
assisted West African countries in coping with the Ebola
epidemic. United Nations peacebuilding practices in
countries such as Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste have
already become success stories in this regard.

At present, regional conflicts are producing major
spillover effects, and traditional and non-traditional
security threats are interwoven. Some post-conflict
countries are facing the risk of the resurgence of war.
How to improve our work in the area of peacebuilding,
consolidate the fruits of the process and achieve lasting
peace are the major topics to be explored by the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.

China wouldlike to elaborate on the following points.

First, we must adhere to the "host-country-led and
host-country-driven" principle. Peacebuilding efforts
must be based on the consent of the host country
and be tasked with enhancing the capacity-building
capabilities of the host country; our goal should be to
achieve lasting peace and stable development in the
countries concerned. The international community
must respect the sovereignty and ownership of post-
conflict countries, give full play to the initiatives of the
countries concerned and provide constructive support
and assistance to these countries.

The idea that peacebuilding actions can take over
most - or indeed even all - of the role that should be
played by the host country Government is not desirable.

Secondly, the peacebuilding architecture should
serve as a communication platform between the host
country and the stakeholders of the international
community. Peacebuilding is a systems project that
includes multiple areas such as political, security
and social development, and involves multiple actors,
including the host-country Government, international
financial institutions and regional organizations.
International financial institutions should focus on
helping the countries concerned to improve their
capability to generate and mobilize resources and
provide a solid basis for future development.

The African Union and other regional organizations
should give full play to their geographical advantages
and explore and formulate regional solutions for
peacebuilding. The United Nations should enhance
coordination and allow all actors to fully leverage their
respective advantages and expertise, so as to create an
effective division of labour and synergies.

Thirdly, wemustproceedfromthe actual needs ofthe
countries concerned and adopt a tailor-made approach.
Post-conflict countries have different national realities.
Even in the same country, peacebuilding needs and
priorities may vary from one stage to another. When
formulating work plans for peacebuilding, we must
take into full consideration the local conditions, respect
the views of the host country, pay attention to its actual
needs and ensure that our plans and work are in full
alignment with the overall national strategy and priority
development areas. In the process of implementation,
there should be regular evaluation of its effectiveness
on the ground so that timely adjustments and additional
measures can be taken in accordance with the needs of
the host country.

Fourthly, we must attach importance to the
communication and connection between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping operations. In conflict-stricken
countries where peacekeepers have been deployed,
peacekeeping missions are familiar with the local
situation and have access to a wealth of information and
intelligence. United Nations peacebuilding efforts must
focus on strengthening connections with peacekeeping
operations so as to ensure the sharing of resources. In
the final stage of a peacekeeping mission's lifespan,
the mission should seek to ensure and maintain the
lasting stability of the host country and enhance its
communication with the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, so as to ensure that peacebuilding efforts
can be carried out smoothly after the departure of
the mission.

Fifthly, we must give full play to the important role
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The PBC comprises
members of the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. The
PBC is well informed in many areas and has an in- depth
understanding of peacebuilding work in particular
countries. The Peacebuilding Commission should
consider further strengthening its ties with the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council so as to actively advice on issues such
as the consolidation of peace, enhancing the capacity
of host countries and developing country-specific
mechanisms. The Security Council should enhance its
communication with the PBC and its country-specific
configurations so as to provide better guidance in
this area.

