Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz: It is a
pleasure and a privilege for me to be here today. The
subject I will focus on is the use of advanced technology
in peacekeeping and the associated benefits, not only to
the Mission but to the United Nations and the Security
Council at all levels.

This topic is of particular relevance to the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) at this
time as we prepare for the arrival of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). A very extensive selection process is
being run by the Secretariat for a contractor to field and
operate the complete UAV system. We hope to see its
arrival in the Democratic Republic of the Congo very
soon.

This capability will certainly help us in addressing
some of the major tasks set out in our most recent
mandate under resolution 2098 (2013). How will we use
these assets? We will use the UAVs to identify armed
groups headquarters, logistics hubs, troop movements,
convoys, clandestine air strips and roadblocks; to
obtain early warning of armed groups' movements
and intentions; and to monitor camps for internally
displaced persons. The ability to fly over sensitive
areas for extended periods of hours and days will
provide timely information. Those UAVs will help to
deter hostile action by the armed groups and to trigger
the use of rapid reaction forces.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there
may be contingents from Portugal, Spain, Italy, France,
the Netherlands, Germany, Austria and Poland in the
same area - making it impossible to operate without
very good information. I believe that information as
key to the success of any mission.

I should not limit myself to discussing UAVs
alone. There are other advanced military technologies
that also have the potential to offer major benefits for
United Nations peacekeeping. We are already using
ground-based radar in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to provide better knowledge and awareness of
activity on the Great Lakes. There is also the potential
to make much greater use of surveillance technology to
bolster monitoring capacity, as in the context of cross-
border activity. We have borders with many countries
and more than 50 armed groups operating close to
those borders, which they may cross, leading to broader
disturbances. High-resolution imagery could be of
significant use as material evidence. In a similar vein,
the selective employment of signals intelligence could
enable peacekeepers to stay one step ahead of those
posing a threat to peace, which would undoubtedly
help to mitigate the risks both to the population and to
United Nations troops and personnel.

Other advanced military technologies that could
deliver benefits in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo include weapon-locating systems, boats, radar
and acoustic technology. These are important because
the rebels may use the territory of foreign countries
as a base for fighting. That is something we need to
know. We have scanners and forward-looking infrared
systems in our helicopters and aircraft. We have GPS
trackers in our vehicles. Small and mini unmanned
aircraft systems are extremely important for tactical
operations. We should also note that the adoption
of other basic technologies, such as night-sights for
weapons, both thermal and image-intensifying, man-
portable surveillance radar and laser range-finders
would confer excellent benefits. The problem is that we
need more than advanced technology. At the moment,
we need much more basic technology.

While pointing to the many potential benefits of
the increased used of advanced military technology
in United Nations peacekeeping, there are certain
sensitivities and limitations that need to be recognized.
The use of surveillance devices could be regarded
as overly intrusive by host nations if not adequately
controlled, including the information that is generated.
Only unarmed UAVs will be used in MONUSCO.

Advanced technology also often requires skilled
operators and analysis to support it. Such resources
are often in scarce supply, particularly for the United
Nations, which is heavily dependent on others for
most of its military manpower. When we increase
the technological resources in our mission, we need
to adapt the structures we have. We need to have
much more information. We need to have many more
analysts. We need to have much more structure to deal
with the intelligence. It is important to ensure that we
can fully exploit the information and intelligence that
are captured. If we do not link our structures to the new
technology as it is adopted, the results are likely to be
suboptimal.

I would like to highlight the fact that the benefits
of this technology relate not only to the results they
bring to the mission. They are important at all levels,
especially with regard to the political conclusions made
because the political analysts have real evidence of
what is going on the ground.

In this brief address, I have pointed to some of the
potential opportunities presented by advanced military
technology for United Nations peacekeeping. No two
United Nations peacekeeping missions are the same.
While such technology might be good for one mission,
it might not be as beneficial for another. Indeed, I have
not discussed technologies that, while not suitable to
MONUSCO, might suit other missions particularly
well.

Technology has its limitations and will not always
be the answer to our challenges. In MONUSCO, we
will soon have a chance to see for ourselves what UAVs
can do for peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It promises to be a very interesting and
instructive period for us, and we will be keen to share
our experiences as we proceed forward.

