Mr. Zhang Jun (China (spoke in Chinese): We
listened closely to Assistant Secretary- General Khiari's
briefing.

Since early 2018, thanks to the concerted efforts of
the parties concerned, there have been positive changes
in the situation on the Korean peninsula and the issue
of the peninsula has been steered back on track towards
a negotiated solution through dialogue. Earlier this
year, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
the United States held meetings between their leaders
in Hanoi and Panmunjom, as well as working-level
consultations in Stockholm, which are positive step
towards greater mutual understanding between the two
parties.

At the same time, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has honoured its promise to suspend nuclear
tests and the test launches of intercontinental ballistic
missiles and has declared on multiple occasions its
commitment to the denuclearization of the peninsula.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
United States, as the principal parties to the peninsula
issue, should cherish the hard-won relaxation of the
situation on the peninsula, achieved through dialogue,
and work together by taking practical measures to
achieve the denuclearization of and lasting peace on the
Korean peninsula.

The situation on the Korean peninsula has recently
taken another turn, leading to renewed tension
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the United States and bringing the situation on
the peninsula once again to a critical juncture. China
notes that, on 7 September, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea conducted a test and made a related
public statement. So far, the details of the test, what it
involved and other specific information have yet to be
established. The Security Council should therefore not
jump to hasty conclusions.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
taken a series of positive steps towards denuclearization,
but its legitimate concerns and aspirations with regard
to security and development have not been given
the attention they deserve and remain unanswered.
That is one significant reason explaining the current
deadlock in dialogue and increasing tensions related
to the situation. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and especially the United States should take
advantage of the hard-won window of opportunity,
take on board and respect one another's stances in good
faith, demonstrate genuine flexibility and good will,
act on the consensus reflected in the Singapore joint
statement and, by taking a phased and synchronized
approach, break the deadlock and resume dialogue and
engagement as soon as possible so as to prevent the
dialogue process from derailing or reversing course.

The international community, in particular the main
parties to the peninsula issue, must take an objective
and impartial position, act in the service of long-term
interests and the greater good, and make additional
efforts contributing to the relaxation of tensions in the
dialogue and consultations between the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the political process on
the peninsula so as to avoid plunging the region into
tensions and confrontations.

The Security Council's resolutions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea should
be comprehensively, completely and accurately
implemented. Sanctions are only a means to an end,
not an end in and of themselves. Enforcing sanctions is
required by the relevant Council resolutions. Pushing
for a political solution is also required by the relevant
Council resolutions. Currently, there is a greater sense
of urgency to find a political settlement to the issue on
the peninsula.

Advancing the denuclearization of the peninsula
in parallel with establishing a peace mechanism on
the peninsula, is the only realistic and feasible way to
solve the issue politically. It is the Security Council's
important responsibility to maintain peace and stability
on the peninsula and move the denuclearization process
forward. In the current context, the top priority is to
maintain the international consensus and momentum to
reach a political solution to the peninsula issue, support
and urge the United States and the Democratic People's

Republic of Korea to meet one another half way and do
everything we can to head off a dramatic reversal of the
peninsula situation.

It is imperative that the Council take action and
invoke the reversible provisions in resolutions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea as soon as
possible in the light of the evolving situation on the
peninsula and make the necessary adjustments to the
sanctions measures stipulated by those resolutions,
especially in areas where the livelihood of the people of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is at stake.
That is in keeping with the spirit of the resolutions,
which are conducive to easing the humanitarian and
livelihood-related situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, creating a favourable environment
for dialogue, encouraging the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to take greater strides towards
denuclearization and creating the necessary conditions
for and impetus to a political settlement of the situation
on the peninsula.

China has been consistent in its commitment to the
denuclearization of the peninsula, the maintenance of
peace and stability there and the settlement of all issues
through dialogue and consultations. Approaching the
matter responsibly, China has played a constructive role
by maintaining close communication and coordination
with the parties concerned and encouraging peace
talks between them. With regard to implementing
the Security Council's resolutions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, China has unfailingly and
conscientiously fulfilled its international obligations
and sustained huge losses and tremendous pressure in
the process of implementing the relevant sanctions.

China maintains that the Security Council
sanctions against the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea should not negatively affect humanitarian
activities. China calls on the Security Council to
remain united, discharge its historical responsibility
and speak unequivocally with one voice in support
of a political solution. China stands ready to continue
working together with all parties concerned towards
the peninsula's denuclearization and achieving lasting
peace and stability there.

