Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting,
which provides States non-members of the Security
Council with an opportunity to make their views
known regarding the Council's efforts to adopt a
universal, binding draft resolution aimed at preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) - a draft resolution that Council members
will adopt after lengthy consultations to reach a
consensus among its members and after taking into
account the viewpoints of other United Nations
Member States interested in international peace and
security, such as Lebanon.

Lebanon - which, like other Arab States, shares
the views expressed very clearly a short while ago by
the representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement (NAM) - wishes to emphasize
that the draft resolution should take into account all the
points of view expressed at this meeting so that we can
achieve the total elimination of WMD and avert the
threat of the proliferation of such weapons, particularly
in the Middle East region.

Lebanon, like other Arab States, is a party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and is gravely concerned that Israel is the only
State in the region that does not participate in
international efforts aimed at establishing a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East, while it
possesses a complete arsenal of nuclear weapons and
the means of their delivery that are not subject to any
form of monitoring or inspection by the international
agency specializing in that area, as well as advanced
chemical and biological weapons.

Lebanon would like to ensure that the draft
resolution emphasizes that non-proliferation of WMD
begins with strict and rigorous inspection of their
manufacture and with the continuation of international
disarmament efforts.

In order to make the draft resolution more precise
and truly practicable, the Council should provide
definitions for some of the terms used in the text, which
have been referred to by many other States - including
NAM. member States - or use more precise terms.
Lebanon believes that the very important step to
be taken by the international community in adopting a
resolution based on the draft before us will prevent
States from avoiding their international responsibilities
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We should like to pay tribute to the Council's efforts to
attain that objective.

