The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We too would like to thank Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley for their important and
detailed presentations. We would like to express our
ongoing appreciation for their efforts in their respective
and complementary fields of action in bringing all
parties closer to an inclusive political solution to
the conflict in Yemen and in addressing the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world today.

Peru is following the developments in Yemen with
concern. While we welcome the recent preliminary
understandings at the technical level within the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, on which we
congratulate General Lollesgaard, we cannot fail to
emphasize the extremely fragile nature of the current
situation given the deep mistrust that still prevails
between the parties and the rigidity of their positions.

We believe that we are at a critical juncture, which
demands more than ever that the leaders of both parties
show concrete signs of genuine commitment and
political will that translate into tangible and expeditious
progress on crucial issues, such as the composition of
local security forces in Al-Hudaydah, the management
of revenue from commercial activity and the effective
implementation of the two phases envisaged in the
redeployment of the forces.

To that end, we stress the special responsibility of
those countries that are able to influence the warring
parties and that can and must do more to convince them
to moderate their positions, avoid further escalation,
strictly honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law and ultimately
comply with what was agreed in Al-Hudaydah. We
emphasize that the international community, in
particular the Council, cannot tolerate further delays
with regard to those critical issues or provocative and
destabilizing actions, including by third countries,
that could lead to an escalation of the conflict in an
environment in which the devastating humanitarian
crisis looming over that country continues to deteriorate
on the ground.

The significant increase in the number of people in
need of assistance and protection today, the 3.3 million
displaced Yemenis and the ravages caused by the new
outbreak of cholera are scourges for which we must
all feel partially responsible. The work of the United
Nations and various non-governmental entities in
alleviating human suffering is commendable, but the
reality is that their capacities are being overwhelmed
by the scale of the tragedy.

As the Organization has pointed out, the struggle
to prevent famine is being lost in Yemen. In such
circumstances, it is regrettable that the quantity of
imports continues to fall short of requirements as
a result of the persistence of severe and inhumane
restrictions imposed on the ports of Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef, which have resulted in disappointing trade
flows in essential goods, such as food, medicine and
fuel. In that regard, we reaffirm that ports, airports
and roads must remain open and operational and that
humanitarian aid and the population's access to it cannot
and must not be conditional on any military objective.
Moreover, humanitarian personnel must be able assist
the population in a safe and unrestricted manner.

We also encourage the countries that participated
in the pledging conference in February to disburse
their generous and critical contributions so that the
humanitarian response plan, which is crucial to filling
the gaps for the afflicted Yemeni population, can
resume its operations without impediment.

In conclusion, I stress the imperative that
Mr. Griffiths be able to continue to count on the
resolute support of the Council and the main actors
involved in the conflict in carrying out the complex
task of persuading the parties to agree to an inclusive
political solution endorsed by the United Nations, in
full respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Yemen.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

