Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to make a modest
contribution at this meeting of the Security Council on
the twenty-first report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(S/2009/344). I wish first of all to express my
Government's appreciation for the quality of the report,
which describes progress made in the implementation
of the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire.
09-42011

As the Secretary-General acknowledges in the
report before the Council, significant progress was
made during the past two years in the implementation
of the Ouagadougou Agreement and the supplementary
agreements. Indeed, the political environment in Cote
d'Ivoire continues to be peaceful due to gains made
through implementation of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement.

The President of the Republic and the Prime
Minister continue to carry out their activities in the
peace process with a view to strengthening the social
environment in the country. Among those activities are
State visits by the President to various regions of the
country previously occupied by the Forces nouvelles.
During the most recent visit, the President travelled
with the Prime Minister and several other members of
the Government to the Montagnes, Bafing and
Denguele regions from 7 to 21 June 2009, to bring
peace to the people and reunify the country.

Owing to this overall peaceful climate, all the
Ivorian political parties have been calmly carrying out
their activities throughout the country. As of 30 June
2009, overall statistics concerning registration for the
new identity cards show that about 6.5 million people,
or about 75 per cent of the intended target population,
have been registered.

Regarding security, the overall situation remained
stable during the reporting period, especially with the
redeployment of the 8,000 personnel of the Integrated
Command Centre throughout the country. A workshop
was held in Abidjan on 8 and 9 June to assess the
implementation of the fourth supplementary
agreement, during which priority activities were
identified for the next five months and a timetable was
set. The first meeting of entities in charge of following
up the implementation of the military aspects of the
fourth supplementary agreement was held on Thursday,
25 June. The report of the workshop was endorsed and
a programme of work adopted. A meeting will be held
every 15 days.

The next meeting of the Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement will be held on 9 August in Burkina Faso.
The meeting will be an opportunity to review the
remaining stages of the peace process.

In the coming months, priority will be given to
consolidating the reunification of the country,
continuing the regroupement, disarmament and
3
reintegration of ex-combatants, strengthening social
cohesion, and preparing and holding credible elections
on 29 November.

Following the assignment and ongoing
deployment of 8,000 members of mixed units of police
and gendarmerie elements, efforts will continue to be
made to consolidate the deployment of the mixed
forces and to give the Integrated Command Centre the
intervention logistics necessary to secure the electoral
process. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process already under way should
be strengthened through efforts to mobilize and
provide in a timely fashion the necessary resources in
the framework of the DDR process as soon as possible
and in accordance with the recommendations of the
fourth supplementary agreement.

With regard to the civil service, we will do our
utmost to ensure that the sites in Sangouine,
M'Bahiakro and Guingreni open in the coming months
so that 700 young people trained in the use of firearms
can be hosted with full room and board. The proposed
financing from the European Union, totalling
$7 million, should help to start the training of 4,000
people in six new vocational training centres
rehabilitated by the German Agency for Technical
Cooperation.

Together with financing from the World Bank
amounting to $17 million, which was concluded on
ll February, it will be possible to train in two years up
to 12,000 ex-combatants in eight centres: Bouake,
M'Bahiakro, Man, Gotongouine, Guingreni, Korhogo,
Daloa and Bondoukou. In addition, 10 other
provisional centres for other types of training would be
established.

Cote d'Ivoire is now irrevocably engaged in the
electoral process, with nearly 6.5 million people
registered in the country and abroad as of 30 June
2009, representing 75 per cent of the target population.
The most recent electoral laws under consideration will
be adopted shortly by the Government in order to
accelerate the implementation of the electoral process
so that the first round of elections can be held on
29 November. All the benchmarks and performance
indicators for the major areas identified in the
Ouagadougou Agreement and its supplementary
agreements, and annexed to the report of the Secretary-
General show steady progress in, if not the completion
of, the main stages of the process for ending the crisis.
All the latest information available to my
delegation points to the fact that presidential elections
will be held on 29 November, based on the following
timeline. Data processing for producing the voter
registration list started two days ago on 21 July, and
will end on 25 August. The provisional list will be
issued in early September. Claims regarding the
provisional list will be addressed throughout
September. The final electoral list will be issued during
the first week of October. Voter cards and national
identity cards will be distributed in October and
November. The electoral campaign will start on
15 November.

All these efforts by the Ivorian authorities should
give rise to renewed optimism as to the effective
holding of the first round of the presidential elections
on 29 November. Unfortunately, it is during this stage,
when the process is nearing completion, that there have
been some attacks on the peace process and the
institutions in Cote d'Ivoire. My delegation is referring
to the recent statements by French personalities who
made unfair and unjustified remarks against the Ivorian
authorities and the ongoing process.

My delegation would not have dwelt on these
remarks had it not been for the fact that they come
from a Power which holds a special status in the
settlement of the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. No one can
claim to be unaware that France has troops supporting
United Nations peacekeepers in Cote d'Ivoire, that
France is a permanent member of the Security Council,
that France initiates draft resolutions on Cote d'Ivoire,
and that France is therefore not just anybody in the
peace process in Cote d'Ivoire. This heavy
responsibility, as well as the influence and impact that
French attitudes and comments can have in Cote
d'Ivoire, should be reason for a greater sense of
restraint and responsibility on France's part.

In any case, in conclusion, I wish to reassure the
Council that the first round of presidential elections in
Cote d'Ivoire will definitely be held on 29 November.
Everything is being done politically and logistically,
and with the well-appreciated support of the United
Nations, to honour that date.

