Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to begin by thanking our briefers for their
enlightening statements. I also thank Senegal for
taking the initiative to convene this meeting with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on a matter
of such mutual concern - the fight against violent
extremism. That is an issue at the crux of our shared
concerns and affects all of our societies, irrespective
of their cultural identity or geographical location.
That being said, we need to understand the issue and
react appropriately, as highlighted by our briefers.
Cooperation between the United Nations and OIC is
important on all fronts but particularly in terms of the
need for pluralism and environmental awareness.

I would like to begin with the positive by
highlighting the significant successes seen this
year in the fight against Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and Syria. The Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities indicated in a recent report
that the total volume of online propaganda spread by
the group has decreased. That represents steps forward
that deserve to be highlighted.

Nevertheless, reality forces us to acknowledge
that ISIL continues to exercise significant appeal over
a number of individuals, particularly young people, in
many countries - my own country being no exception.
More needs to be done to counter that phenomenon.
Terrorist group propaganda, and particularly that of
ISIL, seeks to entice future recruits by playing on
political, economic and social motivations, as well as
psychological ones, which are dangerously powerful.
Specialists who have studied the subject have clearly
demonstrated that there is no unique profile of a
potential recruit nor any simple explanation as to why
individuals decide, sometimes incredibly rapidly, to
join a terrorist group. The reasons are multiple and
complex, combining collective mindsets and individual
trajectories, the broad sweep of history, personal
experiences and security, geopolitics, justice and
mental health issues.

Recruiters attract young people by playing on their
feelings of injustice and marginalization. They appeal
to their need for money and recognition, promising
them an ideal and a cause to defend, when in fact
they find nothing but tyranny, brutality and death.
They use the fascinating power of images to stun and
manipulate their targets' minds and even, if necessary,
known brainwashing techniques to lead their subjects
to reject their academic, professional and even familial
environments. They are particularly effective in two
environments: on the Internet and in prisons. Their
ideology of chaos is at the heart of terrorist propaganda
and has the dual purpose of spreading terror throughout
the majority and recruiting new fighters from a
restricted minority.

I would now like to turn to a second broad point.
Faced with such a large threat, each and every State
and regional organization has a role to play to shatter
that large-scale recruitment exercise. Against the
current backdrop, strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and OIC is more crucial than ever.
Earlier, the Ambassador of Spain offered many, very
interesting proposals along those lines, explaining how
we might enhance such cooperation, which could help
us to better understand the factors that lead to violent
radicalization and terrorism, as well as improve our
collective action in the fight against the terrorist threat.
Naturally, we must - and this is essential - take care
so as not to create false conflations. Muslims are by far
the principal victims of terrorism.

Our two institutions share common goals. The
OIC Programme of Action 2025, adopted at the OOIC
Summit in Istanbul in April, and an earlier 10-year
action plan called for the strengthening ofthe role of OIC
in matters of conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
rehabilitation in its member States, as well as in conflict
situations involving Muslim communities.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism provide an excellent
framework for cooperation with OIC. As was
highlighted by the General Assembly in June, priority
must henceforth be given to the implementation of the
principal recommendations of the Plan of Action. That
responsibility falls, first and foremost, on member States
and regional organizations, but the United Nations
will be there to assist them in establishing normative
frameworks or enhanced operational capacity building
activities. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre can also take on some of the burden of that
strengthened cooperation.

Finally, while strengthening cooperation between
States and between organizations, we must pursue
efforts to counter terrorist propaganda with the help
of the private sector, civil society organizations and
grassroots actors, all of whom contribute to forging
trusting civil societies that are diverse and democratic
and can generate employment for their young people.

France is greatly attached to the freedom ofthought
and speech and recognizes the deep extent to which they
are intertwined with the freedom of belief and other
fundamental freedoms that pave the way for respect for
pluralism and the views of others. Those principles must
be the driving force behind our teachings, actions and
practices. I fully endorse what Mr. Diagne had to say
along those lines regarding the pressing need to increase
our understanding and attachment to pluralism.

We must fight terrorism and its propaganda
of hatred with unrelenting determination and with
the necessary and proportionate means and the full
arsenal of the law, while fully respecting fundamental
freedoms. Those are the same human rights that the
terrorists wish to destroy, as they are the very bedrock
of our democracies. France will continue to contribute
fully to such endeavours.

