We welcome this opportunity to offer reflections on the interplay between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. Given the central importance of the rule of law at the international level, the importance of the role of the Court cannot be overstated. The Court's work has been remarkably successful. Its judgments and advisory opinions are widely respected and represent one of the most important sources of the development of international law. There is, however, much room to expand the Court's work. The most obvious point is that only 74 States Members of the United Nations have made a declaration under Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. Given the important relationship that the Council has with the Court, we believe that all States serving on it, in particular its permanent members, should show their commitment to the rule of law by making the relevant declaration. The Security Council also has the competence to ask for advisory opinions from the Court on questions of public international law. We welcome the significant increase in the number of requests for advisory opinions in recent years, some of which have led to landmark opinions by the Court - such as the advisory opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons. At the same time, that increase is due to the increased engagement of the General Assembly. The Council has used its important power in that respect only once in its history, as far back as 50 years ago. That is very surprising given that there is no lack of examples of Council members differing, at times sharply, on questions of public international law, and they certainly could have benefited from an advisory opinion on more than one occasion. If two thirds of the lifespan of the Council have been spent without resorting to an important legal tool, it can come as no surprise that the option is not even discussed anymore. But that can also change, and perhaps today's debate can be the beginning of a new conversation on that. We encourage all Council members dedicated to the rule of law to contemplate the option when it has the potential to inform the decision-making of the Council and resolve differences in legal interpretation that impede effective Council action. The most important contribution by the Council to the rule of law is in enforcing international law, beginning with its very own decisions. In that respect the Council certainly must do better. When permanent members take policy decisions that clearly violate Council resolutions, the authority of the Council as a whole is undermined significantly. The same is the case when they commit flagrant violations of international law, in particular the most serious forms of the illegal use of force against another State. We have witnessed all of that in the recent past. Those are actions that further remove the Council from its task to be a guardian of international law - be it the Charter of the United Nations or its very own decisions. As a consequence, the Council undermines its own authority and the obligation Member States have to implement its decisions. We are particularly concerned about recent trends concerning the application of international law with respect to the use of force, including Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. Excessively expansive and unchecked interpretations of Article 51 undermine the regulatory system set up by the drafters of the Charter 75 years ago and embraced by all of us when we joined the United Nations. In addition to its other powers reflected in the Charter of the United Nations, the Council also now has the option of referring situations of manifest violations of the prohibition of the illegal use of force provision for investigation by the International Criminal Court, an additional tool with which the Council can live up to its obligation to ensure the relevant parts of the Charter of the United Nations. Finally, the use of the veto is a key element of every discussion on the relationship of the Security Council with the rule of law. We share the view of those who believe that the veto power given to the permanent members in the Charter of the United Nations is a responsibility. In particular, they must ensure that no veto be cast that obviously contradicts the purposes and principles of the United Nations. As we all know, we have seen far too many vetoes in recent years that have not stood that test. We are of the view that any decision aimed at ending and preventing atrocity crimes should find the support of every Security Council member and never be subject to a veto. We welcome the fact that 122 States, including 10 Security Council members, have signed on to the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We hope that many others will join the code of conduct soon and work with Council members who are committed to its application in practice.
