The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
would like to invite all members of the Council to
observe a minute of silence for all of the victims of the
bombings in Algiers on 11 December 2007. The
victims of the bombings included 17 United Nations
staff members and a large number of Algerian nationals
and nationals of other countries. On behalf of the Council,
I would like to express profound sympathy and sincere
condolences to all of the victims of this devastating
tragedy, to their families and to the Government of
Algeria, as well as to the victims of all terrorist attacks.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Norway, Portugal and Somalia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dhakkar
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia.
It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.

I now give him the floor.


