Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): When one takes the floor following so many
other speakers, one cannot but be brief and join in the
positive statements that have been made. We have a
saying in Spanish to the effect that it is never too late to
say something good, although this comes after the loss
of so many lives.

These words follow on to the show of solidarity that
we have seen here since this morning, with the massive
support announced by the United States of America, the
initiative of the Secretary-General, and the adoption of
resolution 2177 (2014), which we all sponsored, with the
unanimous support of the members of the Council.

It is now time to walk the talk. I would like to
recommend here that it should not be left only to the
World Health Organization and UNICEF. Other United
Nations agencies such as the World Food Programme
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations must also be involved, because it is
not only a question of health; there is also the issue of
nutrition and of feeding the people, given the economic
situation that these countries are now facing.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, believes
firmly, as expressed by its President, Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo, in African solidarity and, indeed, solidarity
with the entire world. It is for that reason that last
Monday, when UNESCO awards were handed out to
scientists from Peru, Burkina Faso and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, His Excellency said that we cannot
isolate those countries suffering from Ebola. We cannot
isolate human suffering. Initially, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea closed its borders and suspended its
flight in order to deal with internal preparations at our
borders and airports, but we reopened them once we
had taken the necessary measures for control. Through
our national airline, CEIBA, we will soon reopen our
flights to all the countries we serve in West and Central
Africa.

I am honoured to take this opportunity to announce
that the President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
has decided to contribute $2 million to the World Health
Organization in order to combat Ebola. As Equatorial
Guinea is a small country with few resources, our Head
of State and the Government believe in solidarity. We
believe that we must do our utmost to join in solidarity
and support the effort to help the countries affected,
because Ebola is notjust a problem for Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone, it is rather an epidemic, a pandemic
that can spread like wildfire through any number of
countries at any time. It is a concern not just for Africa
but for the entire world. All of us, therefore, large and
small, are called on to give as much support as possible
to our brother countries and to take all the preventive
measures necessary.

