Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to deliver this statement on behalf the Group
ofArab States. At the outset, Iwould like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the current month and for convening this
important meeting.

With regard to your concept note (S/2015/793, annex) of 15 October, which includes guidelines for
this meeting, and while we emphasize the importance
of the topics laid out in note S/2010/507 for improving
the Council's efficiency and transparency, the topic of
today's meeting - the working methods of the Security
Council - is one of the most important of the five key
issues put forth in General Assembly decision 62/557
on the reform of the Security Council. I shall therefore
focus on the theme of our meeting today.

The growing challenges experienced by the
international community and the substantial changes
in the international reality since the inception of the
United Nations in 1945 have bolstered our resolve to
step up our efforts to strengthen the role of the Security
Council in order to make it more capable and effective
in addressing and overcoming those challenges within
a more representative, transparent, neutral and credible
context.

The Arab Group underscores that the efficiency
of the Security Council is primarily dependent on
the reform of its working methods. It is necessary
to develop and improve the working methods of the
Council to make them more effective and transparent.
Consideration must therefore be given to establishing
a permanent rules of procedure, instead of the current
provisional rules of procedure, which have been in
effect for decades. Also, consideration must be given
to increasing the number of Security Council meetings
that are open to all members. Furthermore, the States
concerned in the questions under discussion by the
Council should be allowed a decision-making role in
the Council, and such meetings should afford genuine
opportunities for contributions from the general
membership in the Council debate. Closed meetings
and informal consultations should be minimized such
that they are the exception rather than the rule.

In addition to consultations with the States
concerned and their participation in the Council's
decision-making, in accordance with Article 31 of the
Charter ofthe United Nations, the Arab Group also calls
on the subsidiary organs of the Security Council and
its Committees to report adequately on their activities
to the members of the Council. It also underscores the
need for the Council to strictly observe the limits ofits
mandates established in the Charter.

While the Arab Group grasps the importance
of comprehensive reform of the Security Council,
it recognizes the possibility of taking gradual steps
with regard to improving the working methods of the
Council. In this regard, we would like to stress our
support for the position of the Non-Aligned Movement,
established in document A/66/574, including the
comprehensive detailed proposals to improve the
Council's working methods and procedures, the
adoption and implementation of which would effect a
qualitative change in the Council's work.

