The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

First, let me pick up where our colleague from
Indonesia left off when he said that this is a sad day for
the Council. I do not share that view. I think that the
discussion today, which we as the presidency wanted
to have focus on the humanitarian situation, gives rise
to optimism. I am optimistic that, as a result of this
meeting, we will have a situation where more will be
done on the humanitarian front.

Accordingly, I also would like to thank the three
briefers for their very impressive statements. Our
Russian colleagues called into the question the basis
for their findings. Maybe afterwards they can indicate
what the basis was for those findings.

Our Russian colleague compared the situation
with regard to the measles outbreak in New York with
the measles situation in Venezuela. However, there is
one big difference between the two. If parents in New
York want to vaccinate their kids, they can go into a
pharmacy and get the vaccine. If parents in Venezuela
tried to get the vaccine for the measles in a pharmacy in
Caracas, they would be unable to find it.

In this context, I would also like to pick up on
what our Belgian colleague said with regard to arms.
I would like to express the view that what Venezuela
needs least at the present moment is a supply of military
weapons. What Venezuelans need right now is a supply
of humanitarian aid and medical assistance.

In the light of what our Indonesia colleague has
said, I would like to appeal to our Venezuelan colleague
that he recognize the dimension of the humanitarian
crisis that his country is facing and that he allow all
humanitarian actors to work in his country. These
workers need access, and they should be able to assist.
As our French colleague has reminded us, the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
should govern the delivery of humanitarian aid. Like
others, we are alarmed about the politicization of
the humanitarian issue. That runs counter to the
humanitarian mandate.

Many speakers also alluded to the massive exodus
of Venezuelans from their country. Like nearly everyone
around the table, let me also express Germany's
solidarity with the neighbours and pay tribute to what
Peru, Ecuador and Colombia are doing, as well as the
Foreign Minister of Colombia. I would also like to
commend the countries in the region for seeking to
coordinate their efforts in response to the humanitarian
crisis. It is the biggest refugee crisis that Latin America
has seen in its history.

On the political solution, very briefly, we need
a peaceful political process. All actors must show
restraint, refrain from the use of force and respect
human rights. We support free, transparent and credible
presidential elections organized under the leadership
of the interim President, Juan Guaido. The European
Union is also ready to help through the International
Contact Group.

I would like to conclude by saying that we must not
leave the people of Venezuela alone.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.


