Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Haiti, His
Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, and on my own behalf,
I would like to wish every success to South Africa,
Germany, Belgium, Indonesia and the Dominican
Republic, which are serving as non-permanent
members of the Security Council for the period 2019-
2020. I would also like to congratulate the Dominican
Republic, which holds the rotating presidency of the
Council, for organizing this open debate on the theme
"Addressing the impacts of climate-related disasters
on international peace and security" in order to focus
everyone's attention on the urgent need to address
climate-fragility risks in a sustained manner.

The Government of the Republic of Haiti believes
it essential that the international community recognize
the significance of climate-related disasters for
international peace and security and the importance
of implementing a common action plan to counter the
threats that they pose.

This open debate is timely because the year 2019
will be marked by important processes to promote the
three pillars and the core values of the United Nations
through an integrated follow-up to the commitments
made at major conferences and meetings in recent
years. At the heart of those processes are efforts to
ensure the proper and universal implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The debate
on climate-related risks is in line with the priorities
recently announced by both the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session and the
Secretary-General.

The Republic of Haiti will continue to make its best
contribution to all such processes because, ultimately,
it is a question of improving living conditions and
respecting the dignity of all human beings, bearing in
mind the motto "no one should be left behind".
Recurrent climate-related disasters are a major
obstacle to sustainable development efforts and a
genuine threat to the survival of many countries, in
particular small island developing States; hence the
increased interest of all such States in the ongoing and
future discussions on climate issues. I fully endorse
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Belize in its capacity as Chair of the Alliance of Small
Island States.

In recent years, severe cyclones have caused untold
human suffering and considerable material damage in
many parts of the world, particularly in Central America
and the small island States ofthe Caribbean. In general,
recovery and reconstruction needs have often exceeded
the national capacities of most affected countries.

My country has been hit many times by severe
natural disasters, such as Hurricane Matthew in October
2016, which destroyed the livelihoods of virtually all
rural populations and undermined the efforts of the
Government. We must recognize the share of climate
disasters that have hit Haiti's economy hard, destroying
a significant part of its infrastructure, exacerbating the
country's structural vulnerabilities, placing a heavy
burden on economic recovery efforts, aggravating
cumulative delays and delaying year after year the
prospects for achieving the country's sustainable
development goals.

With the support of all stakeholders, the
Government today is seeking to invest more in
preventing those risks. In search of rapid and
sustainable solutions to this phenomenon, President
Moise launched several innovative initiatives as soon
as he came to power, including the Caravan of Change.
Unfortunately, those initiatives have not yet received
sustained financial support from the international
community. The President's priority objective is
to consolidate democratic institutions, strengthen
essential infrastructure, attract job-creating investment
and, in general, improve the living conditions of all
segments of the population. Unfortunately, we cannot
endorse certain assertions relating to the situation in
Haiti in the concept note, in particular the questionable
reference to an

"upward trend in malaria cases since 2009 that can
be traced back to Haiti" (S/2019/1, annex, para. 11).

I strongly encourage all States, together with all
the relevant United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies, to work constructively to ensure that the
adverse effects of climate change are taken into
account in an even more responsible manner. The
Republic of Haiti is committed to playing its full part
in this collective climate action. We reiterate our full
support for all efforts leading to the implementation of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, as well as the follow-up of commitments made
under the Paris Agreement and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction.

In conclusion, two elements remain crucial for a
responsible and sustainable response to the destructive
effects of climate change: the political will of all
States and the collaboration of all stakeholders, on the
one hand, and the mobilization of adequate financial
resources, on the other.

