Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its 28 member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by commending China for holding
today's open debate on strengthening multilateralism
and the role of the United Nations. We live in an
interconnected and rapidly changing world. As such,
we need collectively agreed upon rules and effective
global institutions in order to ensure stability, security,
respect for human rights, prosperity and development.
A rules-based international order provides a safeguard
for everyone, not a constraint. It acts as an enabler for
both large and small nations to benefit from a safer,
fairer and more sustainable world. Protectionism and
unilateralism are not the answer.
The emergence of new multi-level relations means
that diplomacy has to be global, regional and local at
the same time. The only way to try to manage such
complexity is through multilateral frameworks. In a
multipolar world, multilateralism is not only a more
equal and democratic way to deal with international
affairs, but also the only realistic way to address
national interests. We Europeans have advanced our
national interests over the past 60 years, not in spite
of multilateralism, but through it. The European Union
is an example of the fact that that approach works as
a force multiplier. No State alone is big and powerful
enough to address the great challenges of our times.
We need an effective multilateral system with a strong
United Nations at its core. The alternative would not be
the rule of nation States, it would be complete chaos.
The alternative to a rules-based order is disorder.
The alternative to a rules-based global order is
global disorder.

Globalization makes it impossible to tackle
challenges in isolation. Our own peace, security and
human development inevitably depend on the prospects
for peace, security and human development in the rest of
the world. For its part, the European Union has learned
throughout its history that the only way to be safe,
prosperous and strong is to invest in safety, security
and prosperity for all. We know that the strength of our
neighbours does not represent a threat or a challenge,
but rather a guarantee of stability, provided that we all
work within the framework of a cooperative and rules-
based international order.

We also know that in order for security to be
sustainable, it has to be based on human rights, good
governance, social inclusion and an understanding of
the worldwide impact and negative effects of global
challenges like climate change. And we have learnt
that sustainable peace always requires a negotiated
political solution rooted in some kind of multilateral
framework, which will be different from case to case.
It also requires the rule of law and accountability.
International criminal justice is not only a powerful
deterrent against future violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, but is, most of all,
instrumental in our efforts to achieve accountability
and sustainable peace. The European Union expresses
its unwavering support for the International Criminal
Court and its strong belief in the legitimacy of the
Court. We also know that power lies not only in national
Governments, but also in continuous discussion with
opposition groups in democratically framed dialogues
rooted in norms and principles that are shared by all.
There are a number of contexts where multilateral
diplomacy is needed in order to tackle the rise of new
threats and benefit citizens around the world, such as
free and fair trade, digitization, climate change, the
Sustainable Development Goals, ocean governance
and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action - also
known as the Iran nuclear deal - just to name a few.
Today, we also see growing threats and challenges
to the multilateral system, but we do not see them as
representing the demise of multilateralism. On the
contrary, they should be interpreted as a call for a better
multilateral system with a stronger United Nations at
its core. The United Nations is not perfect, but without
the United Nations the world would be a worse place.
What we need is a stronger United Nations that delivers
more effectively in support of our efforts to achieve
our common objectives. In that regard, we must work
together to improve multilateral mechanisms and
support the efficient implementation of the Secretary-
General's ambitious reform package, which will make
the United Nations better equipped to tackle current
and emerging challenges. We believe that today the
only way to safeguard multilateralism is to reform it and
make it more effective in building peace and security,
economic and social development and human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all.

Multilateral cooperation is the backbone of
the foreign policy of the European Union, and the
promotion of the rules-based global order with the
United Nations at its core is at the heart of our interests.
In our times, a super-Power for peace must also be a
super-Power for multilateralism. The European Union
is a reliable, rational and effective global actor that
provides the stability and predictability necessary for
the international community to move forward. The
European Union is a promoter of multilateralism and
has become a global player, not least by strengthening
its autonomy in areas such as defence and economic
sovereignty, but also by observing the rules agreed
upon by all and by considering the interests and
concerns of everyone. While words of support for
multilateralism are welcome, it is through our actions
that we really make a difference. Those who claim
to defend multilateralism have a responsibility to do
so consistently and not selectively, recognizing that
upholding the United Nations-centred multilateral
system and abiding by international law are two sides
of the same coin.

The global strategy of the common foreign and
security policy of the European Union sets out our
common strategic vision. We support the multilateral
system, and we are willing to join forces with partners
who believe that international cooperation can create
a better world. The European way is also the United
Nations way. That is why we aim to forge partnerships
based on an equal footing, thereby strengthening a
global network of engagements for multilateralism
that reaches beyond traditional bilateral diplomacy and
identifies common ground with other international and
regional organizations, such as the African Union. The
innovative African Union-United Nations-European
Union trilateral cooperation is an illustration of
that approach.

In conclusion, the European Union strongly
supports the United Nations efforts in the areas of
conflict prevention, mediation and political processes,
both politically and in concrete terms. We are also
engaged side by side with the United Nations to make
peacekeeping operations more effective and deliver
lasting peace and development to the populations where
those missions are deployed, thereby contributing to
sustainable development. We support the efforts of the
Council to put more focus on women's participation in
peace negotiations and peacebuilding. The European
Union and its member States strongly support the
Secretary-General's initiatives to make the United
Nations delivery more effective and efficient on
the ground, especially the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, highlighting the need for a stronger focus on
protecting civilians, performance and accountability,
and improving the safety and security of peacekeepers.

We remain a key partner in that endeavour, not only
by supporting United Nations peacekeeping operations,
but also by deploying our own missions within the
framework of our common security and defence policy.
We continue to advocate for a better definition of the
role ofregional organizations within United Nations-led
interventions, facilitating - when appropriate - rapid
deployment, in complementarity with United Nations

operations, as is the case with the European Union
training and capacity-building missions and operations
within the framework of security sector reform or when
our missions are deployed in a bridging capacity. In that
regard, we will continue to support the development of
African peace capacities, which increasingly contribute
to peace and security on the continent.

To conclude, we believe that an extended arm with
an open hand, and not an iron fist imposing the will of
the strongest, is the best way to find common solutions
to common problems and challenges. The European
Union is and will continue to be a cooperative global
force, one that sticks to its commitments and upholds
international norms and a principled partner that
puts human rights and sustainable development at the
core of its agenda and never ceases to pursue peace,
security and economic prosperity for all. And it is in
that spirit that we will continue to work within, as well
as with, the United Nations and beyond so as to ensure
that the future of the international system is based on
cooperation rather than confrontation.

