Mrs. Mills (Jamaica): Jamaica would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, and Poland on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. We welcome this opportunity to
participate in this open debate, which is both timely and
relevant. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
the former President of the International Court of Justice
and the President of the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals for their remarks.

The concept note prepared for this debate
(S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex) provides very pointed
questions to guide our collective reflection on how best
to ensure that the tenets of international law are not only
upheld but also fully respected by all Member States.
My delegation believes, however, that reform of the
Security Council must be at the core of our discourse.
As the main organ charged with the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is critical that
the Council be able to meaningfully, effectively and
convincingly respond to threats to international peace
and security. Consequently, clear and decisive action
has to be taken in that regard. Security Council reform
must be pursued as a matter of urgency if real progress
is to be realized.

Secondly, ensuring respect for international
obligations has to be promoted as part of a larger
agenda that takes account of action being undertaken at
the national level. Efforts to promote peacebuilding and
sustaining peace through a concentrated focus not only
on conflict resolution but also on conflict prevention
will be essential. Such an approach is necessary in the
face of traditional as well as new and emerging threats
to international peace and security, which are being
fuelled by a myriad social, economic and political
factors that provide a breeding ground for discontent,
conflict and strife.

Thirdly, innovative and creative approaches are
effective insofar as they are grounded in the legality of
the action that they purport. We must, at a minimum,
put a greater premium on reliance on the tools that we
already have at our disposal, including those provided
for in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
Although it is accepted that many disputes arise from
bilateral disagreements, it should be incumbent on the
parties involved to explore all available prospects for
peaceful resolution, and for the United Nations to be able
to play a part in facilitating that solution, particularly
in the face of protracted disagreements for which all
reasonable approaches have not been fully exploited.
My delegation remains convinced that combined
action at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels
remains the best course of action for conflict resolution,
and that the Council should be prepared to engage on
all fronts before resorting to Chapter VII mechanisms
or to individually undertaking unilateral action. We
would therefore join those who argue, for example, for
a greater use by the Council of the advisory opinions
of the International Court of Justice in the course of
its deliberations. Creating more strategic partnerships
with regional organizations could also prove useful.

My delegation's argument for greater reliance on
measures in Chapter VI of the Charter is not advocated
in a vacuum or to the complete exclusion of those
provided for under Chapter VII. We must, however,
continue to find a way to ensure that sanctions achieve
their intended objectives and, given their legally
binding nature, are fully respected by Member States.
To that end, we would propose that the adoption of
draft resolutions imposing new sanctions also continue
to coincide with the organization of briefings of
Member States, as well as the possible publication of
more user-friendly information on the main features
of the proposed sanctions regime. We believe that
would increase the chances for better awareness among
national stakeholders of the importance of compliance
and their appreciation ofit. The prospects for assistance
to Member States to support implementation should
remain a viable option, and would necessitate the
provision of the requisite resources for that to be
undertaken in a sustained manner.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council of
Jamaica's unswerving commitment to the maintenance
of international peace and security, and to upholding
international law in pursuit of that common objective.

