Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and his views on the
future of United Nations peace operations, which we
have heard with much interest. I also wish to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/682), which we find comprehensive and forward-
looking. We consider today's meeting very timely and
we thank the United Kingdom presidency for producing
a detailed and useful concept note (S/2015/846, annex),
which could help guide our deliberations towards a
productive end.

Malaysia has been a regular troop contributor to
United Nations peacekeeping since 1960, three years
after achieving its independence in 1957. That is proof
of our belief in multilateralism and the principle of
collective action. Since then, we have seen the scope,
role and functions of United Nations peacekeepers
evolve tremendously, certainly going much further
than was envisioned in the Charter of the United
Nations. In the context of ongoing peace operations,
particularly those with aspects of so-called frozen
conflict, we believe the Security Council could do
more to capitalize on its political leverage with a view
to accelerating political settlements among belligerents
on the ground. In certain situations, such as Lebanon,
the Sudan and Western Sahara, for example, we believe
that there is room for the missions on the ground, as
well as the Council, to improve and build on relations
with the parties concerned, with a view to moving the
political procses forward.

We are also seeing an increasing number ofinstances
where conflict settlement processes occur outside
the Council, with regional actors and organizations
playing a leading role. That is an encouraging trend,
and we believe that the capacity and capabilities of
regional organizations to continue doing so should be
supported and reinforced. That said, mindful of the
role and responsibility entrusted to the Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
in the context of such processes, it is important that
the full Council, and not just some of its members, be
involved. The Security Council cannot be reduced to a
rubber-stamping authority. That would only weaken its
credibility and diminish its political leverage.

As rightly noted in the concept note, the Security
Council has an array of tools it can deploy to ensure
that it fulfils its mandate. More important, perhaps,
is that it needs a shift in thinking from a conflict-
management mode to a problem-solving one. At the
same time, the Council could refresh its existing tools,
in the way that, for example, New Zealand has given
new meaning to consultation between the Council and
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), which we fully
support. In our view, such informal engagement does
add value, and it is worth considering whether it could
be institutionalized. And by institutionalized, I do not
mean formalized.

With regard to the issue of mandate sequencing,
Malaysia is not opposed to the idea in principle and
could readily support it. That said, we believe that
several prerequisites must be met before such operations
could be deployed. In essence, such prerequisites
mean more comprehensive treatment of all the issues
outlined in the reports of the Secretary-General and of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446). From an operational perspective,
areas such as logistics support, force generation and
deployment and mandate design, among others, must
be given due priority while at the same time a keen eye
must be kept on aspects of practicality such as mission
footprint and, of course, financial costs.

Mandate design is particularly important. In our
view, it should be focused and tailored specifically to the
situation. Missions must be able to interpret and apply
their mandates at the technical level on the ground. At
the same time, troops must be deployed with assets that
are adequate and appropriate to effective execution of
their duties. In the context of the increasingly complex
nature of the situations in which peace operations are
deployed, another key issue that must be addressed
when considering the issue of mandate sequencing is
that of caveats. In our view, if peace operations are to
effectively implement their mandates, more clarity is
needed on how caveats imposed by specific TCCs can
either help or hamper a mission's success. In that regard,
a focused discussion involving TCCs on the subject of
caveats and the protection of civilians, leading to a
complete and agreed-on understanding, would be highly
useful. On a related issue, we would like to emphasize
that proposals for consolidating missions, particularly
their civilian components, should not compromise the
roles of protection advisers, particularly of women and
children.

In conclusion, we greatly appreciate today's
opportunity for the Security Council to discuss the
implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations
peace operations review exercise. We hope that in
future similar discussions can be convened that take
up other areas and aspects touched on in the review.
In that regard, we welcome the presidential statement
currently being negotiated on the issue and look
forward to its adoption soon. We owe nothing less than
a full consideration of such issues to the brave men
and women who risk their lives every day in some of
the world's most deplorable and dangerous conflict
situations, which we, as the Council, have a duty to
address.

