Mr. Hadi: Yemen, one of the poorest countries
in the Arab world and has been devastated by a war
that has set the country back for decades. The state of
Yemen is broken. That is what the Yemenis themselves
told me last week. They feel as though they are dying
in silence and that they have been forgotten by the
world. Yemen has been plagued by years of instability
and widespread poverty. Before the conflict, Yemen
was already suffering. Many people were already
suffering from food insecurity. Simply put, the war has
aggravated that situation. Basic social services were
on the verge of collapse. Today, more than 20 million
people are in true need of some form of assistance. How
we have reached this stage is an important question, but
what is more important today is that I share with you
an eyewitness account of the humanitarian situation
in Yemen.

1 have just returned from Yemen after a 7-day
mission. That was actually my second trip to Yemen
in two months and my third since the crisis started. On
my latest trip, I visited Sana'a, Haj jah and A-Hudaydah.
I am not a stranger to Yemen. I worked and lived there
for the World Food Programme (WFP) for three years
in the 1990s. But this time, as I was approaching
Sana'a's airport, looking out from the WFP-operated
flight - which is one of the few special flights that
still service Sana'a - I saw the damage that the airport
had incurred.

Several things came to mind. I wondered how
people live. How do people come back to Yemen if they
are stranded outside the country. If someone required
medical evacuation, I wondered, how would that
situation be handled? As a staff member for the World
Food Programme, I also thought about what would
happen if we were asked to carry out an airlift for
urgently needed food and medicines to Sana'a. Would
the airport be able to handle such an operation? I really
do not know. I began to ask my colleagues if the airport
could handle such an operation.

On our way to the WFP offices from the airport, I
really looked into the faces of the Yemeni people on the
streets, among whom, as I mentioned, I had lived for
three years. What I saw were the signs of a lot of wear
and tear on their faces. They truly looked sad as they
watched another United Nations convoy pass through
the streets of Sana'a, not knowing if it was a sign of
hope or an end to the devastating war. When I arrived
at the office, again, I looked into the faces of the staff
and met with them. When I met with the national staff,
I especially sensed that they were actually torn between
fulfilling their humanitarian duties and taking care
of their own crises at home. Many among the United
Nations staff are actually displaced within Sana'a.

For the first few days ofmy mission in Sana'a, I met
with local authorities civil servants. The one message
that came up consistently in every single meeting was
that needs are increasing. There is a growing number of
people who are in desperate need of assistance and the
humanitarian operations are not keeping up. The food
security situation in Yemen is deteriorating rapidly.
Hunger is becoming epidemic everywhere. This June,
the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
revealed that over 14 million people in Yemen are
food insecure. Of those, 7 million are severely food
insecure. It is one thing to read those reports, but it
is another to go and speak with a mother and father
who cannot serve a meal to their children at the end
of the day. As Mr. O'Brien said, those people do not
know when their next meal is coming. It is really scary
to not know if you can offer your children a meal. In
some governorates, 70 per cent of the population is
struggling to feed themselves. Nine out of Yemen's
twenty-two governorates are classified as level three.
In other words, those governorates are at emergency
levels of food insecurity. In simple terms, that means
they are one step away from hunger.

Once I left Sana'a, I went to Hajjah to see and
speak to people in the field. Our first stop was at the
health centre. It was crowded, with people queued up
almost until the entrance of the hospital. Some of the
beds had two kids in them. Almost all of the children
that I saw were malnourished, and some were severely
malnourished. The mothers of those children told me
that they had had to travel long distances from remote
areas in order to make it to the clinic. They told me
that they had to borrow money from neighbours and
relatives, and even to sell their assets, in order to pay
for treatment.

I am sorry to say that that is the positive side of
things. I can only imagine what I would have seen
if I had had the opportunity to visit more remote
locations. I would have seen parents looking at their
dying children who could not afford the long journey
to the hospitals - hospitals that may or may not have
had the capacity to respond to them. According to
UNICEF , 1.5 million children in Yemen suffer from
acute malnutrition, including 370,000 with severe acute
malnutrition, a life-threatening condition that requires
urgent treatment. The figure of 370,000 represents an
astonishing increase of 65 per cent from 2014. Children
suffering from severe malnutrition are 10 times more
at risk of dying than their peers because their immune
systems are extremely weak.

Our next stop was at the WFP General Food
Distribution office in Hajjah. The streets were crowded
with thousands of people lined up at the entrance. Since
February, WF P has had to split rations to ensure that
we reach as many food insecure people as possible. We
had already planned to reach 3 million people, but with
the rapid increase in the number of hungry people, we
were trying to give everybody something. Our teams
and partners have been forced to reach 6 million people
every month with half a ration. That is not the best way
to fight malnutrition, but it is the way to keep as many
people alive as possible in this situation. Many families
were generous enough to share their struggles with me
and the team. They told us how they experience hunger
every day and, sadder still, how they see it in the faces
of their children. For the first time, I found myself
helpless and unable to offer even words of support, let
alone promises ofincreased help and assistance that we
might offer.

Everyone I met spoke about the increasing food
prices. Food prices are more than 20 per cent higher
than they were before the war. Yemen's middle class
is now joining the ranks of those who cannot put food
on the table for their children. That is really worrying.
Many civil servants have not been paid for few months
now. They are no longer even able to purchase food.

On the road from Hajjah to Al-Hudaydah, we
stopped along the mountains to speak to one of the
farmers. He was harvesting millet and recounted to us
the details of how his crops had been damaged because
of the conflict. When I asked him how he was planning
to survive and what he was going to do given that he
had already lost his harvest, he kept repeating the words
that I heard from almost every struggling Yemeni that
I met, which translate to "we are in the hands of God".

The road from Hajjah to Al-Hudaydah was the
same road that I remember from 20 years ago. I have
driven that road many times, except that this time it
was destroyed. Some bridges were destroyed; it was a
bumpy road and we had to take too many detours. It
was difficult. I then wondered how the road was going
to be used when the rainy season started. How is food
going to be moved from Al-Hudaydah to the rest of the
governorates?

Then we visited the port of Al-Hudaydah. As
everybody has said, I looked at the cranes and the port
equipment and so many things were damaged. Yemen
imports 90 per cent of its food requirements. The port
of Al-Hudaydahis a lifeline to many Yemeni people. I
was even told that the labourers are no longer feeling
safe enough to work in the port, so there is a lot of
congestion, a lack of equipment and labourers who
are not working. Even a WFP vessel that was carrying
urgently needed food had been waiting for weeks to
dock so that the food could be delivered to the people
who needed it.

Our next stop was Al-Thawra hospital in
Al-Hudaydah, which was a visit that proved to be
the defining moment of my mission. I saw the faces
of children that have been engraved in my mind as
iconic images of the crisis in Yemen. I saw children
and images - this time real ones - that I have never
seen in my 25 years of working for the World Food
Programme. I will never forget the children that I saw.

I am sure many of those present have seen the
disturbing images on the news recently, including the
heartbreaking photograph of 18-year-old, Ms. Saida
Ahmed Baghili. She was in the hospital when we
visited. The doctors told me that they had been seeing
an increase in children with severe acute malnutrition.
Malnutrition compromises the immune system of those
children who, like Saida, suffer from other health
complications. That all leading to high rates of child
mortality. The global acute malnutrition rate among
children in Al-Hudaydag, like Saida is one of the
highest around the world. The images of those children
and their mothers shocked me and my colleagues. We
all stood helpless. Overcome by emotion, I could not
decide who to sympathize with more - a malnourished
child sitting on a bed, too tired and sick to even cry,
or his mother next to him, too hungry and tired to
support her child. That really hurt me, not only as a
humanitarian worker but as a father.

Hunger and malnutrition are solvable problems but
only through the right intervention at the right time.
That is why we need to focus on helping the Yemeni
people. That is why we have to make sure that we
have the right access. I would like to thank the donors
that have supported and continue to support WFP in
implementating such programmes. We have been able
to work and assist, but only where we have access.

There are also challenges in getting timely security
clearances for the delivery of assistance. The fluid
security situation and ongoing fighting definitely do
not help WFP and the rest of the humanitarians to work
better to dispatch aid, to monitor and to make sure that
the right intervention is carried out at the right time.
That is something that we worry about, and it is one of
our main concerns. On the long drive back to Sana'a,
I had time to reflect on what I had seen. The situation
is undoubtedly beyond critical. Resources and political
support are urgently needed from the international
community. In 2016, WFP in Yemen has been funded
only 34 per cent of the $6 million needed.

I am not a politician and WFP is proud ofits neutral
and impartial stance. I am here not to discuss political
matters, but rather to illustrate the impact of the current
conflict on the humanitarian needs of the Yemeni
people. An entire generation is crippled by hunger today
in Yemen, and we rely on the international community
to support us in this challenging time.

I met many people in Yemen, and I promised them
that I would convey their suffering to the world.

