Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this urgent meeting,
and I thank Ms. Kang for her sobering analysis oflife in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas in Syria.

In recent days, the world has seen this horror for
itself. Images of emaciated men and women living
under siege in Madaya, of children starving to death,
evokes some of the darkest moments of our history.
As a visiting United Nations official said earlier this
week, there are people in Madaya, but no life. What
we saw should not happen in this century. In the face
of such horrors, we welcome the fact that the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent have reached
Madaya this week. We should all applaud their efforts
to negotiate a way in. But, sadly, it is long overdue. and
for some it is too late. And as we learn more about the
desperate situation facing those in Madaya, it becomes
ever clearer that ad hoc deliveries will not be enough.

Sustained access is now needed.

Madaya is just the tip of the iceberg. This tragic
town represents just 10 per cent of the besieged areas
and only 1 percent of hard-to-reach areas in Syria.
Many of these other areas have not been visited by
the United Nations since October. If the status quo
continues, the images that we have seen from Madaya
could be repeated many, many times over.

We cannot allow this to happen with the eyes of
the world on us today. Let us send a clear message to
the warring parties: starving civilians as a method of
warfare is inhuman, unacceptable and prohibited under
international humanitarian law. As the Secretary-
General said in his statement yesterday, in a conflict
that has already reached shocking depths of inhumanity,
the suffering in Madaya is another low. We agree with
him that the Council should call on all the parties,
and especially the regime, which has the primary
responsibility to protect Syrians, to allow unimpeded
and sustained humanitarian access. And let Council
members with ties to the regime use their influence,
not their air force, to address this horrific situation.

We all know that the solution is a political process
that ends the war, and that to achieve that we must all
work together. But, as we do that, it is only right that
we also draw international attention to the desperate
situation in Madaya - a situation that is only worsening.
It is about putting pressure on all the parties to allow
access so that the United Nations can reach the over
400,000 people in need in besieged areas, and the over
4 million people in hard-to-reach areas. The sheer scale
of the humanitarian crisis should serve as a reminder to
us all of the urgent need to support the United Nations
relief effort. That is why the United Kingdom will host
the London Conference on Supporting Syria and the
Region, on 4 February - alongside the United Nations,
Norway, Kuwait and Germany. The participation of
my Prime Minister, the Emir of Kuwait, the German
Chancellor, the Norwegian Prime Minister, as well
as Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, in London next
month gives a sense of the scale of our ambition.

The London Conference is about donor pledges. But
it is also about much more than that. It is the moment to
address the longer-term needs of those affected by the
crisis by supportingjob creation, by providing education
and, crucially, by putting even more pressure on the
parties to protect civilians and respect international
humanitarian law. At the Conference, leaders from
70 countries and from international organizations, civil
society, non- governmental organizations and the private
sector will confront and condemn violence against
civilians. We will rally support to mitigate the human
impact of the worse violations and abuses. We will
commit essential support to deliver safer communities,
safer health care and safer access to education in Syria.
In doing that, we hope to drive improvements in daily
life and to deliver important confidence-building
measures to underpin the political process.

We should all be clear that the ultimate solution to
Madaya's woes, and to those facing all Syrians, rests
on a political agreement, one that brings an end to the
fighting. We must continue the unity the Council showed
in December and build on the agreement reached by the
International Syria Support Group. We look forward
to talks beginning later this month. To make a success
of those talks, and for the long-term future of Syria,
we also need to work now to ensure that communities
are protected so that ultimately they can rebuild. To do
that, we must emphasize that even wars have rules. It
will be through those talks, through sustained access to
besieged areas and through the London Conference that
we can make this the year that suffering finally ends.

