Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I associate myself with the
statement that will be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later today.

Let me join others in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, for her comprehensive
briefing to the Council, and for her invaluable work, as
well as that of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in that country.

Her briefing and the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/604) underline the progress made
in the consolidation of democracy and stability in
Haiti. The restoration of constitutional order, with the
inauguration of Jovenel Moise as President, and the
formation of a Government under Prime Minister Jack
Guy Lafontant, is indeed a milestone that has opened a
window of opportunity for the future of Haiti.

Building a better future for Haiti will take time and

continued determination. In addition to the progress

made on the judicial track, further judicial reform,

including fighting corruption and impunity, improving
access to justice and penal reform, will be crucial to
Haiti's socioeconomic development. These efforts will
also create better conditions for private investment.
Strengthening the rule of law, respect for human rights
and further strengthening the Haitian National Police
force must therefore remain top priorities. Delivering
on the expectations of the Haitian people will require an
inclusive process in which all actors, including national
authorities, political parties, Civil society and the private
sector, work together to deliver the necessary reforms.
Women have a key role to play. Their full, equal and
effective participation is particularly important.
MINUSTAH has played a significant role in
supporting the progress we are now seeing in Haiti.
Its institutional memory and key resources need to
be used strategically during the transition period and
beyond. It is particularly important that MINUSTAH's
work on gender mainstreaming and against sexual
and gender-based violence not be lost in the transition
process. Therefore, it is essential that a strategic focus,
coordination and budget for gender issues be maintained
and that adequate reporting on these matters take place.
We commend the Secretary-General for the many
examples of work on gender and sexual and gender-
based violence in the report.

As Haiti moves forward into this new phase in its
development, the partnership between the Government,
bilateral donors and the United Nations must also
evolve. It is essential that the United Nations deliver
as one in its support for national efforts. The Global
Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections Areas
in the Rule of Law in Post-Conflict and Other Crisis
Situations could continue to play an important role in
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations in this
regard. In addition, an integrated and joined-up United
Nations presence in Haiti - during and after the
transition i will be needed to address the risks and
drivers of instability. This includes efforts to reduce
social inequality, help spur economic growth and
strengthen trust in institutions.

Adequate planning for the successor mission
to MINUSTAH, including for the handover to the
United Nations country team and on how that country
team should best be configured, will be critical.
Planning should take place in the spirit of the agenda
on sustaining peace and with a focus on long-term,
inclusive development.

While the Secretary-General reports that Haiti
appears to be on a steady path towards institutional and
political stability, it is important that the United Nations
and the Security Council in particular remain ready
to support this process. As the needs in the country
change, we will need to consider how best to use the
different instruments in the United Nations toolbox
to ensure peace and security and achieve sustainable
peace and development.

I join others in acknowledging the concerns
pertaining to cholera and sexual exploitation and abuse
related to the United Nations presence in Haiti that were
raised during the Council's recent visit. We welcome
the intensified cholera response, which has resulted in
a significant decline in suspected cholera cases. We
were happy to co-sponsor General Assembly resolution
71/161 B, in support of the Secretary-General's new
approach to eradicating cholera and building resilience
in Haiti.

We also welcome the efforts to strengthen
protection from sexual exploitation and abuse and the
outreach efforts described in the report. Zero tolerance
for sexual exploitation and abuse for all peacekeeping
and United Nations staff, uniformed as well as civilian,
should be the only acceptable benchmark. Victims
need to be protected, assisted and provided with the
necessary rehabilitation, while perpetrators must be
brought to justice.

To conclude, the progress that Haiti has seen could
not have been achieved without the resilience, strength
and determination of the Haitian people. Sweden will
remain a committed partner for Haiti as it continues
with this new chapter in its development.

