Mr. Prendergast: I last briefed the Council on 18
October. Since then, while the overall situation on the
ground has remained essentially unchanged, there have
been a number of significant political developments in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory.

Against the backdrop of a new Palestinian
Cabinet taking office and the collapse of Israel's
governing coalition, Israeli-Palestinian violence
continues to claim lives on both sides nearly every day.
Curfews and other restrictions on movement continue
to impoverish increasing numbers of Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, and Israel remains in the
midst of its worst economic recession since 1953.

This week, various international meetings are
taking place in the region in an effort to respond to the
ongoing crisis in three critical areas. First, the Quartet
Special Envoys met yesterday to work towards
finalizing the road map to a comprehensive peace
settlement, which is due to be adopted at a principals-
level meeting of the Quartet in December. The Special
Envoys, who had previously met on 24 October in
Jerusalem, are working to revise the draft road map in
the light of consultations with the Palestinians, the
Government of Israel and other Governments in the
region.

Secondly, the United Nations Special
Coordinator, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, is convening a
United Nations inter-agency meeting today to review
the humanitarian plan of action prepared by a United
Nations technical assessment mission that visited the
region last month on the recommendation of the
Secretary-General's Personal Humanitarian Envoy,
Ms. Catherine Bertini. The plan presents strategies for
responding to the humanitarian crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Representatives of the Palestinian
Authority and the international aid community, as well
as the Quartet Envoys, are also providing comments on
the plan of action.

Thirdly, the Quartet's capitals-level Task Force on
Palestinian Reform will convene in Jordan later this
week, along with delegations from the Palestinian
Authority and the Israeli Government. The Task Force
will assess the progress of reforms following the
conclusion of the "100 days plan" of the Palestinian
Authority and will identify means of overcoming key
obstacles to reform - particularly in sectors where
there has been little progress in recent months, such as
the civil service, judiciary, and elections.

The challenges on all of these fronts are
formidable. Since my last briefing to the Council, some
46 Palestinians and 30 Israelis have been killed as of
yesterday, and at least one more Palestinian has been
killed since then. On 5 November, the Palestinian
Authority issued a directive to all Fatah offices
forbidding members of the movement from opening
fire on Israelis "for any reason whatsoever", and the
Authority has begun negotiations with Islamist factions
intended to secure a commitment to end suicide
operations.

As the Council knows, however, late on Sunday
night a Palestinian gunman infiltrated Kibbutz Metzer
in Israel and shot dead five Israelis, including two
children sleeping in their beds. The Al-Aqsa Brigades
of the Fatah movement are reported to have claimed
responsibility. The Secretary-General has condemned
that terrorist attack and has reiterated his concerns
about the broader context of the ongoing cycle of
violence between Israelis and Palestinians, including
extrajudicial killings.

It bears repeating that terrorist attacks damage the
Palestinian cause politically, as well as being morally
unacceptable. If its orders are to have any credibility,
the Palestinian Authority must take all measures within
its power to apprehend and prosecute the gunmen
responsible for this crime, as well as those who ordered
them to carry it out, and to prevent the commission of
further acts of terrorism.

Equally, it bears repeating that the Government of
Israel must fully respect international humanitarian law
in confronting terrorism. On Sunday morning, Israel
announced that its soldiers had killed a Palestinian
Islamic Jihad operative in Jenin, which Israeli forces
had reoccupied two weeks earlier and where they
demolished the homes of ten alleged militants and their
families. Islamic Jihad immediately pledged to inflict
an even more painful strike, as they described it, on
Israel and have already claimed responsibility for an
explosion on Sunday afternoon that killed an Israeli
soldier in the Gaza Strip. Islamic Jihad also claimed
responsibility for a suicide bomb attack against a bus
near Hadera on 21 October that killed 14 Israelis and
injured more than 40.

It is clear, therefore, that the distressing, self-
perpetuating and ultimately futile pattern of violence
shows no signs of abating. As I mentioned in my last
briefing, settler violence against Palestinians,
especially in connection with the harvesting of olives,
is a growing problem. On 27 October, settlers attacked
olive pickers from the village of Yanun, near Nablus,
injuring four Palestinians, including two children, as
well as four volunteers. In previous incidents,
Palestinian olive pickers had been killed by settlers. As
the Council knows, olives are the backbone of the
Palestinian economy in the West Bank.

Israel's confiscation of thousands of dunums of
agricultural land near the green line, so as to facilitate
construction of its separation wall, is also heightening
tensions. According to Israeli human rights
organizations, the northern segment of the wall will
leave at least eight villages, home to more than 10,000
Palestinians, stranded between the wall and the green
line. And it will cut off access by West Bank residents
to their agricultural land and water resources. Once
completed, the wall could effectively annex
approximately 7 per cent of the West Bank. Although
Israel is entitled to safeguard the security of its
citizens, it must do so without prejudicing the rights of
Palestinians or pre-empting the contours of a
permanent territorial settlement.

Moving to the humanitarian situation, curfews
have been eased in a number of places in recent weeks,
notably Ramallah and Hebron. However, residents of
the Palestinian towns of Jenin, Nablus, Qalqilya, and
Tulkarem continue to suffer, with curfews lasting an
average of 17 hours a day. Strict restrictions on
movement also remain in place for Palestinians
travelling within the West Bank, and humanitarian
personnel continue to face difficulties accessing
Palestinian areas. In addition, ambulances are
reportedly still facing lengthy delays at checkpoints -
sometimes for as long as two and a half hours -
despite the pledge first made to the Secretary-General's
Personal Humanitarian Envoy, Catherine Bertini, last
August and repeated on subsequent occasions by Israeli
authorities that ambulances would not be delayed
longer than half an hour at each checkpoint, which
would still be far too long.

Another humanitarian commitment by the
Government of Israel was to facilitate the passage of
water tankers inside the West Bank. Some 200 villages,
with approximately 200,000 residents, are without a
local source of water, at least during the dry months.
The majority of those villages are located in Area C. In
other words, they are under full Israeli civilian and
security control, and are thus not served by the
Palestinian Authority water networks. Villagers are
dependent on water delivered daily by tankers for their
household use and many also for their livelihoods.
Israeli security forces continue to delay tankers
severely or even outright prevent them from gaining
access to villages. The consequence is that a regular
supply of water is not assured. The United Nations has
urged the Government of Israel to fulfil its pledge to
Ms. Bertini to facilitate the delivery of water.
Unfortunately, we observe no improvement.

On 29 October, the Palestinian Legislative
Council gave a vote of confidence to a new Cabinet
appointed by President Arafat. The Cabinet includes
eight new ministers, three of whom were first
appointed last June but never confirmed in office. By
decree, the Cabinet will remain in office in a caretaker
capacity until new elections are held.

Those elections are currently scheduled for 20
January, 2003. President Arafat has appointed a new
electoral commission, which is chaired by a respected
independent. Many observers are, nevertheless,
sceptical about the prospects of holding elections as
soon as January, citing the absence of an approved
legislative framework for elections and the difficulty of
preparing for and holding elections while many West
Bank cities remain under Israeli military occupation
and are subject to severe restrictions on movement. The
Palestinian people last had the chance to vote in
January 1996. Everything possible should therefore be
done to help ensure that elections can take place.

New elections in Israel will be held on 28
January, 2003. On 4 November, after failing to
establish a new coalition Government following the
departure of the Labour Party from the coalition, Prime
Minister Sharon announced his decision to go to early
elections within 90 days, and President Katzav
dissolved the Knesset. Between now and the date of the
elections, Labour and Likud will hold primary contests
to select their candidates for Prime Minister.

I would like now, if I may, to turn to
developments in Lebanon. Despite the reduced rhetoric
and lower profile of the issue in both Lebanon and
Israel, the Wazzani Springs water project continues to
be a source of tension along the Blue Line. Since the
last briefing to the Council, there has been constant
diplomatic activity aimed at defusing tensions. The
United States, the European Union and France have
recently dispatched water experts to the region in order
to work towards a resolution of the issue.

The United Nations has remained in close contact
with all parties in an effort to facilitate a reduction in
the level of tension. Certain media reports have
indicated that, while water has begun to be drawn from
the Wazzani Springs under the current project, the
amount being pumped may, for the time being, be
limited. Both sides should be encouraged to work
towards a diplomatic resolution of the matter.

Israeli air violations continue to be a cause for
concern. Israeli aircraft have continued to violate the
Blue Line and Lebanese airspace, drawing anti-aircraft
fire from the Lebanese side of the line. This anti-
aircraft fire, and the shrapnel that it produces,
continues to fall over northern Israeli towns and
villages.

On 3 November, there was a marked increase in
the number of air violations. It was reported that Israeli
aircraft overflew southern Lebanon, the Bekaa valley
and the capital city, Beirut. Again, those sorties were
met with anti-aircraft fire.

Both the air violations and the ensuing anti-
aircraft fire carry the potential for a deterioration of
what is already a tense situation. All parties should be
reminded of their obligations fully to respect the Blue
Line and to refrain from all violations thereof.

The coming elections in Israel will consume a
great deal of attention, both in the region and beyond,
and there may be a temptation to suspend efforts on
other fronts until they have been concluded. We cannot
afford that luxury. As I argued during my last briefing,
a deterioration of the situation on the ground only
makes it more difficult to pursue our collective
objective of a two-state solution. The maintenance of
the status quo - with its high levels of violence,
increasing human suffering and loss of life and steady
erosion of even a minimum of mutual trust and
respect- should not be an option, as this can only
lead to a further worsening of conditions.

The current efforts of the Quartet and others to
develop strategies for addressing simultaneously
political, security, humanitarian and reform issues need
the international community's full support and
attention. In order to succeed, however, we need to
pursue these efforts within a coherent framework to
which the parties have agreed, and the parties need to
stay the course and carry out long-standing
commitments. For that reason it is of critical
importance that the Quartet finalize its road map as
soon as possible and then obtain the explicit agreement
of both sides and of the international community to
follow that map to a just, lasting settlement of this
conflict.

