I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, Coordinator of the Association for Indigenous Women and Peoples of Chad, for her contribution. We are encouraged to see the elections were conducted peacefully in Mali, Guinea and Togo. However, preparations for elections in some countries have stalemated. Political discord among parties continues to make national dialogue and reconciliation in various countries more difficult. We remain very concerned about recurrent terrorist attacks against civilians and defence and security forces in the region, particularly in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. We join the Secretary-General and other Member States in condemning the multiple terrorist attacks on 9, 10 and 13 June against civilians and a United Nations humanitarian facility in Nigeria. Moreover, the deterioration of the humanitarian situation and violation of human rights in the region are also our concerns. As reported, in 2020, 24 million Sahelians will be in need of humanitarian assistance. Across West Africa and the Sahel, 19.1 million people are projected to be in food insecurity during the lean season, from June to August - a 77 per cent increase compared with 2019, the highest number in a decade. Furthermore, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic puts West Africa and the Sahel region at risk of further instability and insecurity. We also are concerned about the fact that drug smuggling and trafficking in West Africa are on the rise. The recent seizures of 120 kilograms of cocaine in Senegal and 405 kilograms of cocaine in Cete d'Ivoire show that more attention should be paid to the problem. Against this background, my delegation wishes to make the following observations. First, we call on the relevant political stakeholders and actors in Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana and Guinea to work together and reach consensus so that the upcoming elections can take place inclusively, transparently, credibly and peacefully. Secondly, we call on all concerned parties to further cooperate on the fight against terrorism and violent extremism across West Africa and the Sahel. We welcome the recent Security Council press statements on terrorism acts in Mali (SC/14213) and Nigeria (SC/14216) and on the Group of Five for the Sahel (SC/14211). We also join the Secretary-General in welcoming the adoption of the 2020-2024 action plan for the eradication of terrorism by the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on 21 December 2019. Thirdly, we join other Member States in supporting the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. We urge the Governments and other relevant parties in the region to uphold their obligations and responsibilities to implement international humanitarian law and ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those who most need it without hindrance. Fourthly, we call for a coherent and integrated approach to the security, humanitarian and development challenges and climate change. We support every initiative and effort to enhance regional and international cooperation and partnerships to promote greater socioeconomic development, to prevent and resolve farmer-herder conflicts and to tackle their root causes. We stress the importance of the full, equal and meaningful participation and involvement of women in the maintenance and promotion of peace, security and development. Last but not least, we commend the tireless efforts of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the African Union, ECOWAS and the Coalition for the Sahel's joint command mechanism. We reiterate our commitments to working closely with the United Nations, the members of the Security Council and international and regional partners so as to address the combined threats of terrorism and organized crime to international peace and security and build sustained peace, security and development for the region.
