Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): As the
representative of a country so profoundly attached to
the United Nations and its values, I would like to clarify
several points.

First, I thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien for his briefing,
his courage and the work that he and his team have
carried out. When the credibility of a major Office of
the United Nations is called into question in such a way,
it must be defended. And that is what I would like to do
publicly today in defending the work of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and paying
tribute to the work of all the humanitarian personnel
who put their lives on the line every day and night to
save others. I think that that deserves the support of the
community of nations.

We are all aware that the so-called humanitarian
pauses, which are decided upon unilaterally without
prior consultation whatsoever, are not a solution. They
are welcome, of course, but they are not a panacea.
We all know that it is impossible to obtain access
authorization in just a few hours to allow for the
entry of humanitarian workers and the evacuation of
the wounded and their families. Blaming the United
Nations for such objective factors is akin to firing at an
ambulance, both figuratively and literally, because we
know that hospitals and health-care personnel are often
the targets of deliberate air strikes. The key to it all is
to put an end to the hostilities and, in particular, to the
bombing. That is the basis on which we can build. It is
therefore urgent to exert maximum political pressure
on the regime and its supporters. That was the goal of
the recent General Assembly meeting following the
veto by Russia of the draft resolution by put forward by
France and Spain.

That pressure must be increased until the tragedy
taking place in Aleppo has been brought to an end.
We cannot give up on that. I have said it and I will
reiterate that Aleppo is to Syria what Sarajevo was to
Bosnia and Guernica was to Spain. That means that the
situation must be viewed as a large-scale humanitarian
tragedy - a black hole that swallows up and destroys
all of the values that the United Nations holds dear and
a promise that a horrendous tragedy will occur if we
fail to act now.

I would also like to make a few brief comments
on the issue of terrorism. I have made these comments
before in this forum. Not only does Aleppo not help
to combat terrorism - an issue which should, in
fact, unite the entire international community - but
Aleppo also systematically helps to spur radicalization
and, by extension, terrorism. I will echo the words of
my Minister for Foreign Affairs, who stated in this
Chamber (see S/PV.7785) that the battle of Aleppo is
a gift to terrorists and those who become the victims
of terrorist attacks, like France, pay the price. As far
as I and my country are concerned, this is an issue that
affects our national security.

My second comment concerns humanitarian aid.
I would simply like to point out that we all know -
and here too let us call a spade a spade so that we
can make some headway - that the Syrian regime
and its supporters are responsible for blocking the
humanitarian aid. I have already stated that here. It is
particularly unfair and completely out of place to blame
the United Nations when humanitarian workers are on
the front lines attempting to save lives.

Lastly, the international community cannot remain
silent on the abuses that are committed daily in Syria.
If we and the rest of the world believe in the work of
the United Nations and the values that unite us as an
Organization, something must be done. If not, we will
to bear the collective and individual responsibility
for it for a long time to come. In that regard, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights did not mince words
when he spoke about crimes that have never before
been committed, including war crimes and crimes
against humanity. He stated that light must be shed on
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Impunity and weakness cannot
be an option when we are dealing with a tragedy like
that taking place in Aleppo. In that regard, France
welcomes the adoption by the Human Rights Council
on 21 October of a resolution (A/HRC/RES/S-25/1)
demanding that the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic to
conduct a special independent investigation on events
in Aleppo and identify the alleged perpetrators of
human rights abuses.

In the same vein, we will pay particular attention
to the findings of the internal board of inquiry
a, established by the Secretary-General after the
bombing of a United Nations-Syria Red Cross aid
convoy on 19 September in the north-west of Aleppo,
which, I recall, caused the deaths of more than 20
people. To make a long story short, the onus is on the
parties to a conflict to protect civilians and ensure
humanitarian access and medical care. The protection
of humanitarian workers in particular - as provided
for by resolution 2286 (2016), on health-care personnel
and infrastructure - is vital. We must make a strong
appeal for the immediate cessation of attacks on such
personnel and infrastructure.

Once again, France calls on the Syrian regime and
Russia to put an end to air strikes on Aleppo, and not
only for a few hours, and on that basis, along with the
rest of us, to commit to building the political transition
needed in order to find a genuine political solution to
the crisis in Syria. As long as that has not occurred and
the tragedy unfolding in Aleppo continues, political
pressure must continue and will increase. Like many
others, I would like to issue another appeal, which we
hope will become louder and be heard and responded to
in a tangible manner.

