Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I wish to
thank the United Kingdom for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful to the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their extensive briefings. I take this
opportunity also to commend the work of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, under the
leadership of Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala,
and of the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs in
assisting the Tribunals and the Mechanism to reach
their goals.

Today's briefings noted the developments registered
in the past six months and the progress achieved in
meeting the completion strategy targets. We welcome
the efforts and commitment of both Tribunals, while
fully respecting and safeguarding due process, in
completing the outstanding proceedings within the
established time frame and in ensuring a smooth
transition of their duties to the International Residual
Mechanism.

The ICTR has completed its work at the trial level
with respect to all 93 accused persons and is focused
substantially on the appeal phase, which, naturally,
increased the workload of the Appeals and Legal
Advisory Division of the Tribunal.

We note that the ICTR is currently facing great
difficulties in relocating 10 individuals who were either
acquitted or released after completion of their sentences
and who still remain in safe houses in Arusha under the
Tribunal's protection. This situation impedes the well-
timed completion of the ICTR's mandate and creates an
additional burden. We welcome the Tribunal's efforts in
resolving the issue and emphasize that the cooperation
of States remains a crucial pillar of the work of the
Tribunal.

The ICTY has also made progress in its path towards
the transition and has already concluded proceedings
against 136 out of 161 indicted individuals. The report
notes that the ICTY anticipates concluding all trials
this year, except with regard to three individuals whose
arrests occurred later. However, given the sharply
increasing workload of the Appeals Chamber, the
existing challenges to retain highly experienced staff
members can hinder the timely delivery ofjudgements.

We note that the Arusha branch of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals has been
duly functional since its inauguration last July 2012,
and that the opening of The Hague branch next month
will certainly make the Mechanism fully operational.
Resolution 1966 (2010) empowered the Mechanism with
the residual functions of the Tribunals after their closure.
The successful operation ofthe Mechanism will depend
significantly on the cooperation of States, especially
when it comes to the critically important issue of the
arrest and surrender of the remaining three fugitives
indicted by the ICTR and relates to the enforcement of
sentences. It is therefore important that States remain
committed to meeting the relevant obligations towards
the Tribunals, continue to cooperate with them, as well
as with the Mechanism, and contribute to safeguarding
and further developing their legacy.

The activities and jurisprudence of the Tribunals
have helped to develop international law, particularly
the law of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and contributed to advancing the rule of law and
restoring peace. Indeed, the establishment of the
truth in situations of gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, the provision of
adequate and effective reparations to the victims, and
the need for institutional actions to prevent the repetition
of criminal offences are all necessary adjuncts to a true
resolution of conflicts and imperatives in regard to
the effective and politically uncompromised system of
international criminal justice.

