Mr. Fifield (Australia): We thank the United
Kingdom for convening this debate.

Reconciliation is fundamental to building and
sustaining peace and must be seen as central to Member
States' sustaining peace agenda and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The Security Council and
the General Assembly decided in their twin resolutions
(Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council resolution 2282 (2016)) that sustaining peace is a shared task and
responsibility. It is to be fulfilled by Governments and
all other national stakeholders. It flows through all
three pillars of the United Nations engagement at all
stages of conflict and in all its dimensions.

Furthermore, all nations are working towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly SDG 16,
on the establishment, protection and maintenance of
peace, justice and strong institutions. That requires
putting reconciliation at the centre.

An inclusive approach to national conversations is
essential in efforts to build and sustain peace. Australia
prioritizes reconciliation when working with partners
in the context of its overseas development programme,
as well as in our own national policies and strategies,
bringing stakeholders and affected communities
together. Reconciliation is notjust a concept or a practice
for countries with recent experience of conflict. It is a
work in progress in different contexts for all countries.

Domestically, Australia is walking the path of
reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous
Australians. Australia's framework, which is known
as Closing the Gap, includes a number of measures to
bridge that divide, including economic opportunities
for indigenous Australians through an indigenous
procurement policy, which seeks to leverage the
Government's annual multi-billion-dollar procurement
spend. This drives demand for indigenous goods and
services, stimulates indigenous economic development
and grows the indigenous business sector.

The private sector also plays an important role in
reconciliation. The Business Council of Australia and
major corporations are to be applauded for creating the
Raising the Bar programme, which is aimed at seeing
more than $3 billion Australian dollars spent by major
corporations with indigenous suppliers over the next
five years. The Australian Government also supports
work with the corporate sector to deliver reconciliation
action plans. These plans support organizations in
considering how they can contribute to reconciliation
between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
That delivers jobs, culturally aware workplaces and
businesses and helps to develop future generations of
indigenous leaders.

Reconciliation is a key focus of Australia's
international efforts. An example of that is our support
to peacebuilding in Bougainville island, as part of our
bilateral partnership with Papua New Guinea. Working
in partnership, the role of community leaders and faith-
based organizations, and ensuring women's involvement
have been key in advancing reconciliation and building
and sustaining peace. For example, the Nazareth Centre
for Rehabilitation has been an important contributor
to the ongoing peace and reconciliation process, and
Australia has been proud to be a long-term supporter.

We urge that United Nations assistance to Member
States focus on and integrate reconciliation needs,
including in the context of comprehensive analysis,
which Member States have decided should be delivered
under the sustaining peace agenda and United Nations
reform. We welcome the use of the Peacebuilding
Commission and other United Nations forums to
learn lessons from national experiences and provide a
platform for the discussion of effective approaches to
reconciliation for the purposes of sustaining peace. We
look forward to continuing to promote reconciliation,
nationally and internationally, in partnership with the
United Nations, its Member States and civil society, to
further efforts to achieving Sustainable Development
Goal 16 and the sustaining peace agenda.

