Mr. Kastrup (Germany): The German Foreign
Minister, Joschka Fischer, who had to return to Berlin
last night, has asked me to read a statement that he had
intended to make.

"My country fully associates itself with the
remarks made by the Belgian Foreign Minister,
Mr. Michel, on behalf of the European Union. It
is in view of my country's special commitments
with regard to Afghanistan - the first being our
chairmanship of the Afghanistan Support Group,
and the second our traditional sponsorship of the
annual draft resolution of the General Assembly
on Afghanistan - that we would like to add
some thoughts. Our interest in and political
commitment to contributing to the multilateral
effort aimed at designing a new political
framework for the political future of Afghanistan
was again highlighted this morning when our

Federal President, Mr. Rau, attended the opening
of the Security Council meeting.

"One thing is certain: a purely repressive
response to terrorism will fail. This is a lesson we
must not forget with regard to Afghanistan in
particular. For more than 20 years, a murderous
war, human rights violations and misery inflicted
on millions of refugees have provided the
nourishing ground for an unprecedented
symbiosis between the Al Qaeda terrorist group
and the Taliban regime. From there the trail leads
directly to the monstrous attacks in the United
States.

"As hard as the decision may be, without
military means we will not be able to destroy this
hotbed of terror. We must not forget that the
humanitarian catastrophe in Afghanistan is first
and foremost the work of the Taliban. They bear
the main responsibility for the failure of the
previous United Nations peace efforts in that
country.

"Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, who
provided us this morning with a clear and
principled blueprint for the next steps ahead,
deserves our respect and unanimous support for
his most difficult task. He envisaged the steps
ahead, which we should not hesitate to take.
These steps are the following.

"First, a solution must be found by the
Afghan population that must reflect the diversity
of the Afghan people and must be accepted by
Afghans in an act of free self-determination. The
first pressing goal should be the convening of a
representative body, with a View to forming a
transitional government that will agree on a peace
plan and on its implementation.

"Secondly, the legitimate interests and
concerns of the States neighbouring Afghanistan
must be taken into consideration in the efforts to
reach a solution. This could help avoid a
unilateral instrumentalization of internal Afghan
developments and prevent further interaction of a
tragic nature with neighbouring States. The
neighbouring States bear a large share of the
responsibility for the success of the peace efforts.
We appeal to them to cast off old modes of
thought and to contribute to regional stability by
showing a willingness to compromise.

"Thirdly, a political solution must be
legitimized and comprehensively backed by the
United Nations. The internal Afghan powers must
take responsibility for the solution, yet they will
still require the assistance of the United Nations
and the international community. This is the
prerequisite for stabilizing the situation and
organizing relief and reconstruction. Clear
political, economic and humanitarian objectives
must now be defined. The mandate necessary to
this end must be provided by a Security Council
resolution.

"There are four prime tasks: a major
international effort to provide, rapidly and
comprehensively, humanitarian aid to the
suffering people of Afghanistan; support for the
formation of a representative transitional
government and the development of local and
regional self-administration; the opening of
economic and social perspectives by means of a
comprehensive reconstruction programme ~ a
kind of Marshall plan for Afghanistan; and the
buttressing of the first three tasks by contributing
to security and stability. The Northern Alliance
also bears responsibility for this.

"We are very concerned about reports of
recent atrocities which might jeopardize ongoing
efforts for a political solution. A new political
order in Afghanistan can claim legitimacy only if
it respects universal human rights and
international humanitarian law. The new
Afghanistan must be created step by step.
Wherever the Taliban's grasp on power has been
broken, new hope must be raised through
concrete humanitarian relief and reconstruction
measures. An appeal to demilitarize the capital,
Kabul, seems necessary and reasonable.

"The United Nations must be able to count
on broad international support in its quest to
support the creation of viable political structures.
This requires cooperation from those States
which are particularly affected or are playing a
major role. Germany and the European Union are
ready to do their part. We support Ambassador
Lakhdar Brahimi and his team.

"The first and most urgent task is securing
the immediate survival of the people of
Afghanistan. In order to combine and increase the
humanitarian efforts made by the international
community, we have, as Chairman of the
Afghanistan Support Group, convened a meeting
in Berlin, to take place in early December. If
necessary, such a meeting could be organized at
an earlier date. This meeting is intended to send a
signal of international solidarity with
Afghanistan, in response to the appeal of the
Secretary-General made this morning.

"We stand ready, together with our
European partners, to meet with the G-21 group
of friends on Friday to lay the ground for a
lasting framework - a signal of hope and of a
new beginning."

