Mr. Mumbengegwi (Zimbabwe): I am delighted
to see you, my sister and dear colleague, presiding over
this important meeting as President of the Security
Council for this month. I note with appreciation that,
barely a month after the successful elections in your
great country and your subsequent appointment as
Minister for Foreign Affairs, you have managed to
redraw the attention of this body to the issue of the
Great Lakes region. In doing so, you have redirected
this principal organ of the United Nations to focus on
its core business of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

It is fortuitous that the question of peace and
security in the Great Lakes region is being considered
under the presidency of the United Republic of
Tanzania, a country that, for decades, has borne the
brunt of hosting thousands of refugees from the region
and beyond. Your country was also home to our
liberation movements in the southern African region.
We salute the gallant, hospitable and generous people
of Tanzania. It was therefore logical that
Dar es-Salaam, the haven of peace, was the venue of
the first International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region in November 2004, which was held under the
auspices of the United Nations and the African Union.

Let me indicate here that the Great Lakes region
is the linchpin for the attainment of lasting peace and
stability in many parts of Africa. Conflicts in that
region could impact negatively on countries in other
regions and hamper efforts towards the common goals
of development and regional integration. Zimbabwe is
closely linked to the Great Lakes region through
common membership in regional organizations, such as
the Southern Africa Development Community and the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa. It is
in that light that we value the resolution of conflict in
the Great Lakes that this debate seeks to promote.

The success of any peace process rests on the
political commitment made by the leaders of the
countries concerned, and that in turn is demonstrated
by integrity, transparency and the ability to trust and be
trusted, each by the other. However, the attainment of
enduring peace takes more than just political
commitment. It requires that the root causes of conflict
in the region, which have long been identified as lack
of development in all its aspects, be addressed. That is
where the international community has a big role to

play.

The first International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region showed that the international community
was coming to grips with the Great Lakes problem.
The Dar es-Salaam Declaration clearly indicated the
direction the peace process must take and how the
international community can strengthen it. Let me
recognize here the role that the African Union has
played and continues to play in that process. Indeed, it
is only natural that the African Union, through its
Peace and Security Council, should take the lead in
efforts to seek a lasting solution to problems in the
Great lakes region. While welcoming the progress that
has so far been made towards the consolidation of
peace and stability in the region, we are cognizant of
the fact that Africa falls short on the resources
necessary to put in place mechanisms to ensure lasting
peace in conflict areas. We therefore welcome the
continued efforts of the United Nations and the
international community to support the peace process
and post-conflict reconstruction in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there is an urgent need to assist the
Government in order to enable it to hold free, fair and
transparent elections following the successful
referendum on the constitution. Resources are needed
in order to continue to improve the institutional and
infrastructural capacities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. While violence in the country has
declined in the past year, the need to further create a
stable and peaceful environment, both for the holding
of elections and for the return of refugees and
displaced persons, remains paramount. The United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo requires the continued support
and mandate of the Security Council to enable it to get
on top of the situation and to disband all militias and
rebels based in the country.

The newly elected Government in Burundi needs
to be supported through a visible, predictable and
concerted international effort aimed at instituting a
credible reconstruction effort to lay the basis for
sustainable development.

The attainment of lasting peace in the Great
Lakes region goes beyond the provision of
humanitarian assistance. In our View, the newly created
Peacebuilding Commission should be the leading
United Nations organ to address the challenges in the
Great Lakes region and elsewhere. It has its work cut
out for it with regard to the countries of the Great
Lakes, and its success or failure may be judged by its
ability to address those and other challenges in Africa,
as well as similar situations in other parts of the world.

Let me conclude by calling on the United Nations
to facilitate the holding of a second Great Lakes
summit with a view to identifying ways to implement
the Declaration of the first International Conference on
the region. We need to focus on practical aspects of
cooperation between the United Nations system and the
African Union's Peace and Security Council. It is our
belief that the inter-agency coordination of the United
Nations system needs to be enhanced to spearhead
post-conflict reconstruction for the long-term stability
of the Great Lakes region.

