Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): Let me take this opportunity
to thank Equatorial Guinea for organizing this open
debate on the theme of silencing the guns in Africa,
an important and timely topic for our continent. I also
wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono
Angue, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Equatorial Guinea, for presiding over
this Security Council meeting. Let me also thank
Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lamamra and Mr. Gounden for their
important briefings.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Benin on behalf of the
Group of African States.

Africa is endowed with huge human and natural
potential that can transform the lives of its people.
The wave of decolonization in the twentieth century
brought hope for collective work in the continent to
ensure peace, justice and development and safeguard
the independence and interests of African nations. In
the intervening years, conflicts, political instability and
undue external influence and interventions undermined
national, subregional and continental efforts to translate
that huge endowment into durable peace and sustained
and inclusive development.

In Africa, from the East to the West and in the
North, extremism and terrorism are spreading - taking
advantage of State fragility and insecurity. The result
is deteriorating conditions for millions of Africans,
including intergenerational poverty and inequality,
migration, environmental degradation and recurrent
droughts. Nothing is more descriptive of the
continent's situation than the fact that over 75 per cent
of the Council's agenda is focused on Africa. Without
discounting the complex challenges for the causes
and dynamics of inter-State and intra-State conflicts,
Eritrea is a firm believer in Africa's potential to silence
the guns and afford its citizens the life that they deserve.
It requires political will to reclaim the priorities and the
narrative of the continent.

There is a critical need for African nations to have
a political space to chart their own development and
political paths. What Africa needs is fewer external
interventions and more partnerships. The region has
to strengthen its own mechanisms for prevention, the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding in
order to avert violent conflicts and prevent post-conflict
States from sliding back into conflict. Moreover, while
the role of the Security Council in the maintenance of
peace and security remains critical, it needs to revisit its
approaches and interventions in Africa. There is a need
for a paradigm shift. Trying to use the same approaches
time and again will not help achieve better results.

The Horn of Africa is an example of a region that
experienced decades of human suffering as a result of
conflicts, with peace eluding many of its citizens for
several decades. Yet, in recent months, the historic
peace deal between Eritrea and Ethiopia has resulted
in rapid positive changes marking the dawn of a bright
era of peace, partnership and development for the
entire region. The new-found peace has so far resulted
in the opening of the border, allowed the movement
of the two peoples across the common border, united
families, sparked the resumption of trade, opened
up communication links and avenues for cultural
exchange, and more. An important takeaway from
the new developments in the Horn of Africa is the
importance of leadership, political will and ownership
of conflicting parties to resolve their conflicts and
move forward.

The recent peace has also opened doors for the
consolidation of peace in the rest of the region. In the
tripartite agreement signed among Eritrea, Ethiopia
and Somalia, the countries agreed to cooperate in
advancing the goals of their people, while promoting
regional peace and security and building close
political, economic, social, cultural and security ties.
Moreover, at a separate meeting between the Presidents
of Djibouti and Eritrea, they pledged to open a new
chapter of cooperation in their relations. Those
developments are the result of a courageous choice
made to close the era of conflict and zero-sum games.
The new peaceful dynamics in the Horn of Africa will
give a huge boost for the ambitious objectives of the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. The citizens of
the Horn of Africa have embarked upon an arduous
journey of transforming the region for present and
future generations. Determined to get it right this time
around and make up for the lost decades and missed
opportunities for peace and economic progress, there is
a sense of great responsibility to ensure that what has
been achieved so far is inclusive and sustainable.

In conclusion, while we hail the rapid progress of
the past few months, we are mindful of the challenges
in the region as also envisioned in Agenda 2063 in
terms of sustainable development. We will be counting
on the Council's solidarity to sustain the peace while
yearning for the same for the rest of the African region.

