Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr.
President, I join in expressing the sentiments already
voiced regarding your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Denmark. We also join in expressing
our gratitude to you for having led the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
for your remarks this morning.

The mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was vital and timely. Not only was it a clear
demonstration of the commitment of the Security
Council to support and assist the country as it marches
towards the first democratic elections in four decades,
but it also provided an opportunity to learn first-hand
the status of the preparations for the historic elections
that are to take place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Ambassador Ikouebe complemented an important
aspect of what we wanted to say. Therefore, we will
not cover those items; we will only highlight a number
of issues.

First, we urge that the elections be held as
planned and that all the registered voters in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo go to the polls to
exercise their democratic right to choose their leaders.
We appeal to the people and to the leaders of the
various political parties to accept the outcome of the
elections and - once it is established that they were
free and fair - to support that political process and its
outcomes.

Secondly, it is our View that, having invested so
heavily in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including by sending seven
missions, the Security Council needs to remain
engaged in the country during its post-election period
to ensure that the political gains to be achieved are
consolidated.

Thirdly, it is also our View that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should continue to benefit from
the presence of the United Nations and its agencies in
maintaining peace, security and stability by instituting
reforms in all sectors that need them. Suffice it to say
here that the challenges are enormous but not
impossible to overcome.

Fourthly, within the region it is crucial to enhance
our efforts to support the people and the elected
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as they adjust in the post-election and post-conflict
phase so that they can find their rightful role as an
important and strategic player in the region. To that
end, we look forward to the holding of a second
conference on the Great Lakes region at an early date
to chart the way forward to regional integration and
cooperation. In that regard, Tanzania reiterates its
commitment to maintain and strengthen its policy of
good-neighbourliness with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Lastly, we believe that the gains that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo stands to secure can
be sustained only if there is a concerted effort to
alleviate the abject poverty of its people. We have
heard too often that a rich endowment of natural
resources can sometimes be a curse; the reverse is also
possible and is achievable. With sufficient political
will - especially on the part of the political leaders of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - and with the
assistance of the United Nations, the rest of the
international community and the international financial
institutions, the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be transformed into an economic giant of the region
and, indeed, of Africa.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo now
stands at a point where it must rise to meet the
aspirations of all its people to peace, security and
development.

