Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you very much, Madam President, for coming to New
York to preside over this debate, as well as for selecting
such an important and relevant topic. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and the four briefers
for their important contributions this morning. Let me
also take this opportunity to congratulate Argentina
and Ambassador Perceval on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August, and
to warmly welcome our new American colleague,
Ambassador Samantha Power, to the United Nations.

The founders of the United Nations wisely created
provisions for United Nations cooperation with
regional organizations in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, but I doubt that they could have
foreseen the range and scope of regional and subregional
orgnanizations that have arisen since 1945 and the
important role that they have played and are playing
in conflict prevention and resolution. Let me provide
just four recent examples of effective engagement by
regional organizations in conflict prevention.

In Europe, the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina has led to significant
progress in relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
creating a framework for practical cooperation between
the two countries and lowering tensions in a fragile
region.

In Yemen in 2011, as the country encountered
political instability accompanied by serious violence,
the Gulf Cooperation Council played an invaluable role
in brokering an agreement that created the framework
for a negotiated political transition process, which
should lead to a new constitution and elections in 2014.

In South-East Asia, efforts led by the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations in 2011, under the
chairmanship of Indonesia and with the active support
of the Security Council, resulted in a cessation of
violence along the Thai-Cambodian border.

And in Africa, the patient engagement of
President Mbeki and the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel has played a major part in
managing tensions surrounding implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan
and South Sudan. The African Union road map of
April 2012 set the template for resolution 2046 (2012),
serving as a model for United Nations and African
Union cooperation in maintaining international peace
and security.

We can draw some useful lessons from these and
other examples. They show how regional organizations,
whose interests are directly affected by the prospect of
instability within the region, can bring a strong sense
of urgency and commitment to their engagement. They
show how regional organizations can apply detailed
knowledge of the social and political issues in play. In
some cicumstances, regional organizations may find
it easier to be accepted as peacekeepers or mediators
by the actors involved, and as the example of Kosovo
demonstrates, regional organizations can often make
good use of the range of incentives that exist through
common ties in the region to encourage a sense of
compromise and flexibility.

There are other ways in which regional organizations
can help maintain international peace and security.
They can play a valuable role as indepenedent election
monitors, able to deter abuse of electoral procedures and
to validate properly held elections. But with this role
comes an important responsibility. In circumstances
where there is credible evidence of serious irregularities
in the conduct of elections, regional oerganizations that
have monitored the elections must be ready to voice
these concerns clearly and objectively, unconstrained
by diplomatic or regional solidarity.

Regional organizations can also help uphold
international peace and security by establishing and
upholding standards of democracy and good governance
among their members. The African Union's policy
of zero tolerance towards military coups and other
violations of democratic standards is an important factor
in the trend that has seen the widespread establishment
of multi-party democracy across the continent in place
of military or one-party regimes.

Within the Commonwealth, the readiness of the
Ministerial Action Group to take action suspending
members from participation in the organization has
served to uphold and entrench democratic standards.

I have highlighted positive examples of regional
organizations' cooperation with the Unted Nations, but
it is also important to discuss difficulties, as well as to
highlight successes.

First, some conflict situations will be of relevance
to more than one regional organization and the views
of the different organizations may differ. In 2011, over
Libya for example, the League of Arab States and the
African Union arrived at strikingly different positions
on the ongoing revolution. In general, the Council is
always keen to take account of the views of relevant
regional organizations, but that becomes harder when
those views are discordant.

Secondly, we have seen circumstances where
the views of the relevant regional and subregional
organizations are at odds. Again in 2011, this was
the case when the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States took different
approaches to developments over Cote D'Ivoire, leaving
the Council having to assess a diversity of regional and
subregional perspectives.

Thirdly, the issue of capacity also needs to be
considered in a realistic way. Regional organizations
sometimes have the political will but not the practical
or financial capacity to take swift action in response
to peace and security challenges. On Mali in 2012, we
saw the regional and subregional organizations assert
their readiness to lead an international response, but
this was followed by a long hiatus during which time
insurgents steadily expanded their control over parts
of the country, requiring French forces to intervene to
arrest the mounting crisis.

Equally we in the Council need to look self-critically
at our own conduct. We need to acknowledge frankly
the occasions, as with Syria, when we have failed to
provide an effective response and clear international
direction in circumstances where the voice of the
relevant regional organization - the League of Arab
States - has been clear and forthright in setting out
what it expects of us.

So there are lessons to learn, as well as successes
to highlight. But the overall trend is clear - towards
increasing engagement by regional organizations in
conflict-prevention and therefore towards increasing
United Nations cooperation with regional organizations.
And that is a challenge we must embrace. We should do
so in a flexible and creative way. Today's presidential
statement (S/2013/PRST/l2) and the previous Council
products on cooperation with the African Union and
the League of Arab States set out valuable guidelines.
But we should avoid the temptations to overly codify
our relationships or to prioritize establishing a strict
theology of institutional cooperation over practical
action.

