Mrs. Zappia (Italy) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Ivorian presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this meeting. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Chairperson of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for the compelling briefings
that we have heard.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Italy believes that an effective and efficient peace
architecture must be based on partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, as set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. First and foremost, that means
further strengthening ties between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU), based on mutual respect,
shared values and comparative advantages. We welcome
the progress achieved under the leadership of Secretary-
General Guterres and Mr. Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, since the signing of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security in April
2017, and we encourage the strengthening of relations
between the two organizations. At the same time, we
welcome the strengthening of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

We also welcome the progress made with regard to
the implementation of the African Union Peace Fund.
We believe that it is important to stress that the Fund
must finance mediation and preventive diplomacy
activities in addition to peace operations. The
continent is currently experiencing historic changes.
Reconciliation between Ethiopia and Eritrea and the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which led to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in the Sudan and South Sudan,
attest to the possibility of finding African solutions to
African problems, while, at the same time, pursuing the
objectives of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

Italy continues to advocate for the use of United
Nations assessed contributions to finance African
peace operations, provided that they meet the highest
standards in the areas of troop quality, training,
equipment, financial transparency, respect for
human rights and discipline. It is also necessary to
develop a reference framework concerning respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights.
In that context, let me to broach the issue of Africa's
representation within United Nations bodies. Africa's
underrepresentation in the Security Council must be
redressed. As a member of the Uniting for Consensus
group, Italy hopes to strengthen cooperation with
African countries by addressing the important issue
of the reform of the Security Council with the aim of
making it more democratic, representative, transparent
and accountable. The United Nations and the European
Union (EU) have a long history of cooperation in the
areas of conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Italy
fully supports the strengthening of that strategic
relationship, while valuing the complementarity of the
work of those two organizations. Similarly, triangular
United Nations-EU-AU cooperation, which has already
shown itself to be extremely effective on the ground,
must be further developed.

The partnership with the United Nations came
up for discussion during our chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) this year. In keeping with the motto
of our presidency - "dialogue, ownership and
responsibility" - we have promoted initiatives aimed
at strengthening the synergy and complementarity
of the United Nations and the OSCE's work and at
encouraging dialogue and the regular exchange of
information between the two organizations, while,
at the same time, contributing to the financing of its
Liaison Office with the United Nations in Vienna. We
have focused on priority sectors for the international
community, while considering the connections
linking the Eurasian and Euro-Mediterranean security
dimensions. In that regard, I will mention only Ukraine
and the central role played by the OSCE in every
aspect related to the solution of that crisis. The OSCE
Ministerial Council, which is meeting in Milan today,
provides us with the opportunity to take stock of and
identify the next steps to be taken. The United Nations
is playing an active role in that process with a view to
strengthening cooperation.

In the same spirit, as Chairman of the Central
European Initiative for 2019, Italy will make the
development of synergies with the United Nations one
its mandate's objectives. It is also important to recall
long-term cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe. There is clear complementarity
linking the values and goals of the two organizations,
in particular the fight for democracy, the rule of law,
the promotion and the protection of human rights, and
basic freedoms.

At the subregional level, we believe that it is crucial
to deepen cooperation between the United Nations
and other bodies that can complement the work of
continental organizations, based on the principle of
subsidiarity. In Africa, for example, the United Nations
could benefit from the prominence and effectiveness
of organizations such as ECOWAS and IGAD. In that
regard, I would like to mention the case of the Gambia,
where the Security Council, working in cooperation
with ECOWAS, enabled the Gambian crisis to end in a
peaceful transition of power in 2017. At that time, Italy
was a non-permanent member of the Council during its
split-term with the Netherlands.

In conclusion, let me point out that effective
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
bodies must increasingly focus on the prevention
dimension of conflicts. In that regard, I reiterate
Italy's full support for the Secretary-General's reform
and the implementation of his Agenda for Peace in a
coherent and global vision with a holistic approach
encompassing the peace and security, human rights and
development pillars.

