Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): It is with great
pleasure that my delegation joins others in welcoming
Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President
of the Republic of Liberia. We equally appreciate her
statement and share many of the aspirations and
concerns that have been raised, especially with regard
to the formidable challenges of national reconstruction
and reconciliation. Indeed, Liberia has come a long
way in the quest for peace, and its people deserve
commendation for their resolve in recent years to stay
the course. That was clearly demonstrated in the
successful completion of the two-year transition
process as set out under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement drawn up at Accra.

Naturally, in this new climate of hope,
expectations are high, not least among the most
vulnerable segments of the population, who continue to
bear the brunt of the acute humanitarian and socio-
economic crisis of a war-shattered economy.

Undoubtedly, President Johnson-Sirleaf has an
onerous responsibility to discharge, since her beloved
country, Liberia, is, in many respects, starting from
scratch on many fronts. In that regard, we wish to note
that the country's security situation remains fragile, not
to mention the other serious challenges - particularly
the urgent need for the consolidation of State authority
and the firm establishment of the rule of law and good
governance throughout the country. These constitute
the foundation on which a strong economy can be built
in order to tackle expeditiously the formidable
humanitarian and socio-economic problems that
President Johnson-Sirleaf's Government faces.

We recognize that the Government and the people
of Liberia bear primary responsibility for the
reconstruction and development of their country.
Nonetheless, the magnitude and complexity of the
challenges facing Liberia call for the continued support
and cooperation of the international community and of
the United Nations system as a whole, especially
during this critical period of transition from war to
peace. That will enable the leaders to build on the
gains made so far and will stimulate the rapid
economic growth that is vital for sound nation-
building.

We expect the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) to contribute greatly towards that end.
Therefore its continued presence in the country - at
least in the foreseeable future - is necessary. Let us
learn from history and not betray the people of Liberia
again in their hour of need. In the light of the goodwill
that Liberia currently enjoys on the international plane,
we hope that, sooner rather than later, the country will
benefit from the assistance and support of the newly
established Peacebuilding Commission.

It is also with humility that I deem it appropriate
to remind President Johnson-Sirleaf that, because she
is Africa's first female President, history has thrust
upon her the additional burden of being a trailblazer
for the numerous women and girls of Africa in their
quest for empowerment through active and meaningful
participation in national politics, including in
leadership roles. We are confident that, given her
sterling qualities and pedigree, she will live up to their
expectations and set an example worthy of emulation.

I need not dwell at length on the long history of
excellent relations between our two countries. Suffice
it to say that Ghana will continue to use its tenure of
office in this organ as well as its membership of our
two common institutions - the Economic Community
of West African States and the African Union - to
support the implementation and attainment of President
Johnson-Sirleaf's laudable vision. Her success is our
success, and we wish her well.

