Ms. Mohamed: I thank you very much, Sir, for
the opportunity to participate in this important debate
on peacebuilding in Africa. I congratulate you on
Japan's ascendancy to the presidency of the Council
for July and commend you for the manner in which
you have conducted its affairs. I also thank you for
providing the concept note (S/2016/586, annex) that has
guided and will continue to guide the debate on this
important subject.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as for his leadership,
wisdom, commitment and patience.

Kenya is honoured to participate in this debate,
which is taking place just before the sixth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD VI), which will be held in Nairobi on
27 and 28 August. Japan's historic commitment to
and its reliable partnership with Africa in peace and
development are well known. The hosting of TICAD
VI in Africa reaffirms Japan's strong commitment to
our continent.

I applaud the Security Council for its role in
stabilizing countries in conflict. In an increasingly
complex and interconnected world, the role of the United
Nations cannot be overemphasized. All the countries
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
are from Africa. Peacebuilding remains crucial to
our continent, which continues to face unprecedented
challenges even as the world becomes more globalized,
democracy spreads and regional integration deepens.
Today Africa is still struggling with some of the
same challenges. The key difference today is that the
continent is more determined than ever to overcome
them. Let me outline some of the measures that Africa
has taken to respond to the challenges it faces.

First, in 2002, Africa transformed the Organization
of African Unity into the African Union (AU), complete
with a framework for the development of an African
Peace and Security Architecture. The framework laid
the foundation for institutionalizing peacebuilding in
Africa. Through it, institutions such as the African
Union Commission, the AU Peace and Security
Council, the Continental Early Warning System, the
Panel of the Wise, the African Standby Force and the
AU Peace Fund were established. Those institutions
are still at different stages of evolution and provide the
basis for peacebuilding in Africa. The recent relaunch
of the revamped AU Peace Fund by the AU Summit in
Kigali earlier this month reaffirms our commitment.

Secondly, African countries have revitalized their
regional economic integration initiatives in order to
ensure sustained peace and shared prosperity. Today
the regional bodies the Common Market for Eastern
and Southern Africa, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Southern African Development
Community, the Arab Maghreb Union and the East
African Community are determined to sustain peace
through trade and economic partnerships. We have
all signed up for the Continental Free Trade Area.
We are looking for freer movement of goods, services
and persons.

Thirdly, institutionalized strategic partnerships
were sought with the United Nations and its various
agencies in all areas of peace and security based on
consultative decision-making, a division of labour, and
burden- and responsibility-sharing. Those relationships
have evolved from ad hoc consultations to systematic,
principled and predictable arrangements through the
setting up of the United Nations Office to the AU and
the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, both of
which remain a positive work in progress.

The challenge of achieving effective peacebuilding
has become the main preoccupation for policymakers
on our continent and beyond. The evolving nature
of conflicts in Africa and elsewhere necessitated the
institutionalization of peacebuilding through the
establishment of the PBC in 2005. The PBC brings
together various actors, both national and international,
to ensure that countries affected by conflict do not
lapse or relapse into conflict. The essence remains that
of building effective partnerships for sustaining peace.
True partnership actually starts at the community level,
moving on to the national, regional and international
levels. The whole process, which is intended to leave
no one behind, must include the private sector, civil
society, women and youth. Effective partnerships
remain essential to sustaining peace and development
in Africa. Of course, there is sufficient evidence to
show that there can be no peace without development.

It is exactly three months since the Security
Council and the General Assembly adopted identical
resolutions on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490) provided a solid basis
for the two progressive resolutions. The report also
observed that the fragmentation between several
intergovernmental organs dealing with peace and
security, each holding a piece of the peacebuilding
puzzle, had proved to be a significant impediment to
operations on the ground, where peacebuilding actually
takes place. The resolutions introduced the principle
of sustaining peace, which stresses the need for more
investment in governance, security and development
in the continuum of conflict prevention, management
and resolution.

More emphasis on conflict prevention means
recognizing the primacy of politics in the pacific
settlement of disputes - an issue to which the
Secretary-General has referred. The importance of
investing in early-warning systems instead of reacting
to outbreaks of Violence is clear, and could not be more
clear in the cases he cited. The full implementation
of the resolutions could result in lesser emphasis on
militarized responses to conflicts in Africa, and instead
promote more political engagement and developmental
approaches that could result in effective peacebuilding.

The PBC strives to uphold national ownership and
leadership in the implementation of peacebuilding
initiatives. We fully appreciate that. Similarly, the
Peacebuilding Fund has provided critical funding to the
establishment and functioning of national institutions
that play a central role in peacebuilding processes to
address challenges. Moving forward, in order to sustain
peace for effective development in Africa, let me make
the following observations.

First, peacebuilding cannot succeed if half of
the population is excluded from the process. Across
Africa, the invaluable role of women in the whole cycle
of conflict - and not just during the post-conflict
reconstruction - as well as their capacity to shape,
drive and promote peace, is well known. Bridging
cultural challenges that hinder women's participation
in sustaining peace, mainstreaming gender in the
peacebuilding discourse and involving them in
decision-making at all levels must be a priority. I am
pleased to report substantive progress in the drafting
of the PBC gender strategy, which I am confident will
further strengthen the Commission's engagement on
gender-related peacebuilding. We intend to formally
propose the strategy for adoption in early September.

Secondly, the PBC can be effective only ifpolicy and
political discussions are complemented by predictable
financial support for critical priorities. As I mentioned
earlier, the revamped African Union Peace Fund to
support AU-led peace operations was launched during
the AU Summit in Kigali. It remains underfunded.

Similarly, we all recognize the crucial role of
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), especially in Africa.
Its flexibility and impact on our collective efforts
to sustaining peace at short notice is not in dispute.
However, it has perennially faced a desperate funding
shortfall. It is against that backdrop that Kenya, the
United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, Mexico, Sri
Lanka and Somalia will co-host a pledging conference
for the PBF on 21 September on the margins of the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly. I take
this opportunity to invite all Member States to the
pledging conference.

Finally, allow me to make a few remarks in my
national capacity as the representative of Kenya.

I came here from chairing the fourteenth session of
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), which successfully concluded in Nairobi
last Friday and whose theme was "From Decisions to
Actions". The Conference underscored the importance
of international support measures such as market access,
official development assistance, increased investment
flows, and technical assistance and technology transfer
as crucial building blocks to enhance the economic
resilience of countries and communities in developing
countries. Enhancing economic development is
recognized as building resilience to risks and
vulnerabilities in the most fragile States. Peacebuilding
therefore has to contribute to maximizing trade,
investment and development opportunities. Such effort
no doubt requires the collective, coordinated and
sustained support of both State and non-State actors.

Moreover, in the wake of the historic adoption of key
global policies in 2015, including the 2030 Agenda for

Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the Paris Climate Change Agreement,
among others, achieving peace and security has to
continue to underpin the delivery of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The interconnectivity of
the SDGs implies that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission has to fit into and complement the work
of all other agencies and initiatives that promote
social, economic and political development. The divide
between peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance and
development needs to be overcome and addressed as a
continuum, so that every person everywhere can have
an opportunity to achieve peace and prosperity.

I would like to assure everyone that we are
committed to the pursuit of peace on and beyond the
continent and consider it a prerequisite for development
and prosperity. That is why we are concerned by the
pullback on the part of the European Union of its
funding to the African Union Mission in Somalia and
AU missions elsewhere - a move that we consider not
well-aligned with our collective objective to achieve
sustainable peace in our part of the world. I hope that
that matter will continue to receive the attention of the
Council.

Once again, I wish to thank Japan for organizing
this debate. I wish to invite all members of the Council
to TICAD VI, which is to be held in Nairobi from
27 to 28 August. It is our desire that the link between
peace, peacebuilding, security and the 2030 Agenda be
emphasized and given pride of place.

In conclusion, we welcome the diagnostic tool
developed by the United Nations and the World Bank.
We in Kenya actually know the wisdom and the value
of deploying technology in the service of humankind.
We have developed three such technologies and
applications: the "Umati" project for crowds; "Wiano"
for reconciliation; and "Ushahidi", which means
"witness" or "testimony". The Ushahidi project was
used in Kenya, Haiti and Japan, among other places.

