Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's important meeting. I also thank Ms. Ghelani
for participating in it.

Five years ago, on 22 February 2014 to be precise,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2139 (2014), on
the humanitarian situation in my country, Syria. In that
regard, I would like to recall some of what I said in this
very Chamber when that resolution was adopted.

"Humanitarian support to the Syrian people
cannot be effective unless it is accompanied in
word and deed by an end to the efforts to politicize
humanitarian issues and an end to terrorist acts. The
activities of the armed terrorist groups, including
those associated with Al-Qaida, are the main cause
of the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people"
(S/PV. 7116, p. 15).

Today I will briefly explain why I have chosen to
repeat what I said some five years ago. I will do that
by addressing the following three points. First, five
years ago, we said that humanitarian support to Syrians
would be right and effective only if actions were aligned
with words. That remains valid today. How can certain
States, including permanent members of the Security
Council, claim to be concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Syria while the Governments of those
States continue to support terrorism, maintain their
own armed forces illegitimately in Syria and engage in
aggression after aggression against my country? That
has led to thousands of civilian martyrs, the majority of
whom are women and children, and to the destruction
of the infrastructure.

Colonel Francois-Regis Legrier of France, who was
the leader of the French artillery unit in the illegitimate
coalition that was established against my country,
confirmed that point. I am citing from NationalDefence
Review, in which he said few days ago:

"We have massively destroyed the infrastructure."
The goal of the coalition was to limit its losses. That
has led to a substantial increase in the number of deaths
among civilians and greater destruction.
Colonel Legrier asked:

"How many Syrian villages must suffer the
same fate as Al-Hajin for us to understand that we
are headed the wrong direction?"

He noted that the coalition could have acted more rapidly
and effectively against the terrorists by sending just
1,000 soldiers. He concluded his interview by asking,

"Why do we have an army that we do not dare
to use?"

I will answer that question by recalling what former
American President Barack Obama said here in the
Council about the fact that the international coalition
needed 30 years to eliminate terrorism in Syria. He
predicted that eliminating terrorism and Da'esh would
take three decades. President Obama therefore agrees
with Colonel Legrier. That simply underscores what we
have repeatedly said, that the goal of the illegitimate
coalition was not to combat terrorism, but rather to
target the resources of the Syrian State, prolong the
war that was imposed on Syria and drown the countries
and peoples of our region in the ongoing chaos of
imaginary conflicts.

In that connection, how can some of the permanent
members of the Security Council claim to be eager to
resolve the humanitarian situation in Syria, given that
their Governments have imposed unfair economic
sanctions on the Syrian people? Those sanctions affect
all aspects of daily life and impede the access of
ordinary civilians to food, medicine and milk for their
children, particularly in our harsh winters. The Syrians
are suffering due to those barbaric measures, which
affect the electricity, oil and gas sectors. This is not just
political terrorism, but also economic terrorism, which
is unfair, illegal and illegitimate.

Far from engaging in self-criticism, those States
do not take steps to rectify the errors for which they
are responsible, which would be a very noble task, as
an Arab proverb goes. Nothing of this sort is being
done. When we say "economic terrorism" we are not
exaggerating, because the conditional assistance that
certain States are offering makes us lose twice the value
of that aid as a result of the damage caused by their
coercive measures, which have wrought havoc on our
national economy and international trade transactions.

Secondly, five years ago we said that humanitarian
assistance in Syria could be delivered on a fair and
effective basis only ifit was free from any politicization
of humanitarian issues, and that statement stands just
as true today. How can the humanitarian co-penholders
within the Security Council discharge their duties
while ignoring the need to consult and coordinate with
the Syrian Government?

We understand that States have the right to govern
and manage their bilateral relations the way they
choose and in accordance with their own interests. Of
course, we enjoy that right and implement our foreign
policies accordingly. However, membership of the
Security Council imposes upon its membership the
responsibility to engage and consult with the countries
concerned so that the members can better understand
the preoccupations, worries and challenges of those
countries. That would be done if Council members
carried out their duties in line with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, rather than being free
to pursue their own national agendas and short-sighted
political affiliations.

My colleague the Permanent Representative of
Belgium, one of the humanitarian co-penholders,
expressed his deep concern about what he called
25,000 Syrian refugees who have left Hajin town in
Syria, not in Florida, and headed to Al-Hol camp in
Syria, not in California. My Belgian colleague added
that he is sad for the deaths of some 60 children and
adults on the road from the Hajin Syrian town to Al-Hol
Syrian camp. I remind my colleague, the Ambassador
of Belgium, that many of those whom he described as
Syrian refugees are not Syrians at all; in fact, they are
Europeans. Many of them came from Belgium, France,
Britain, Germany, Spain and Sweden. I am of course
talking about thousands of terrorists and thousands of
their family members. All of them are not Syrians.

I did not hear from my Belgian colleague any
call on my country to participate in the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria. We did
not receive an invitation to participate either in the first
Brussels Conference or in the second. They claim that
they are humanitarian pen-holders. This proves that the
reasons behind the three Brussels conferences are not
humanitarian at all. They are purely political reasons
against my country, Syria. The aim is to prolong
terrorism, while using the humanitarian factor to
blackmail and promote instability among the countries
of the region.

How could certain countries, some of which
are members of the Council, claim that they are
eager to resolve the humanitarian situation in Syria
while preventing the return of Syrian refugees to
their homes and villages after being liberated from
the terrorists? They put up artificial barriers, while
linking humanitarian and development assistance with
political conditions that contradict the principles of
humanitarian work.

When I talk about the politicization of the
humanitarian assistance in Syria, I need to refer to
what I have said scores of times - the United Nations
reports depend on what is called "open sources".
Last month, I informed the Council that a reporter
from Der Spiegel, a German magazine, fabricated
information on Syria and had done so for years, simply
to demonize the Syrian Government (see S/PV.8454).
Today I wish to inform the Council that an employee
of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), Riam
Dalati, confirmed that scenes filmed in the hospital of
Douma in the Ghouta, near Damascus, after the alleged
chemical attack there were entirely fabricated. The
BBC therefore distanced itself from Dalati's fabricated
report and suspended him. I want to make it clear that
if that report had confirmed the alleged attack or the
use of chemical weapons in the Douma hospital, Syria
would have been the target of another tripartite attack
outside the framework of international legitimacy.

Thirdly, five years ago we said that humanitarian
assistance in Syria could be delivered on a fair and
effective basis only if terrorism were eliminated. That
is true again today. How is it possible that certain States,
including some members of the Security Council, can
claim that they are interested in the humanitarian
situation in Syria while they still provide support and
protection to the remaining terrorist groups? How can
certain Western countries claim that they are keen on
combating terrorism and bringing its perpetrators to
justice through mechanisms such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria while
they refuse to refrain from the political exploitation
of terrorism and to repatriate their own nationals who
have been engaged in terrorism in Syria? The policies of
certain countries have made international instruments
and Council resolutions on counter-terrorism a mere
cheap trade commodity like that of Da'esh.

In conclusion, what is required today is to sincerely
work with the Syrian Government in accordance
with resolution 46/182, with full respect for Syrian
sovereignty. A few days ago we saw the fruits of the
engagement between the Syrian Government and its
humanitarian partners, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and the United Nations, in the absence of obstructing
external factors.

By engaging with the United Nations, we were able
for the second time to deliver assistance to the camp
where terrorists are deployed and that is occupied
by the American troops that invaded a dear part of
my country. We provided life-saving assistance and
medical care services to the inhabitants of the camp.
In complementing that effort, the Syrian Government,
in cooperation with our friendly Russian partner, has
opened two humanitarian corridors to allow for the
voluntary, safe and dignified exit of Syrian civilians
who are besieged by the American troops and their
affiliated terrorist groups. One of those terrorist
groups is called Suqour Al-Sahra. It attacked the city
of Al-Suwayda, where it killed 327 civilians at dawn
and captivated 32 women then returned to its lair,
which is under American protection. We look forward
to supporting the Syrian and Russian efforts to ensure
an end to the suffering of those living in the camp,
where the majority would like to return to the areas
that are under the control of the Government, as noted
by Ms. Ghelani and according to a survey conducted
recently by the United Nations. We also look forward to
ending the illegitimate presence of the American troops
and the terrorist gangs that they support..

My colleague the Ambassador of France said that
the Syrian Government had approved only 40 per
cent of requests for humanitarian assistance. That
is categorically untrue. The report of the Secretary-
General before the Council - that is the report of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) - and which was referred to by my colleague
the representative of France, does not mention that the
Syrian Government approved without exception all
requests submitted by the World Food Programme,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, UNICEF and the non-governmental
organizations, all acting under their respective mandates
and within their spheres of competence. The requests
were for the delivery of vital foodstuffs, medicines and
vaccines. This failure to include that information in
the Secretary-General's report is the responsibility of
OCHA. It should be contained in the report so that my
colleague the representative of France does not make
the same mistake again.
The Security Council must uphold the principles
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. It must prevent the noble issue ofhumanitarian
assistance from being used as a means to destabilize
States or interfere in their internal affairs. Regrettahly,
we see that happening flagrantly again today in the
Republic of Venezuela. That would not be happening
in Venezuela if some States had not succeeded in using
the humanitarian issue to politically blackmail certain

Member States in exactly the same way as we have seen
in Syria.

