Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of May. Our appreciation goes also to
Ambassador Heller and his team for their excellent
leadership during the month of April.

At the outset, I wish to thank Ms. Karin
Landgren, Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal, for her detailed briefing on the activities of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN). I should
also like to pay tribute to Mr. Ian Martin, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Nepal, who concluded his excellent work in February.
I would like to begin by expressing deep concern
about the political developments of the past few days,
following the announcement of the dismissal of the
chief of Army staff and the resignation of the Prime
Minister. These may have serious implications for the
future democratic process in Nepal. We fully support
the Secretary-General's appeal to all concerned for
restraint and political consensus.

The United Nations has been actively engaged in
the peace process since the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement was concluded in 2006. During the more
than two years of UNMIN's presence, the people of
Nepal and the parties concerned have achieved historic
breakthroughs despite continuing challenges. The
election of a Constituent Assembly and the
transformation to a federal democratic republic are
commendable achievements. We highly value the vital
supporting role of UNMIN and appeal to all concerned
to strictly adhere to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

Consultations on a new constitution have been
making steady progress. Given the vital importance of
drafting a document so basic to the future course of the
country, we understand the cautious approach taken by
the people of Nepal, as long as it is well grounded in
peaceful political dialogue. Despite the recent political
developments, we are encouraged by the Maoist party's
assurances of its commitment to the peace process,
including continued participation in the drafting of the
constitution. We urge the people of Nepal to maintain
the momentum they have generated so far and to see
their efforts through to fruition.

The demobilization and integration of Maoist
soldiers is a greater challenge. The Special Committee
has begun its work and has established a Technical
Committee. But this still remains a task that is
fundamental to the peace process and is very difficult
to achieve. Based on the latest assessment by the
Secretary-General, we are concerned that it may not be
realistic to expect the necessary work to be completed
within the next three months.

The parties need to engage in consultations
among themselves, in good faith and in a spirit of
cooperation, in order to reach a decision on the
structures of security institutions. Despite the recent
political turbulence centred on recruitment for the
Nepal Army and the People's Liberation Army, the
status of senior officials of the Army and the
resignation of the Prime Minister, we hope that all
parties will remember why and under what conditions
they embarked on this peace process three years ago. It

was the outcome of the wisdom and courage of the
people of Nepal to take the initiative to bring a long
conflict to an end. All parties should adhere to the
Agreement on Monitoring the Management of Arms
and Armies, which clearly and specifically stipulates
restrictions on the Nepal Army and the People's
Liberation Army.

It is time for the parties to demonstrate such
wisdom again, by resolving outstanding issues which
block the way towards durable peace and prosperity for
the country. Most urgently, a solution should be found
regarding how the 19,000 Maoist army personnel who
have been confined to the cantonments for two years
can contribute to the reconstruction and development
of the country.

Japan sincerely hopes that all parties engage
actively in political dialogue and make best use of the
technical expertise and support provided by UNMIN.
We look forward to UNMIN following through on its
successful supporting role.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
commitment to the peace process in Nepal.

