I wish first to thank the briefers. We applaud their teams' efforts to strengthen the Council's understanding of the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. It is clear that in some cases and some regions, terrorist and organized criminal groups exploit and benefit from weak democratic institutions and law enforcement and take advantage of porous borders and ungoverned or undergoverned territories. In some parts of the world, those conditions provide opportunities for terrorists and transnational criminal groups to coexist in the same territory, develop alliances based on common interests and even collaborate. Based on trends we have seen, transnational criminal organizations are unlikely to risk attracting the attention of authorities through collaboration with high- profile terrorist organizations or involvement in terrorist activity. In the instances where we see a linkage between terrorists and organized criminal groups, whole- of-Government and whole-of-society approaches are vital to addressing the complex nature of the crimes. Strong border security, regional cooperation and intelligence- sharing between security agencies allows for effective responses to combat both and can prevent nefarious actors from taking advantage of trafficking routes and networks in regions with underpoliced or porous borders. In that regard, an important tool for Member States is resolution 2396 (2017), in which the Security Council obligated all Member States to collect and analyse advance passenger information and passenger name records and to develop watch lists. Such data can help investigators identify connections between individuals associated with terrorist and organized criminal groups. We urge Member States that need technical assistance or capacity-building in that area to please request it. Existing treaties, including the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and international counterterrorism instruments and protocols also provide a useful framework for facilitating law-enforcement cooperation. The United States has used the that Convention as a legal basis more than 650 times since 2005 to provide or request mutual legal assistance, extradition and other forms of international legal cooperation with at least 99 countries. In addition to law-enforcement efforts to counter criminal and terrorist linkages, it is also important to engage local communities and civil society to address the underlying conditions conducive to the spread of violent extremism or transnational organized crime. Local civil society is often attuned to the complex issues in play on the ground and can assist Member States in finding practical solutions. Since the adoption of resolution 2482 (2019) last year, the United Nations has made great strides towards better understanding the linkages between terrorists and organized criminal groups. The United States applauds the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime's capacity-building programming to address those linkages. The United States recommends that the United Nations strengthen its cooperation with regional and subregional organizations as well as international platforms such as the Global Counterterrorism Forum. The Forum has created good practices to assist Member States in addressing potential linkages and brings together traditional criminal investigators and those handling terrorism cases. The United States looks forward to hearing the experiences of our partner countries on how they are identifying and addressing those linkages. We will continue to work with the United Nations; organizations such as the Financial Action Task Force, the Group of Seven and the Global Counterterrorism Forum; and partner countries around the world to address both transnational organized crime and terrorism.
