The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Egypt, Hungary, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Malaysia, Pakistan, Romania and Ukraine in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lamamra
(Algeria), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Molnar
(Hungary), Mr. Shah (India), Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Razali (Malaysia), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Gorita (Romania) and Mr. Zlenko
(Ukraine) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

In View of the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend the
meeting at 1.30 and resume it at 3.15.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/271, which contains the text of a letter dated 6 April
1995 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
Members of the Council will shortly have before
them document S/ 1995/275, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by China, France, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following other
documents: S/ 1995/261, letter dated 6 April 1995 from
the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/1995/262, letter dated 6 April 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; S/1995/263, letter dated 6 April
1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/ 1995/264, letter dated 6 April 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General; and S/1995/265, letter dated 6
April 1995 from the Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

The first speaker is the representative of Ukraine. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.


