Ms. Wronecka (Poland): It is an honour to see
you, Mr. President, in the Chamber today. Allow me
also to warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Colombia. We are also pleased to
see among us Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, who was
present with us yesterday, as well. Let me thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his first briefing to the
Council in his new capacity as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia. We assure
him of our full support. Let me also thank Mr. Jean
Arnault, whose dedication was crucial to the success
of the peace process from the very first moment before
we could even think about a United Nations mission
in Colombia.

The peace process remains an undeniable success of
Columbian society and serves as a source of inspiration
worldwide, sending a much-needed positive message.
We hope that the process of its implementation will
continue despite some difficulties.

That said, we are obliged to underline the urgent
need to address the killings of social leaders and human
rights defenders and to ensure meaningful engagement
with civil society, particularly through the National
Commission on Security Guarantees, so that plans are
directed where most needed. That will also be critical to
ensuring peaceful local elections, which are scheduled
to take place in October.

We encourage all parties to support the extremely
important work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
in its role in promoting access to justice and national
reconciliation in Colombia. We also stress the need to
preserve the independence and autonomy of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace and the other transitional justice
mechanisms. According to reports, the challenges
ahead remain formidable in that area.

There is a need for clarity on the sustainability of
the reincorporation process of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) as soon as possible. The full political, legal
and socioeconomic reintegration of the former FARC-
EP members is needed. We strongly believe that the
issue of land ownership must be properly addressed, as
it is at the heart of effective reintegration.

The issue of illicit coca crops remains one of the
most threatening to the peace process in some regions
of the country. According to reports of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, almost 100,000
families have signed up for the National Comprehensive
Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops. Since
the voluntary eradication rate remains high, it will
be critical to ensure that the commitments to those
families are upheld.

External factors are also influencing the
process. We must remain vigilant and aware that the
spillover effects from the massive influx of people
from neighbouring Venezuela could have adverse
consequences for Colombia's efforts.

Unfortunately, only a few days ago, we were all
shaken by the information about the heinous terrorist
attack on the National Police Academy in Bogota,
which left several fatalities and dozens injured. Poland
expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences to the
victims and their families, as well as to the people and
the Government of Colombia.

Poland strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms, underlining that any acts of terrorism are
criminal. It is of the utmost importance to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Given the evidence presented
by the Colombian Government, which identifies the
National Liberation Army (ELN) as the instigator of
that terrorist attack, Poland urges the ELN to renounce
terrorism and immediately and unconditionally release
all hostages. We support all measures announced by
President Duque in his recent message to the nation and
his willingness to continue to support the Colombian
people in their peace efforts.

In conclusion, Poland fully supports the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which
continues to play a vital role in facilitating the
implementation of the peace agreement. We also
commend the role of the United Nations country team
and every United Nations agency present on the ground.

