Ms. Mayaki (spoke in French): My name is Rimana, and I am in my last year of school. I hope that I will pass my exams and start at a prestigious university next year. I had no problems in my time at school. My path was laid out for me, and that was because I grew up in Niamey. But what if I had grown up in Diffa or in Tillaberi, like Nura or Omar? Imagine an 8-year-old child sitting in a classroom who suddenly hears gunfire. In a panic, he flees and is hit by a stray bullet. Yes, like many other countries, the Niger has not been spared by armed conflict. Terrorist groups have progressively carried out appalling attacks and undermined our development efforts in fields as vital as health care, security and, above all, education. Like Nelson Mandela, they understood that education is the most powerful weapon we have to change the world. It is very easy to destroy this weapon. At least 350 public schools have been closed in the Tillaberi region, as reported by Nigerien public radio on 19 February. In Diffa, a local representative told Voice of Africa that schools had been burned down and teachers had received death threats. In 2015 alone, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs situation report dated 2 November reported that more than 12,000 schoolchildren were deprived of education in Diffa. What can the situation be like today? The terrorists do not want children to learn and become open to the world, with heightened awareness and tolerance of diversity. The violence has several causes: poverty, unemployment and erroneous religious ideologies. But if we look more closely, above all it is because the terrorists did not benefit from an education that enabled them to conceive of the fact that humankind has many mindsets and personalities and that words can have a positive impact. Because they did not learn that, they prefer to instigate a climate of terror that would force parents to marry off their daughters for fear of exposing them to insecurity at school. That could also be said to be the cause of illiteracy for an entire generation, who, without expertise of any sort, will be unable to compete in the job market. In addition to being deprived of schooling, what will happen to a generation whose childhood was marked by the noise of gunfire and the sight of the corpses of their loved ones? Receiving an education is not a crime. Neither is living. On the contrary, these are rights established in articles 28 and 6 of the international Convention of the Rights of the Child, on the right to education and life, respectively. Investigations must be carried out, and the guilty must be prosecuted. As for the victims, since their memory cannot be erased, they must be provided psychological and financial assistance. I hope that my words made sense and have shown how much we owe it to ourselves to act. Know that the issues of armed conflict and schooling are at the heart of the concerns of the Parliament over which I preside. I have in mind the efforts made by my colleagues in Diffa and Tillaberi, the visits to administrative and local elected leaders and to other bodies, such as the High Authority For Peacebuilding, in order to ensure that talks move forward, to raise awareness of violent extremism among youth and even to create their own non-governmental organization to those ends. In addition, during our previous session, we hosted the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice, to whom we voiced our indignation directly. For two hours, we were able to share our views and our recommendations. I hope that, in the near future, Nura of Diffa will be able to live in a safe environment and receive a quality education.
