Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin,
as Cristian did, by expressing condolences both to
the leadership of the United Nations and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and to the Government of Brazil for the tragic death of
General Jabornady of MINUSTAH.

I also want to echo what Cristian just said in
thanking you, Joy, and your team for delivering a
successful month of August. It was a busy month, but
I think that, as President, you brought some welcome
unity to the Council on several important issues, most
notably on Syria.

I want to focus on three sets of issues today. First
of all, I would like to use this session to reflect on our
successes this month and on how we can build on them.
Secondly, I will have a look at where we were unable
to find agreement, including some of the events in July.
And, finally, I will look back on our working methods
and assess whether they delived as best they could.

This past month, the Council covered a wide
breadth ofissues: on the role ofregional and subregional
organizations in our work on international peace and
security, on the importance of security-sector reform
in sustainable peacebuilding and on the vital need to
learn from last year's Ebola outbreak, recommitting to
reaching a level of zero infections. I am pleased that
under your presidency, Madam, you have continued
to bring diverse issues such as those to the Council's
attention. But it is this month's discussions on Syria
that I want to focus on.
Resolution 2235 (2015), on the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, represents a much-needed step towards
accountability for the barbaric use of chemicals
as weapons in Syria. For too long, the Council has
been less effective than we would like in the face of
continuing reports of the horrific use of chlorine and
mustard gas against civilians. We look forward to the
urgent implementation of the resolution in the coming
weeks. Reports of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant using chemical weapons are worrying, and they
must be investigated. But they do not make any better
the Syrian regime's continued use of such weapons.

Through the presidential statement on the work
of Special Envoy De Mistura (S/PRST/2015/15), the
Council recommitted to a political solution in Syria
based on the implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). That was the first united signal on
that issue from the Council in 18 months. Those are two
overdue steps. The disturbing attacks on Duma and the
harrowing Arria Formula meeting on the persecution of
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons showed
just how much more work lies ahead, but we should not
be deterred by the scale of the challenge. Those two
small steps felt out of reach at our most recent wrap-up
session, in June (see S/PV.7479). Let us therefore seize
the momentum and unity of this month and redouble
our efforts to draw to a close more than four years of
fighting.

We know what we can achieve when our diplomatic
efforts are aligned. Last month's resolution 2231 (2015),
on the Iran nuclear deal, clearly showed how a united
Council, working closely with regional organizations,
such as the European Union, can really make a difference.
In a world of escalating threats to international peace
and security, it was immensely satisfying to tackle
that one. I want to pay tribute to Gerard and his team
from New Zealand for their vital stewardship of that
important issue through the Council.

Sadly, July also showed the dire consequences of
division. We had the chance to bring justice to those
tragically killed on Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. And
we had a unique moment to remember those murdered
in the Srebrenica genocide and to advance the cause of
reconciliation in Bosnia. On both occasions, we were
denied by the actions of one Council member. That
cannot continue ifthe Council is to retain its credibility.
We faced wider challenges to our collective credibility
over the past months. We cannot, and must not, shy
away from the shocking allegations that emerged about
sexual exploitation and abuse committed by United
Nations peacekeepers. Those horrific reports must be
investigated urgently and decisively. I welcome the
responsiveness of the Secretary-General in briefing the
Council so quickly after the allegations emerged.

It is that responsiveness that demonstrates that
the Council's impact is not always determined by its
products, but also by its working methods. I applaud
you, Madam, for your creative use of the item "Other
business" to address issues from Burundi, to Guinea-
Bissau and Burkina-Faso. I also commend you for
humanizing the impact of Ebola by inviting to the
Council a briefer who worked in the field. And I
commend you for your dedication to agreeing to strong
and clear press elements so that we may communicate
our work to the world at large. Your efforts have been
a welcome continuation of the steps taken by Gerard
to bring more interactivity and informality to our
consultations.

Let me conclude, Madam President, by welcoming
the fact that you are holding this session in public. It is
important that we should share our successes and be
frank about our shortcomings to the widest possible
audience. By working together in this way, we can
help improve our effectiveness in future and tackle
the challenges ahead. I look forward to doing so in the
coming month under the Russian presidency.

