Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I, too, would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Guehenno, Ms. McAskie and
Mr. Fall for their presentations. I would also like
especially to thank Mr. Fall for the excellent report that
he has submitted to us.

There is one main point that I would like to
emphasize in my remarks today: that the Council has
got to ensure that, whatever it does, it does in
cooperation with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). The main contribution of
Mr. Fall's report is that it spells out in great detail the
concerns of the region - the concerns I heard when I
was there personally - and I hope that the Council
will pay attention to the concerns expressed in the
report.

At the same time, looking at West Africa, we see
a paradoxical situation. The paradox is this: it is a
region blessed with excellent reports. Indeed, if you
look at the Security Council mission report of last
October, Mr. Fall's report and Ms. McAskie's report,
you will see that they are excellent reports. But if you
look at the contents of the reports, you find lots of bad
news. For example, since no one has referred to this, I
would like quickly to quote from paragraph 13 of the
report:

"Throughout the Mission's visit the gravity
of the political and security situation in the West
African subregion and the potential for the rapid
spread of insecurity and instability, unless urgent
steps are taken to address the causes of conflict
and turmoil in several countries, were repeatedly
underscored. The possibility of a 'domino
effect', with instability spreading rapidly from
one country to another within the subregion is a
source of deep and widespread concern."
(S/2001/434)

So the question is, how do we deal with this
paradox? How do we ensure that the next time we meet
we will not just get good reports; that we will get good
news from the region? I guess the underlying purpose
of my comments today is to help resolve that question.

I would like to make four points. The first point is
that, while I think we have received very useful
briefings, I wonder whether in those briefings we can
balance the details that we receive with more
assessment. Having listened to all the briefings today, I
find myself - even though I have just visited the
region- lost in a forest of details. Can we take a
helicopter view of the whole situation to see where we
are vis-a-vis where we were in the past? For example,
it is useful to remind ourselves that it was just a year
ago that soldiers of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) were taken hostage by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). We have clearly
come a long way since then. If you look at the military
situation within Sierra Leone, it looks promising. But
the military situation around Sierra Leone has got a lot
worse. Are there connections between the two? What is
going on here?

I hope that when we review the situation we will
not take just a snapshot view of each situation, but will
try to look at the overall trends and see how they are
going. For example, if you look at the peace process,
again, the peace process within Sierra Leone seems to
have improved; there seem to be, as we have heard
today, discussions involving UNAMSIL, the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF. But the
peace process involving the three countries of the
Mano River Union seems to have deteriorated and, as
several speakers have noted, talks are not taking place
among the three leaders. So how do we piece together
the picture?

My second point is on our working methods.
Both last month and this month we have tried to
improve our working methods to see how we can
ensure that as we meet and discuss a problem we add
value to it. Perhaps, to add value each time we discuss
West Africa, we should begin by asking ourselves:
What have we done in the past? What decisions have
we made? Which have been implemented and which
not? And in the case of those that have not been
implemented, why not? In that regard, Mr. Fall's report
has brought out many specific criticisms of the United
Nations. Indeed, if you read paragraph 112 you will
notice that several interlocutors were critical of a
number of United Nations policies. The question is:
How do we react to those criticisms? And, if we think
they are not fair or balanced, how do we respond to
them?

At the same time, Mr. Fall's report has also made
some specific recommendations we have to deal with.
For example, several countries in the region said that
the UNAMSIL mandate should be expanded. We have
heard remarks here, some in support, some not in
support of the expansion of the UNAMSIL mandate.
What will our decision be? How do we respond to that
request from the region? Here, I hope that we will
reflect on these questions that have been brought
before us.

My third point is about long-term indicators. One
of the most vivid impressions I brought back from my
visit to the region was that clearly there are also long-
term problems developing in the region. Any good
social scientist, looking at the demographics of the
region, looking at the number of children being born
and the number of children in school, can make
projections and can tell that there are problems that
will be coming to us five, 10, 15 years down the road.
It is useful for us to balance our short-term work with
questions related to long-term projections, and to ask
ourselves whether the long-term trends are positive or
negative. If they are negative, do we have an obligation
not just to address the present snapshot situation of the
day, but to ask what we can do to make sure that the
same problems will not come back to haunt the Council
five years or 10 years down the road?

My fourth and final point relates to the question
of financing. Clearly, West Africa is a region of high
priority for us, and I think that high priority is reflected
in the amount of resources and attention we are
devoting to it. Clearly, the very discussion we are
having today and the fact that an inter-agency task
force was set up show that the Council is deeply
concerned about the region. But the concern is best
demonstrated by the amount of money we are spending
on the region. Here, it might be useful for us to be
provided with some statistics so that we can see how
we are allocating the funds for the region. For example,
I am told that, as a rough estimate, we will be spending
$800 million this year on the peacekeeping operations.
Possibly, we may be spending up to $100 million over
the next three years on the special court in Sierra
Leone. How do those figures compare with the amount
of money we are spending on the humanitarian side
and with the amount of money we are spending on the
development side? Is the balance right? If you want to
try to find the right long-term solutions for the region,
you ought to ensure that, as you allocate resources, you
allocate them rationally, on the basis of need and not
on the basis of any arbitrary decision.

I hope that the very valuable reports and the very
valuable briefings we have had will not be lost and
that, when we meet next time, we will come back and
try to address some of these questions.

