Mr. Menkerios: I would like to begin by
expressing, on behalf of the Secretary-General, my
profound appreciation to the Senegalese presidency
of the Security Council for convening this important
debate on the topic of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security, including
the African Union (AU). The presence at this debate
of His Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, is an illustration of the
importance that your country, Sir, and the Security
Council attach to the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union.

In September, the Secretary-General issued his first
report (S/2016/780) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
on issues of peace and security in Africa, including
the work of the United Nations Office to the African
Union. In that report, the Secretary-General notes that

"[t]here is an urgent need for new and stronger
ways to address international peace and security
challenges. Stronger partnerships with regional
organizations, in particular with the African Union,
can enable us to respond early, swiftly, coherently
and decisively to prevent and manage conflict."
(S/2016/780, para. 58)

On 29 September, the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union held a briefing on strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, which I was invited to address on behalf of the
Secretary-General, and the Peace and Security Council
subsequently issued a communique that welcomed the
report of the Secretary-General and commended the
significant progress achieved in the AU-United Nations
partnership in the past five years. In order to strengthen
it further, the Peace and Security Council called for a
more systematic, predictable and strategic partnership
between the two organizations.

It should also be recalled that the Security Council
and the General Assembly have repeatedly called for
stronger engagement between the United Nations, the
African Union and the regionaleconomic communities
in conflict prevention, management and resolution
in Africa. Indeed, the principle of partnership with
regional organizations is enshrined in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. Article 3 of the
Constitutive Act of the African Union also encourages
international cooperation, taking due account of the
Charter of the United Nations.

As the Council is well aware, the conflicts that we
face in Africa today have grown in scale and complexity,
thereby posing a greater threat to international peace
and security. Those conflicts cause intolerable loss of
life and widespread destruction of resources, desperate
humanitarian situations and unimaginable human
suffering. We have witnessed the erosion of political
and civic rights, while economies regress and social
development gains are reversed.

Terrorism and violent extremism, transnational
organized crime, piracy and other threats to maritime
security, as well as threats caused by weak or
ineffective governance institutions, electoral disputes
and political and economic exclusion, are some of
the challenges that African countries face. Poverty,
unemployment, demographic pressures and climate
change are also increasingly having an impact on their
peace and security.

Dealing with such complex threats is not an easy
feat. While the Security Council has the ultimate
responsibility for international peace and security
and has invested greatly in addressing those threats
in Africa, and the AU and its regional economic
communities continue to exert every effort to do
the same on the continent, it is clear that neither the
United Nation, nor the AU or the regional economic
communities can address those threats by acting
separately. Collaboration between the United Nations
and the AU and the communities is an absolute necessity.

Increased collaboration between the United
Nations, the AU and regional economic communities
in addressing conflicts throughout the past decade has
produced a large body of practice, particularly in the
area of peace operations and mediation. I am pleased to
note that the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission are making good progress in
strengthening cooperation and collaboration between
the two organizations.

We have better coordinated interventions, for
instance in the Sudan and South Sudan, where the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, led
by former President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa,
has ably led mediation efforts with the support of the
United Nations Special Envoy and many other partners.
Another example is Burundi, where both the United
Nations and the African Union support the efforts of the
East African Community facilitator, former President
Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania.

In addition, we have daily working-level
interactions, weekly and monthly meetings at various
levels, including via a video teleconference link
between both headquarters, and the Joint Task Force
of senior United Nations Secretariat and African Union
Commission leadership twice a year.

In peace-support operations, the United Nations
continues to support the African Union Commission's
efforts to manage and operationalize African-led peace
operations mandated by the African Union Peace and
Security Council and authorized by the United Nations
Security Council. They range from the African Union's
engagement in Somalia to the Multinational Joint Task
Force initiative against Boko Haram and the Regional
Task Force's engagement against the Lord's Resistance
Army. Our collaboration also includes supporting the
AU as the first responder in crises such as those in the
Central African Republic and Mali.

A review of the United Nations-African
Union partnership so far, which is characterized
by an expanding series of ad hoc collaborative
engagements, amply demonstrates that it is time that
the two organizations move towards a more structured,
systematic and predictable partnership - in short, a
strategic partnership. We should not have to reinvent
the wheel every time we face a new conflict on the
continent. A structured, systematic and predictable
partnership would mean that mechanisms are in place
and working in both organizations to ensure joint early
and continuous engagement, from early warning and
conflict prevention to mediation and peace-support
operations to post-conflict reconstruction and
development.

Instead of the two organizations engaging in a
series of ad hoc engagements, they would need to adopt
predictable and structured processes to address threats
to international peace and security in the continent,
based on common principles and burden-sharing that
takes into account comparative advantages.

I must emphasize the value of the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission
undertaking joint assessment and analysis of emerging
and current conflict situations, developing coherent
strategies for conflict prevention or any other form
of conflict management or resolution and providing
the relevant facts, interpretations and proposals to the
two Councils. The two Councils are, as a result, more
likely to decide on common approaches that promote
collaborative engagement.

Although the Security Council will always address
each conflict on a case-by-case basis, there is more that
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission can do to bring a level of predictability
and sustainability to managing peace operations in
this manner. The conclusion of a joint framework for
enhanced partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, which already exists in draft form,
can potentially institutionalize and further strengthen
the strategic partnership between the two organizations.

The United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council of course
play pivotal roles in strengthening the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peace and security.
There has been significant progress over the past few
years in strengthening collaboration between the two
Councils. The tenth consultative meeting between the
two Councils, held in New York in May, provided an
opportunity for a constructive and candid exchange of
Views.

The recentjoint meeting of the Councils to discuss
South Sudan, which took place in September in Addis
Ababa, is also an indication of the progress that has
been made over the past few years. The three African
members of the Security Council play an important role
in strengthening and facilitating Security Council and
African Union Peace and Security Council relations.
I firmly believe that, if the two organizations were
to adopt a structured and predictable partnership,
that would tremendously facilitate and enhance
such engagement.

The decisions of the African Union Summit
in Kigali in July on financing the AU and the Peace
Fund should provide the means for Africa to finance a
greater share of its conflict-prevention and mediation
initiatives, as well as peace-support operations. I
strongly believe that the implementation of those
proposals will strengthen the United Nations-African
Union partnership, because a stronger African Union
will be a more effective partner for the United Nations.

The 2016 African Union Summit decisions on
financing must therefore be welcomed and positively
responded to within the context of the strategic
partnership proposed. Predictable and sustainable
funding remains a major challenge for the African
Union, particularly in the three focus areas of the Peace
Fund, namely, conflict prevention, capacity-building
and peace operations. The adoption of a strategic
partnership and the implementation of AU proposals in
that context would enable the United Nations and the
African Union to engage more effectively and exercise
our comparative advantages so as to address conflicts
and sustain peace in Africa.

Importantly, the proposals on financing the AU and
the Peace Fund also envisage a governance mechanism
for the Peace Fund to ensure strong accountability and
management systems, which are necessary in order to
build the confidence of African Union member States
and partners. The Finance Ministers of the African
Union have decided on an implementation phase for
those proposals throughout 2017. While the full details
are still being outlined, we believe we should commend
the African Union Assembly of Heads of State and
Government for their political commitment, and be
prepared to provide technical support, as required and
if requested.

The United Nations Office to the African Union
(UNOAU) is the conduit through which the United
Nations can enhance the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union in peace and
security matters. Under the guidance of the Secretary-
General and in collaboration with the United Nations
departments responsible for peace and security,
UNOAU will continue its close interaction with
the African Union Commission and AU member
States, so as to build understanding and enhance
communication between the two organizations. As
stated earlier, UNOAU will also continue to conduct
joint horizon-scanning exercises and develop joint
analysis and early warning with the AU, with a view
to developing common understanding and action on
conflict-prevention, mediation and peacekeeping.
UNOAU will also continue to support the institutional
strengthening of the AU Commission, as required, so
as to make the partnership more effective and assist
the AU in delivering on its mandates for the common
purpose.

Strengthening the partnership requires intensifying
our day-to-day engagement aimed at sharing views and
analyses, seeking common understanding of the issues
and developing proposals for joint or coordinated
action to address them. It involves reaching out to the
whole of the United Nations and the African Union
in order to ensure that both organizations draw on all
the relevant contributions and, as much as possible,
ensure coherence. We look forward to the continued
support of the Security Council to ensure that UNOAU
is adequately resourced so that it can effectively fulfil
its mandate. The Secretary-General stated in his report
on strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and
security in Africa, including the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union, that he plans

"to conduct an assessment of United Nations-
African Union cooperation, including the structure
and resource capacity of the UNOAU to meet the
growing demands of the partnership." (S/2016/780, paragraph 57)

We call on the Council to support his plan.

I wish to thank you once again, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for inviting us to make
this statement. Through you, Sir, we thank all Security
Council members for their continued commitment to
peace and security in Africa and for their support for
our common effort. I also wish to place on record our
appreciation to the AU Commission, specifically the
Peace and Security Department and the Political Affairs
Department, for their strong and steadfast support to
the consolidation of our practical collaboration.

