Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jan
Kubis for his briefing. We fully support the dedicated
work of the Special Representative and his staff. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin, for his insightful statement.

Afghanistan now finds itself at a critical juncture
as it undertakes the steps necessary for a political and
security transition in 2014. In this context, I would
like to focus on three key challenges confronting
Afghanistan: the elections, the security situation and
human rights.

First, the successful holding of the presidential and
provincial elections in 2014 is essential to ensuring
a peaceful political transition and to sustaining
international support. In this regard, we welcome the
adoption of key electoral laws, which will establish
sound legal frameworks to guarantee fair and credible
elections. We also welcome the timely appointment of
the members of the two electoral commissions.

Against this backdrop, we condemn the targeted
killing of the senior Afghan election official that
happened yesterday. Such acts of violence seriously
undermine the ongoing efforts of the Afghan people to
achieve a peaceful political transition. With only seven
months remaining until the elections, ensuring a safe
environment for the electoral process must be a priority.

Enhancing the participation of women is another
area that requires more effort. The continued support of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will be crucial in consolidating the
legitimacy and integrity of the process.

Secondly, a stable security environment is of
paramount importance in order to ensure that the
Afghan transition is irreversible and sustainable. With
the launch of the fifth and final phase of the security
transition in June, the Afghan security forces are now
taking full responsibility for leading and conducting
all operations throughout the country. While efforts to
strengthen the capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces are under way, a 23 per cent rise in civilian
casualties during the first half of 2013 shows that
grave security challenges remain. The recent attacks
on United Nations facilities and diplomatic premises
are another serious cause for concern. All parties must
take every feasible step to ensure the protection of
the civilians and comply with their obligations under
international law. Efforts must be stepped up to train
the Afghan National Security Forces and provide them
with the necessary support in order to effectively
protect civilians and ensure accountability.

Thirdly, the long-term support of the international
community is necessary for the Afghan Government
to make progress in key areas under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. In that regard, we
welcome the constructive dialogue between the Afghan
Government and its international partners during the
first senior officials meeting, held on 3 July. At that
meeting, it was reaffirmed that the Afghan Government
should deliver on its commitment, with an emphasis
on reinforcing the financial management system and
tackling corruption.

One of the key commitments made by the Afghan
Government under the Framework is the promotion of
human rights, especially those of women. We urge the
Afghan Government to enhance those efforts by fully
implementing the Law on the Elimination of Violence
against Women and ensuring the independence of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
among other measures.

UNAMA should continue to play a central role
in assisting Afghanistan as it moves forward with its
transition. The sustained support of the international
community will be vital to Afghanistan's long-term
stability. In that regard, we welcome the convening of
the International Contact Group on Afghanistan, which
will be held tomorrow here in New York. We hope that it
will serve as a valuable opportunity to demonstrate the
international community's commitment to Afghanistan.

The Korean Government, for its part, will continue
to support international efforts to build capacity in
Afghanistan, and I reiterate our pledge to provide
$500 million over the period 2011-2015. We will remain
committed to working with the Afghan Government
and its people in order to meet our shared objective of a
prosperous, stable and democratic Afghanistan.

