Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Mr. President, I should like
first to express my appreciation to you personally and to all
the other members of the Council for making possible our
presence here today.

Portugal fully subscribes to the statement that will be
made later by the presidency of the European Union.

The question of East Timor has faced impressive
developments in the past 17 years, since the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to initiate
consultations with all parties directly involved to find a
solution to this problem. The cornerstone of the process
now under way in East Timor are the 5 May Agreements,
recently concluded through the good offices of the
Secretary-General.

Under the Agreements, the Secretary-General is
requested to consult the East Timorese on the status of
their territory through a direct, secret and universal ballot.
Let me stress that this is, in fact, the achievement of what
the international community and Portugal in particular
have for so long sought for East Timor: that its people be
given the right to choose their own future.

East Timor may become a "success story" for the
United Nations, provided all actors comply with their
obligations. I would like to commend the personal
commitment of the Secretary- General and the
engagement of Ambassador Marker and his team in
finding a political solution. Their efforts show that even
the most difficult problems can be overcome if there is a
serious and honest political will to do so.

I must also point out the remarkable work that is
being accomplished by the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET) and by the team headed by
Mr. Ian Martin in the implementation of such a solution.
Their task is not an easy one, yet they have shown
extreme professionalism and diligence in carrying it out
impartially and effectively.

The vote that is about to take place in East Timor is
a historical event made possible by the efforts and
resources of the United Nations and the many countries
that are supporting it. But it is basically the result of the
struggle of the Timorese themselves, who have never
given up the right to choose their future. It is only
regrettable that they may not be able to do so under all
required conditions for such an important decision.

In fact, the prevailing environment of intimidation,
violence and insecurity in the territory is hampering the
very aim of the 5 May Agreements, which is the holding
of a free and fair ballot. I will not go through the whole
list of incidents that occurred with a repetitive pattern in
East Timor. The international community is fully aware
of them. But I have to express my Government's grave
concern that on the eve of the consultation there are still
armed militias active in the territory and that most of their
criminal actions are not being properly investigated or
punished.

 

After the success of the registration process, we were
expecting to see a broad and free campaign in which both
parties would peacefully present their views, enabling
people to make their choices free from any pressure.
Instead, we have witnessed an environment of increased
fear and a situation where many persons in favour of
independence have been either prevented from participating
in the campaign or subjected to physical violence and
intimidation. Several international personnel, and even
UNAMET staff, have experienced this atmosphere of threat
and insecurity.

I seize this opportunity to appeal once again to the
Indonesian authorities to make an additional effort. On the
voting day all conditions should be in place to ensure that
the popular consultation is carried out in a fair and peaceful
way, in an atmosphere free of intimidation, violence or
interference from any side. In this regard I underline - as
is recalled in the resolution that will be adopted by the
Council - that under the Agreements of 5 May it is the
sole responsibility of Indonesia to maintain peace and
security in East Timor.

The events that took place in East Timor yesterday are
evidence that the measures taken so far are completely
inadequate and insufficient. It is inadmissible that so close
to the consultation we are witnessing such an increase in
violence and even loss of human lives. We hope that
Indonesia gives an answer to the statements issued
yesterday by the Security Council and by the Secretary-
General himself strongly condemning these events and
demanding that the Indonesian authorities take concrete
steps to stop and revert this situation.

Through the Portuguese Observation Mission of the
Popular Consultation in East Timor, my Government has
continuously reported to UNAMET and to the Indonesian
Task Force on the Implementation of the Popular
Consultation the incidents it has witnessed. Also, we have
always discussed these issues on a regular basis here in
New York with the United Nations and the Indonesian
representatives. The excellent cooperation that has always
prevailed in these contacts, and that I would like to
emphasize, unfortunately has not always found translation
on the ground.

I would now like to turn to the future with renewed
hope. We welcome the approval by the Security Council of
a resolution that will allow the United Nations to maintain
an adequate presence in East Timor after the ballot and to
prepare the implementation of its result.

As you are aware, the trilateral dialogue between the
United Nations, Portugal and Indonesia has continued to
find the necessary arrangements to ensure a smooth
transition in East Timor, whatever the result of the
consultation might be. The senior officials meeting held
in Jakarta and the one that took place just yesterday in
Lisbon have allowed us to further our cooperation and to
discuss ways to proceed from the consultation onwards.
We are pleased to point out that the Indonesian authorities
have reiterated their commitment to the process after the
ballot.

When referring to the future of East Timor, the role
of the East Timorese and the progress they have made
towards national reconciliation have to be highlighted.
Overcoming their differences and living together
peacefully will be the biggest challenge facing them after
the consultation. We vividly welcome the agreement by
the East Timorese leaders, in the meetings sponsored by
the United Nations, to appoint their representatives to the
East Timorese Consultative Commission and to have both
the head of the pro-integration movement and the head of
the National Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT),
Xanana Gusmao, attend the first meeting of that council.
Their full participation in such an historic meeting, to take
place in Dili the day immediately after the ballot, will
send an important signal of confidence in the future of
East Timor.

Bearing in mind his role in promoting peace and
reconciliation, which is recognized by all parties and the
international community, Xanana Gusmao's presence in
Dili will surely have a stabilizing effect. Portugal
therefore reiterates its appeal to the Indonesian
Government to release Xanana Gusmao, as well as all
other East Timorese political prisoners, and allow access
to the territory by CNRT leaders who reside abroad.

Portugal stands ready to assist the transition in East
Timor and the implementation of the result of the
consultation, whether that is the acceptance or rejection of
the autonomy proposal. We will do our utmost to support
the efforts of the East Timorese in building their future as
the result of a free decision.

My Government will continue also to work with
Indonesia and the East Timorese, within the framework of
the United Nations, towards a successful transition. We
will spare no efforts to make sure that East Timor is
finally on the path of peace and development. East Timor
is proof, after all, that just causes can win.

 

