I thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing. The risk of the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Syria is extremely worrying, notably in the north-west and in the north-east. An immediate and sustainable nationwide ceasefire is the only way to facilitate the response to COVID-19. Let me express France's strong condemnation of the horrific terrorist bombing that struck a market in Afrin yesterday. Many victims were civilians, including children. It is heartbreaking. I would like to express our saddened condolences to the families and all those affected by this attack. I want also to reiterate France's full support for the call of the Secretary- General and of his Special Envoy in this regard. It is urgent that it be implemented. We call on all parties - and especially the regime, which has not responded to the Secretary-General's appeal - to work actively in this direction. As Ambassador De Riviere said this morning, the United Nations must remain at the forefront of these efforts, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). A nationwide ceasefire is all the more necessary as the implementation of the Russian-Turkish agreement on Idlib remains fragile and uncertain. All parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all people in need. This is more necessary than ever to facilitate the response to COVID-19. The efforts of United Nations agencies and their partners to respond to the humanitarian needs of the population and to the COVID-19 pandemic must be supported and enhanced. France has already committed €4 million to the COVID-19 response in the north-west. In the context of the pandemic, the cross-border mechanism has never been so relevant, both in the north-west and in the north-east. France remains determined to preserve that life-saving mechanism. In the north-west, the scale-up of the humanitarian delivery through the two crossing points must absolutely continue. In the north-east, the loss of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point is depriving the population of the most direct and safest access to medical aid. North-eastern Syria needs cross- border assistance through a dedicated crossing point. A scaling-up of cross-border access is an absolute necessity to respond to the emergency needs, and in particular to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. Until today, there has been no progress regarding cross-line access to the north-east. The Syrian regime takes three to four months to approve deliveries of medical supplies from Damascus. This is unacceptable. We also deeply regret that there is no agreement yet to deliver life-saving and urgently needed aid to thousands of people in the Rukban camp. We reject any instrumentalization of humanitarian assistance. In this regard, let me recall that European sanctions are tools to combat human rights abuses and breaches of international law. These sanctions were designed precisely not to hamper humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people, whatever their affiliation, and do not hamper the response to the COVID-19 pandemic today. Let us be clear. The Syrian regime has systematically destroyed medical infrastructure since the beginning of the conflict and continues to impede humanitarian access. There is no doubt that it bears the primary responsibility for the dire humanitarian situation, which is exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic today. Finally, I would like to welcome the release of a summary of the Board of Inquiry's report. We support the full implementation of the recommendations of the Board to guarantee a deconfliction mechanism that does not put medical and humanitarian personnel and facilities at risk. We also support sharing the full report with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and with the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic in order to further investigate the incidents and bring their perpetrators to justice. Lastly, as indicated this morning, only a political solution will bring an end to the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.
