Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): We are honoured and pleased that Honduras, a
part of our America, is presiding over the Security Council.
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and to wish you
success during your term of office. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Alfredo Lopes Cabral for his
contribution during his effective presidency last month.

My delegation is participating in this debate, requested
by the leaders of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) at its meeting held in Lusaka on 2
October 1996. The position of the ministerial group
appointed by the 12 members of SADC to represent them

 

was explained yesterday to the bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the chairman of the group, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, His Excellency Mr.
Stanislaus I. G. Mudenge, and reaffirmed by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Angola, His Excellency Mr.
Venancio de Moura.
Cuba shares the concern of the African continent and
the international community over the critical situation in
Angola: the deadlock in the peace process and UNITA's
non-compliance with the provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol.

It is unfortunate that the head of UNITA, Mr.
Savimbi, did not attend the meeting organized by the
leaders of SADC. This constitutes further proof of the
absence of political will in the leadership of that party to
contribute to a negotiated solution to the conflict in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the Lusaka
Protocol and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

The Angolan Government and UNITA have
assumed - before Africa and the international
community - the responsibility to promote and achieve
national reconciliation in Angola. It is necessary and right
to recognize the sustained and flexible efforts of the
legitimate Government of Angola to achieve these
objectives. After genuine elections and a clear victory by
the Popular Liberation Movement of Angola, and after so
much has been done to promote dialogue and negotiation,
it has become clear that UNITA has totally failed to meet
its responsibilities and obligations. Recent events have
plainly demonstrated that the legitimate Government of
Angola can in no way be placed on an equal footing with
UNITA, not only because of that group's well- known
past, but because of its current illegal activities, which
merit clear condemnation.

Cuba wishes to reiterate its full support for the
Angolan Government and to reaffirm that the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Angola must be
respected.

The international community has met its
responsibility with regard to the peace process in Angola.
The United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) is currently the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the world. Huge financial and
human resources are devoted to this operation. However,
one of the parties to the conflict, UNITA, has failed in its

 

obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and continues to
hamper and jeopardize the peace process.

UNITA's lack of political will towards the peace
process in Angola and its unacceptable non-compliance
with the Lusaka Protocol - a bilateral instrument of
international import and scope - must be condemned with
all rigour by the international community.

UNAVEM. III's mandate, which was extended until 11
October 1996 by Security Council resolution 1064 (1996)
of 11 July 1996, must be reviewed with all due objectivity
by this organ. The mandate of that peacekeeping operation
will lose its significance if strict, immediate deadlines are
not set. When UNITA continues irresponsibly to violate the
peace process, UNAVEM. III' s mandate should not continue
to be extended time and again.

Cuba supports the position expressed by the fraternal
countries of Africa that this brief extension of UNAVEM
III's mandate presupposes political contributions on
UNITA's part. If these are not forthcoming, it is obvious
that the international community must support whatever
paths are taken by the legitimate and sovereign Government
of the Republic of Angola in solving this domestic conflict.

We share the concerns expressed by the Secretary-
General in his most recent report on the current state of the
peace process in Angola, particularly his recommendations
on the position the international community should take vis-
a-vis UNITA's position and on any future extension of the
mandate of UNAVEM. III.

The Security Council, through successive resolutions,
has made a commitment and assumed an unavoidable
responsibility to the peace process in Angola. Cuba hopes
that the Security Council will meet its responsibility by
responding with decisive and energetic actions to the
flagrant non-compliance of UNITA with those resolutions.
Any delay, silence or omission would send the wrong
message and place the credibility of the Security Council in
question. Cuba hopes that, this time, it will act on the basis
of a single standard.

