The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.

Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): On
behalf of the National Episcopal Conference of the
Congo (CENCO), over which I preside, I convey my
best wishes to the members of the Security Council for
2017. Our Conference extends its heartfelt thanks to the
Security Council for its multifaceted support during
its good offices mission to help the Congolese political
class and civil society in their search for a peaceful and
consensual solution to the country's crisis.

We especially welcome the 4 January presidential
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2017/1) on
the comprehensive and inclusive political agreement
negotiated under the auspices of the Kinshasa
Archdiocese and signed on 31 December. We call
on the Security Council to remain vigilant, and we
call on stakeholders to support the comprehensive
implementation of the agreement, particularly as it
relates to the holding of elections in 2017.

Maintaining and building civilian peace is urgent
during this period in order to ensure responsible
and consensual management of institutions prior to
and during the elections, to mobilize the necessary
resources to meet vital social needs and to organize
the vote. In that regard, the parties to the agreement
negotiated under the auspices of the Kinshasa
Archdiocese call upon the international community to
assist the Independent National Electoral Commission
by providing logistical, financial and technical support
in order to ensure a smooth electoral process.

The political commitments negotiated under the
auspices of the Kinshasa Archdiocese provide, inter
alia, for the establishment of a national council for
overseeing the agreement and process, as well as for
a Government of national unity. It is critical that such
bodies be set up as soon as the agreed timetable has
been implemented in the near future. The effectiveness
of such institutions depends not only on management
skills but also, in particular, on good faith and political
will, as well as the legal tools and financial resources
made available to them.

The National Episcopal Conference of the
Congo calls on the Congolese State, the international
community and the parties to the agreement to
advocate for the appropriate measures needed to
ensure the security of the electoral process. It asks the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the
Government in strengthening its intervention capacity
and in maintaining peace in the country, in particular
in east Katanga and central Kasai. The parties to the
agreement have closely examined the cases of political
and opinion prisoners, political refugees and those in
exile, any legal action being taken against politicians,
the closing of media firms, violations of fundamental
freedoms, and the sanctions imposed upon Congolese
people by certain Western Governments. Our
Conference asks the Congolese Government and
the international community to take the appropriate
measures to ease the social and political tension. Such
measures should respect human rights.

The Congolese people warmly and happily
welcomed the signing of the comprehensive and
inclusive agreement negotiated under the auspices
of the Kinshasa Archdiocese as a key way to end the
political crisis and usher in social peace. It asks one
thing of the international community and that is to
vigorously assist the Congolese people in its efforts to
ensure that the agreement is successfully implemented,
until presidential and legislative elections are scheduled
and held.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I thank
Monseigneur Utembi for his comprehensive briefing
and for the tireless mediation efforts made by the
National Episcopal Conference of the Congo under
his leadership.

I believe that this is an excellent example of conflict
prevention in practice, for which Member States
expressed overwhelming support during our discussion
here during yesterday's open debate (see S/PV.7857).
In that vein, the Security Council, in its presidential
statement last week (S/PRST/2017/l), welcomed the
signing of the agreement and expressed the desire for
its speedy implementation, which we all hope will allow
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue on
the path to long-term peace and stability.

We heard the appeal of Monseigneur Utembi to the
Security Council and to the international community
to support the implementation of the agreement in any
way possible.

I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.


