Mrs. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, the delegation of France naturally joins in the
words of welcome that the President addressed a
moment ago to the new Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom. For my part, I wish to thank the
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999), Ambassador
Munoz, for his very detailed briefing, which was
prepared in close cooperation with the members of the
Committee.

The Permanent Representative of Italy will later
make a statement on behalf of the European Union,
with which France fully associates itself. I therefore
simply wish to highlight three points.

First of all, we are steadily achieving success in
the campaign against Al Qaeda. Networks have been
dismantled, and Al Qaeda's capacities to do harm are
being reduced. But, as many speakers have stressed,
that organization has demonstrated its capacity to
rebuild, and the threat persists. We therefore cannot
relax in our efforts. On the contrary, we must increase
them and intensify them.

Secondly, in this context, we welcome the new
improvements in the work of the 1267 Committee, in
particular with regard to transparency and coordination
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We also note
with satisfaction the upcoming recruitment of three
young experts who will be supporting the work of the
Monitoring Group for a few months.

Finally, these efforts will be fully effective only if
all Member States cooperate actively with the
Committee, as they are required to do in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions. States
that have not yet submitted reports must do so
immediately. Furthermore, the quality and content of
the reports submitted to the Committee, particularly as
regards the adoption of national measures in the fight
against Al Qaeda, must make progress, as Ambassador
Mufioz has rightly stressed.

The scourge of terrorism threatens all of us, and
no State is protected. We believe that by continuing to
work together with determination we will be able to put
an end to terrorism, and we have every confidence in
the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999).

