Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank Russia for organizing today's
debate on a subject that is of concern to us all.

With the so-called Islamic State in Syria and Iraq,
and also in Libya, Al-Qaida on the Arabian Peninsula
in Yemen, the Al-Nusra Front in the Golan Heights,
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, the list of threats in the region
is very long. Those terrorist groups threaten not only
the Middle East and North Africa, they threaten the
entire planet. In their destructive madness, they attack
children, women and men. They attack the most
vulnerable, minorities, sanctuaries, cultural heritage,
archaeological treasures and the freedom of expression.
They strive to break down the symbols of humanity and
diversity.

In order to effectively combat the terrorist threat,
it is important to understand the origins of its rise
to power. The terrorist threat is not the root cause of
the crises in the Middle East and North Africa. It is
itself the result of underlying causes, and it is therefore
necessary to address those root causes in order to
eliminate it. Otherwise, even if Daesh or other terrorist
entities were to disappear today, other organizations,
perhaps more monstrous still, would only take over.
The banner under which the terrorists align themselves
may change, but the root causes of the emergence of
those organizations remain. What are the root causes?

First, the rise ofterrorist groups cannot be separated
from their regional political context. Therefore, in Syria,
Daesh has benefitted in large part from the effects ofthe
brutal policies of the Al-Assad regime, which for more

than four years has suppressed and slaughtered its own
people with indiscriminate shelling and the dropping
of barrel bombs. We must fight the terrorists in Syria
without playing into the hands of the Al-Assad regime
or forgetting the crimes that the regime commits daily.
We need to bring increased humanitarian assistance to
areas liberated from the grip of Daesh and to support
the Syrian National Coalition. We must also support the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, aimed at achieving a political
transition.

In Iraq, it is the feeling of marginalization,
dispossession and humiliation on the part of the Sunni
population that has played into the hands of extremists.
We must support the reforms in the pipeline of the
Government ofPrime Minister Al Abadi, whose country
has overcome divisions, while seeking to work within
the framework of a truly inclusive political process.

In Libya as well as in Yemen, the United Nations
mediation efforts should be further supported so as to
achieve a ceasefire and the formation of a national unity
Government that, with the support of the international
community, would be able to isolate extremist groups,
secure the territory and embark on the path of national
reconciliation.

Secondly, among the root causes that promote
radicalization and terrorism, there is the feeling
of exclusion. The lack of prospects and economic
opportunities for young people, including the
difficulties of access to employment, serves to create
a breeding ground for radicalization. It is therefore
essential to invest in the development and well-being
of young people. We must give them an opportunity
to develop their potential by promoting their full
participation in the life of society. It is in that spirit
that our policy of cooperation for development deserves
an important place in the education and professional
training of young people. Luxembourg, with the
support of UNICEF, has committed to the post-2015
Sustainable Development Agenda, which we have just
adopted and which takes into account the specific needs
and potential of children and youth in general.

Thirdly, I must mention another root cause of
instability in the Middle East. I refer to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, a veritable human tragedy, while
the peace process remains deadlocked. Today more than
ever, it is imperative to convince our Israeli friends that
the security of Israel depends on the creation by its side
of a sovereign, democratic State of Palestine. We must
encourage our Palestinian friends to persevere on the
path of reconciliation and negotiation. That path is the
best protection against terrorism. Let us all pledge to
support the path that leads to the desired result, namely,
the two-State solution.

Many of us participated in the hoisting of the
Palestinian flag at the United Nations today. That flag
must lead us all to fight the status quo and indifference.

I will conclude with this fact: we cannot change the
past, but we have the duty to learn its lessons and to
act accordingly in the future. I assure the Council that
Luxembourg, including in its current role as President
of the European Council, will spare no effort to counter
the radicalization of terrorists and violent extremists by
addressing the root causes.

