The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Australia, Bangladesh,
Canada, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Israel, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Lamamra
(Algeria), Mr. Butler (Australia), Mr. Rahman
(Bangladesh), Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Ochaye (Djibouti), Mr. Elaraby
(Egypt), Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr.
Hamdoon (Iraq), Mr. Kawai (Japan), Mr. Abu Odeh
(Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak
(Lebanon), Mr. Razali (Malaysia), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Al-Ni'mah
(Qatar), Mr. Yassin (Sudan), Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Batu (Turkey)
and Mr. Al-Suwaidi (United Arab Emirates) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 12 May 1995 from the Acting Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as the Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, I have the honour to
request that I be invited to participate in the debate
on the agenda item 'The situation in the occupied
Arab territories', under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 May 1995 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, which will
be issued as document S/I995/388 and which reads as
follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, to participate in the
current debate of the Security Council with regard to
the situation in the occupied Arab territories.
including Jerusalem, and the latest illegal Israeli
action in Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a place at the Council table.

 


The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to the
requests contained in letters dated 8 May 1995 from the
Permanent Representatives of Morocco and the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council, document S/I995/366, and from
the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1995/367.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1995/341
and S/l995/376, letters dated 28 April and 3 May 1995,
respectively, from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; and
S/1995/352, letter dated 8 May 1995 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Palestine, on
whom I now call.


