Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank High
Commissioner Filippo Grandi and Assistant Secretary-
General Miroslav Jenea for their briefings on the most
recent developments in Myanmar and the situation of
the Rohingya.

The situation of the Rohingya refugees continues
to be a source of grave concern. The complexity of the
challenge in Myanmar's Rakhine state is very clear and
has deep roots. That means that the societal and the
humanitarian challenges are huge. Addressing the root
causes that forced the Rohingya to flee in the first place
will not be easy. However, efforts have to be made with
the required seriousness of purpose.

We want to be hopeful with regard to the efforts
being made to facilitate the voluntary return of the
Rohingya refugees in line with the memorandum
of understanding signed between the Governments
of Bangladesh and Myanmar. However, clearly, the
challenges are formidable, all the more so since they
relate to demands that the root causes be addressed.
As High Commissioner Grandi said earlier, that entails
the restoration of rights. That is why our approach
to addressing the issue needs to change. As some
people are already saying, an international response
that consists primarily of assigning blame for the
humanitarian tragedy is no longer tenable. It is time
for the international community to find a realistic
workable solution.

In that context, there is a need to end the violence
in Rakhine state and to create conditions for the safe
and dignified return of the refugees and displaced
persons, as well as to ensure humanitarian access. In
that connection, we take note of the steps taken thus
far by the Myanmar Government. However, there is no
doubt that much remains to be done in order not only
to alleviate the suffering and frustration of the people
of Rakhine state but also to embrace all communities
and to ensure peace and harmony. We believe that
enhanced communication and cooperation between the
Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar are vital
to ensuring the implementation of the arrangement on
the return of persons displaced from Rakhine state in
conditions of safety and dignity.

The role of the international community, including
the United Nations and its various agencies operating
on the ground, as well as other organizations, such as,
inter alia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
is also very important in support of such efforts.
Ultimately, as we said earlier, what matters most is to
address the root cause of the problem.

The implementation of the recommendations
made by the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
will certainly contribute to tackling the long-standing
obstacles to peace and development in Rakhine state.
We commend the initial step taken by the Government
of Myanmar but it is necessary to accelerate the
implementation. That is a Herculean task, which
requires the sustained commitment and engagement
of the Government, as well as the support of the
international community, to ultimately ensure that
all communities are treated without discrimination,
regardless of religion or ethnicity, and to support
the voluntary, safe and dignified return of displaced
individuals and refugees to their homes.

Finally, we appreciate the continued engagement
of the Secretary-General through his good offices.
We believe that a visit by the Security Council to both
Bangladesh and Myanmar could be useful in order to
gain a better appreciation of the situation on the ground
and to support the Governments of both countries in
their efforts to address the situation of the Rohingya
refugees. We take note ofthe briefing by Kuwait on this
issue, and we hope that future presidencies will take up
the matter.

