Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important
meeting on a subject that continues to challenge all of
us in one way or another. I also wish the
United Kingdom all the very best during the remainder
of its term as President of the Council.

On 16 June 2005, the Security Council wound up
the seven-year-old United Nations mandate which had
overseen the resolution of the bloody 10-year civil
conflict which had raged on the island of Bougainville
in Papua New Guinea. Sadly, it is estimated that
between 10,000 and 15,000 - and maybe more -
people, including women and children, lost their lives
in a national tragedy that could have been avoidable.

A few months earlier, between 20 May and 9 June
2005, the first general elections for the President and
members of the House of Representatives had been
held to form the Autonomous Bougainville
Government. That historic election had been made
possible under constitutional arrangements agreed
between the Government of Papua New Guinea and the
leaders of Bougainville. The United Nations was also a
critical part ofthat process.

The agreed constitutional arrangements also
allows for the devolution of powers in areas such as
land, the judiciary, finance, transportation and
communications, to name but a few. The powers
relating to defence and foreign affairs continue to
remain national functions. Uniquely, the same
constitutional arrangements provide for a referendum
to be held amongst the people of Bougainville within
15 years of the election of the first Autonomous
Bougainville Government.

To some extent the three points raised in
paragraph 2 of the excellent concept paper from the
United Kingdom Mission (S/2008/291, annex) had
been met when the United Nations mandate was wound
up. Those points are, first, rapid implementation of the
peace agreement to maintain the commitment of the
parties; secondly, the re-establishment of stability and
the rule of law; and, finally, a demonstrable
improvement to the lives of the local people.

The overall involvement of the United Nations
during the mandate, although small in both manpower
and budget, was very effective. One element that the
United Nations was able to bring during the
formulation of the peace process was an independent
perspective, which assisted all the parties to agree on
critical aspects of how the peace process was to be
structured.

A very strong regional dimension, especially the
involvement of our immediate neighbours in the
Pacific, contributed strongly to the success of the peace
process. By the time the United Nations mandate was
wound up, countries such as Tonga, Fiji, Vanuatu,
Samoa and the Solomon Islands had assisted in some
way or another, with major logistical support provided
by both Australia and New Zealand, which enabled the
maintenance of all personnel on the ground in
Bougainville. Japan also assisted.

Added to this, the critical political support from
both the Government of Papua New Guinea and the
leaders of Bougainville was also an important aspect.
Over the life of the United Nations mandate, three
successive Papua New Guinea Governments affirmed
that the resolution of the Bougainville conflict was
critical to the stability of Papua New Guinea and thus
saw it as a bipartisan imperative. In the end, this
continued strong commitment saw the required
amendment to the Papua New Guinea constitution to
effect the Bougainville peace process overwhelmingly
supported by the national parliament.

The current situation is that, as we move towards
the third anniversary of the dissolution of the United
Nations mandate over Bougainville, next month, the
peace process continues. Political commitment at the
highest levels of our Government continues. The civil
service and senior officials on both sides continue to
maintain, within the framework of joint meetings, the
process of steady devolution of powers under the
constitutional arrangement. The people of Bougainville
have also taken part in the national election process,
the most recent being during the middle of last year.
Our regional partners continue to assist us in areas
such as police training, and the United Nations,
through its agencies, continues to deliver in various
areas, such as girls' education.

The national Government continues to provide
for Bougainville in its annual budget.

That said, it seems the more critical issue here is
the third point covered in the concept paper: that of "a
demonstrable improvement to the lives of local people"
(8/2008/291, annex, paragraph 2). I would suggest that
this point presents a potential gap that could hamper
national, regional and international efforts.
The situation on the ground on Bougainville
remains one that requires constant vigilance and
attention. The danger is that recurring incidents of
minor violence always have the potential to provoke
larger acts of violence that could lead to wider
instability. We have seen instances and signs of this in
the last three years. Fortunately, the incidents have
been contained so far. So the connection between the
need to maintain focus on reintegrating ex-combatants
and the need to assist the wider community in
developing a range of skills, especially vocational
skills, is an important focus area.

It is important to underline the importance of a
gender perspective in the process of post-conflict
peacebuilding. There is a global consensus that a
gender perspective is critical in the development
agenda; so too it would seem critical in the conflict
resolution and peacebuilding processes. Much of
Bougainville is matrilineal. When the women of
Bougainville were re-empowered, the peace process
could be better facilitated. Perhaps the toolkit of
response measures for conflict resolution and
peacebuilding should include a realization that local
customs and traditions must be better understood.

We support the position of the Non-Aligned
Movement on the functionality of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we seek the Commission's support in
assisting us in strengthening the peacebuilding process
on Bougainville, in Papua New Guinea.

