I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer and Deputy Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. China is closely following the development of the situation in South Sudan. Due to the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and falling global crude oil prices, the economic and humanitarian situation in South Sudan has deteriorated and the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan faces many challenges. I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize the following points. First, China welcomes the positive progress made by South Sudan on issues such as the appointment of governors. We encourage all parties in South Sudan to bear in mind the overall interests of national unity and development, continue to advance dialogue and consultation, and take steps to solve outstanding issues of the Revitalized Agreement. The international community should fully respect the ownership of the South Sudan Government, strengthen coordination with the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and support them in continuing their mediation efforts. Secondly, peace in South Sudan has not come easily. The ceasefire stipulated in the Revitalized Agreement has generally held of late. China hopes that all parties will work together to sustain this positive momentum. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/890) also notes that there are still sporadic intercommunal conflicts that may undermine the progress of the current ceasefire. This deserves great attention on the part of all parties in South Sudan. We call on all parties in South Sudan to respond to the Secretary-General's call for a humanitarian pause and jointly maintain a peaceful and stable environment. Thirdly, South Sudan's economic foundation and health system are weak, economic development and food security are under pressure, and the county is currently facing practical difficulties caused by the pandemic. The international community should actively provide assistance to South Sudan, especially targeted assistance in the economic and health sectors, scale up investment in agriculture, energy, infrastructure and health care, and help South Sudan implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. China has recently helped build a cervical disease screening centre in South Sudan and sent a team of medical experts to South Sudan to assist in the fight against the pandemic. These moves have been welcomed by all sectors in South Sudan. Fourthly, China appreciates the contributions of Special Representative Shearer and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to peace and stability in South Sudan. It is crucial to improve the safety and security of UNMISS peacekeepers. We appreciate the corresponding measures taken by the Secretariat and the Mission to that end. China notes that UNMISS has done a lot of work to protect civilians. It must be pointed out that the fundamental solution for protecting civilians will ultimately depend on progress in the political process and economic reconstruction. Only in this way can we create a peaceful and stable environment that will allow the displaced to return home and generate employment opportunities for the people. China has noted the restrictions faced by UNMISS in delivering its mandate. We hope to see strengthened communication between the South Sudanese Government and UNMISS, and believe that the relevant issues can be properly resolved. China will continue to support South Sudan's political process and contribute to its fight against the pandemic and its efforts towards economic development. We are ready to work with the international community to promote the early realization of peace, stability and sustainable development in South Sudan.
