Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We have called for this
emergency meeting of the Security Council due to the
ongoing crisis faced by the Palestinian people under
Israeli occupation. With every moment that passes,
the life of another Palestinian child, mother or father
is cruelly taken by the Israeli occupying forces in
their murderous rampage of airstrikes and artillery
bombardment against civilian areas, and now a massive
ground invasion of the Gaza Strip, threatening the
safety and survival of the entire Palestinian civilian
population. As we were driving to this meeting, four
more children were killed. I have their names and their
ages, which range from 2 to 13 years: Rizeq Al-Hayek,
aged 2, Sarah Bustan, aged 13, Imad Ilwan, aged 7, and
Qasem Ilwan, aged 4.

Despite the regional and international efforts to
bring an end to the violence and bloodshed, as well as
the siege, isolation and punishment of our people, and
the broad consensus that there is no military solution
to this crisis or to the conflict in its entirety, Israel, the
occupying Power, has intensified its military operations
with the full intention and knowledge that the number
of civilian casualties will mount. In less than 24 hours,
the Israeli assault has killed more than 40 Palestinians,
including many children.

While President Abbas has been continuously
engaged in efforts to secure a comprehensive ceasefire,
including those of Egypt and Turkey, among other
concerned countries in the region and beyond, Israel has
instead chosen to continue waging war on our people.
At the direct command ofthe highest levels ofthe Israeli
Government and army, the occupying forces are killing
and injuring hundreds of Palestinian civilians, the
majority of whom are children and women, destroying
homes and infrastructure and displacing thousands
of families. Yet another disaster is being inflicted
on Gaza. It is traumatizing and terrorizing the entire
population, worsening the humanitarian crisis caused
by Israel's repeated aggressions and illegal eight-year
blockade and sowing widespread distress, resentment
and rage among our people.

That savage Israeli aggression cannot be justified by
any means. It is not self-defence but a vengeful military
aggression, intentionally planned and perpetrated by
the occupying Power against the civilian population
under its occupation. Among the goals of that military
campaign are the destruction of Palestinian unity and
the collapse of the national consensus Government.
The statements made by Israeli officials, from the
Prime Minister down, as well as the enumeration ofthe
specific aims of the aggression, are clear evidence of
that.

We recall that the Israeli Government cynically
used the killing of three Israeli settlers to launch the
aggression - a crime of which there has not been an
independent and transparent investigation but which
Israel has insanely used as the basis for its barbaric
attacks and because of which officials, settlers and
extremists continue to incite more terror and cause
harm to our people.

Moreover, it is an obvious repeat of the numerous
crises fabricated by Israel over the years to evade all
efforts to advance a peaceful political solution to the
conflict and to justly address its root causes, namely,
Israel's denial and violation of the human rights of
the Palestinian people and its 47-year illegal military
occupation and colonization of Palestinian land. It is
not by coincidence that such deliberate destabilization
of the situation on the ground diverts international
attention from Israel's obstruction of peace efforts,
particularly through its malicious settlement campaign
throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

War crimes, crimes against humanity, State
terrorism and systematic human rights violations are
being committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people. That is not simply a Palestinian narrative.
It is fact. Before the eyes of the world, Israel wages
war against a defenceless civilian population,
tramples their human rights, commits grave breaches
of international humanitarian law and destroys the
pillars of the international system. At the same time, it
forces a repugnant double standard on the international
community through its cynical pretexts, including by
destroying the credibility of the Security Council itself,
which continues to stand aside as Israel flagrantly
violates its resolutions without consequences.

Israel's actions belie its words. The facts speak
much louder than the disdainful words and immoral
lectures made repeatedly before the Council by the
Israeli representative while his Government and army
kill and maim innocent children, women and men.
The Palestinian death toll now stands at more than 274
people, plus the four children, making a total of 278
people killed and more than 2,065 people injured. The
overwhelming majority of those killed and injured are
civilians, including 66 children and, as we heard from
Mr. Feltman, 48 women and 17 elderly persons. More
than 47,000 people have been displaced, the majority
of whom are Palestine refugees. Those disturbing
facts are corroborated by reports from the United
Nations agencies on the ground, including the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

The images of the Palestinian children killed by
the Israeli occupying forces sear our hearts and the
conscience of the world. I am compelled to share the
names of the some of the children, families and elderly
and disabled persons killed by Israel's onslaught since
our last appeal to the Council (see S/PV.7214), the
majority of whom were killed in Israeli airstrikes on
their homes. All the victims, including our children and
women, have names. They are not only numbers that
the Israeli occupying army slaughters as it wishes. The
names are as follows.

Mahmoud AI-Haj, Tariq Saad Al-Haj, Saad
Mahmoud Al-Haj, Omar Al-Haj, Najla Mahmoud
Al-Haj, Amina Al-Haj, all of the same family, were
obliterated. Abdullah Abu Ghazl, aged 4, Yasmeen
Al-Mutaweq, aged 4, Shand Helmi AI-Qarnawi, aged 5,
Ghalia Deeb Ghannam, aged 7, Nour Marwan Al-Naj di,
aged 10, Saber Sukkar, aged 80, and Ola Washahi,
aged 31, and Suha Abu Saada, aged 47, both of whom
suffered from severe mental and physical handicaps,
were killed in an airstrike on a disabled persons centre.

Eighteen members of the Al-Batsh family, including
six children and three women, one of them pregnant,
were massacred and 16 other civilians were wounded
by the Israeli occupying forces in a military airstrike
that was deliberately launched on their home and which
Israel declared was targeting Tayseer Al-Batsh, a police
chief in Gaza. The dead include Nahed Nai'im AI-
Batsh, aged 41, Bahaa Majed Al-Batsh, aged 28, Qusai
Issam Al-Batsh, aged 12, Mohammed Issam Al-Batsh,
aged 17, Ahmed Nu'man Al-Batsh, aged 27, Yehya
Ala Al-Batsh, aged 18, Jalal Majed Al-Batsh, aged 26,
Mahmoud Majed Al-Batsh, aged 22, Marwa Majed
Al-Batsh, aged 25, Majed Subhi Al-Batsh, Khaled
Majed Al-Batsh, aged 20, Ibrahim Majed Al-Batsh,
aged 18, Manar Majed AI-Batsh, aged 13, Amal Hasan
Al-Batsh, aged 49, Anas Alaa Al-Batsh, aged 10, Qusai
Alaa Al-Batsh, aged 20, Zakariya Alaa Al-Batsh and
Aziza Youssef Al-Batsh, aged 59.

Ismail Baker, aged 9, Ahmed Baker, aged 10,
Mohammed Baker, aged 10, and Zakariya Baker, aged
10, were murdered by the occupying forces in broad
daylight as they were playing on the beach in Gaza City,
in the incident that was referred to by Mr. Feltman.
Yasmin Al-Astal, aged 4, Osama Al-Astal, aged 6,
and Raqiyya Al-Astal, aged 70 - all members of the
same family - were killed in an air strike at a mosque.
Ibrahim Ramadan Abu Daqqa, aged 10, his brother
Amro Ramadan Abu Daqqa, aged 25, and their sister
Madeline Abu Daqqa, aged 27, a pregnant mother of
three, and their elderly grandmother, Khadra Abu
Daqqa, Fulla Shuhaibar, aged 9, brothers Jihad Issam
Shuhaibar, aged 10, and Wasim Issam Shuaibar, aged
7, Ahmad Ismail Abu Musaflam, aged 14, his sister
Alaa, aged 13, and brother Muhammad, aged 15, Rahaf
khalil Al-Jbour, aged 4, Yassin Al-Humaidi, aged 4,
Mohammad Shadi Natiz, aged 15, and Mohammed
Salim Natiz, aged 4, and Fares Al-Mahmoum, 5 months
old, also died.

We join our grieving people in praying for their
souls and asking for strength and resilience for their
mourning families and nation.

The names of many of the dead are still unknown
as emergency personnel sift through the rubble and
as Israel continues its attacks. That is the unjust
reality in which the Palestinian people are struggling
to survive and suffering gravely under the Israeli
occupation, as their right to reject and resist that
immoral, inhumane and illegitimate occupation - and
their legitimate aspirations to realizing their rights and
freedom - continue to be shamefully perverted by the
occupying Power.

That reality is worsened by the repeated
appeasement of Israel and the failure of the international
community to hold it accountable and to impose the rule
of law. We call on the Security Council once again to
uphold its duties under the Charter and to act forthwith
to implement its resolutions regarding the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict and on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and children in armed conflict.

Should the Security Council fail to respond to
our appeals to uphold the law to end those crimes
and violations against our people and ensure their
protection, and should our peaceful, diplomatic and
political efforts in that regard fail, we will have no
recourse but to turn to the judicial bodies of the United
Nations and the international system. We have a duty
to our people to leave no stone unturned as we strive
to end the Israeli occupation, oppression and colonial
domination and attain our inalienable rights.

We call on the Security Council to adopt a resolution
that condemns the Israeli military aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza Strip,
calls for its immediate cessation and the lifting of the
Israeli blockade on Gaza Strip, and for protection of the
Palestinian people, since Israel, the occupying Power,
has clearly abrogated its legal obligations to do so. In
that regard, we draw attention to the fact that such a
resolution and the necessary action to implement it
has the full endorsement of the Group of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Non-Aligned Movement, which constitutes the majority
of the United Nations membership.

Lastly, before concluding, I also wish to make an
appeal to the international community to support the
efforts to provide emergency humanitarian assistance
to the Palestinian civilian population in Gaza in order
to alleviate the grave suffering and devastation they
are enduring. In that regard, we appeal for urgent
donor support to the emergency appeal for Gaza
launched by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East on
14 July, recognizing the vital role being played by the
Agency, along with other United Nations agencies and
international organizations on the ground, to address
the crisis and meet the needs of the population.

Finally, allow to me to say just a few words in
Arabic to our people in the Gaza Strip.
(spoke in Arabic)

We return to the Security Council once again after
it failed to respond to the aggression against our people.
From this Chamber, we salute the Palestinian people
for their suffering and magnificent fortitude and bow
before their martyrs who have fallen as a result of
Israel's barbaric act of aggression that has spared no
civilian woman, man or child in the 1.8 million people
living in Gaza. They are right to be angry at the Security
Council, which has not stopped that act of aggression.
They are right to be angry that the world watches as
they suffer and lose their children and members of their
families.

That aggression has not yet stopped. However,
people across the world are proud of the Palestinian
people as they struggle and spare no effort to attain
their freedom and put an end to that barbaric act of
aggression. We all know that the Palestinian people
will succeed, and soon, in putting an end to the barbaric
act of aggression.

