Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, we should
like to thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Arias, for his report
and for the good work that he is producing in the CTC.
The fight against terrorism within the broadest possible
international coalition remains one of Germany's most
important policy objectives. While we fully subscribe
to the forthcoming statement by the presidency of the
European Union, we should like to highlight the
following points.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has done
impressive work, and its Chairman, its experts and the
United Nations Secretariat deserve our recognition and
thanks. We support the CTC's new work programme.
We appreciate the ever-increasing links that the CTC
has established with international organizations and
specialized agencies, as demonstrated recently during
the meeting in Washington organized jointly by the
CTC and the Organization of American States. Most
important of all, the CTC has established a continuous
dialogue with all United Nations Member States on key
counter-terrorism issues under resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003). The quality and intensity of that
dialogue are unprecedented in United Nations history,
and are an asset that we can build on.

Under the new work programme, the Chairman
plans to submit a report on the strengths and
weaknesses of international counter-terrorism efforts.
Such an evaluation could help us in further intensifying
cooperation by adopting a more operative approach.
For instance, one step forward might be for CTC
experts to form joint teams with members of
specialized international organizations and actively
assist countries in key areas of resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003), such as professionalizing their
financial control, border protection, weapons control
and law enforcement sectors. Another idea might be to
consider the creation of a high-level authority - such
as a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator-
who might help to better focus and streamline
enhanced United Nations activities to counter terrorism
in all its aspects and on a global basis. Discussing such
steps or similar ideas more thoroughly would be in line
with many suggestions voiced during the General
Assembly's recent general debate calling for the
strengthening of United Nations counter-terrorism
organs.

We are not here to offer ready-made solutions.
But my Government is convinced that the credibility of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts depends on
their ability to make a difference on the ground. It
seems worthwhile to reflect on new ways to strengthen
the United Nations - including the CTC - in order to
fight terrorism even more effectively. We think the
time has come to increase the effectiveness of United
Nations and CTC action, within existing means and, of
course, while respecting the framework of the United
Nations Charter and international law.

