Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, I would like
to thank Poland for convening today's open debate on
the protection of civilians. We also congratulate Poland
on its initiative to present a coordinated calendar of
events on the sidelines of the debate.

Austria fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered, or to be delivered, on behalf of the European
Union, the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians and the Human Security Network. In our
national capacity, we would like to highlight four
additional points we deem to be particularly important.

First, I would like to emphasize the importance of
the single most effective and sustainable tool for the
protection of civilians, namely, prevention. Even when
all parties fully respect international humanitarian
law in a conflict, civilians will continue to suffer. We
therefore need to invest more in conflict prevention.
Therefore, we call on the Security Council to strengthen
the prevention agenda, including the importance
or recognizing human rights violations as the early
warning signs of conflict. Whenever conflicts break
out, full compliance with international humanitarian
law is paramount. Austria continues to be a strong
supporter of the intergovernmental discussions in
Geneva on strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law.

My second point relates to the dramatic
non-compliance with international humanitarian law
we witness in many conflicts. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report,

"[w]hen explosive weapons were used in populated
areas, 92 per cent of the casualties were civilians."
(S/2018/462, para. 41)

I repeat - 92 per cent. We therefore call on all States to
participate in the development of a political declaration
to address the humanitarian impact of the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. Nineteen of our
African colleagues have shown us the way by adopting
the Maputo communique. Let us follow their lead.
We also share the Secretary-General's call to improve
and extend civilian-casualty tracking, reporting and
response in order to be able to reduce civilian harm.
Austria is co-organizing side events on those two topics
tomorrow and Thursday.

My third point relates to one of the consequences
of conflicts, namely, forced displacement. We continue
to witness increasing numbers of displaced persons.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. Let us
use that anniversary to strengthen our work towards
durable solutions in line with the Guiding Principles.
The development of a multi-stakeholder plan of action
for advancing prevention, protection and solutions for
internally displaced people covering the period 2018-
2020 is an excellent first step in that regard.

Lastly, the protection of civilians is now a central
task of many United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Those missions have become increasingly dangerous and
multidimensional. We must ensure that peacekeepers
receive adequate training and the necessary equipment
to fulfil their protection-of-civilians mandate. With
that aim, Austria will continue to offer a United
Nations-certified course to create better awareness of
the protection of civilians on the operational level.

