Mr. Johansen (Norway): Norway would like to
express its appreciation for the briefing made by the
United Nations Special Envoy Carl Bildt as well as its
concurrence with the assessment made by the European
Union and Mr. Javier Solana.

Developments in South-East Europe are of vital
importance to the stability of Europe and the
integration process on the European continent. As a
partner in this process, Norway has been engaged all
over the Balkans, as a major donor to the efforts to
promote lasting peace and development in the region,
providing peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel
and financial support.

Norway remains firmly committed and engaged.
Assisting the people and the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the peace implementation process has
naturally been a primary focus of our efforts. Important
progress has been achieved since Dayton, and we
encourage the Bosnian authorities to continue to pursue
the priorities set by the Peace Implementation Council
with determination.

Developments in Serbia and Montenegro are of
vital importance to stability and security in the region.
Norway has strongly condemned the Serbian
Government's recent action against independent media
and the systematic campaign of repression against the
democratic opposition. These actions only serve to
further isolate Serbia from the rest of Europe. The
Milosevic regime is becoming increasingly totalitarian.
It is moving to effectively block assistance to
opposition forces.

Norway has developed close cooperation with
several opposition-led municipalities and will continue
to provide assistance to them, as well as to independent
media and civil society.

The continued violence in Kosovo is cause for
great concern. The upsurge in ethnically motivated
violence is totally unacceptable and must be stopped.
The recent killings of Kosovo Serbs seem to be aimed
at forcing remaining Kosovo Serbs to flee, as well as at
preventing the return to Serbia of those already
displaced. Improved security for all citizens of Kosovo
is, in our view, a prerequisite for sustainable
development in Kosovo.

Norway welcomes the commitment to far-
reaching reforms shown by the Croatian Government.
We believe it is important to ensure that the Racan
Government succeeds. A democratic Croatia will be a
catalyst for reform throughout the region.

Norway has become a full-fledged participant in
the Stability Pact for South-East Europe. This reflects
Norway's commitment to continue to participate in and
contribute to the processes of bringing peace and
stability to the region. We have set aside $15 million
for specific Stability Pact projects. Our total assistance
to the region will reach approximately $100 million
this year.

In addition, Norway offers improved trading
conditions for the countries of the region, either
through free trade agreements, together with our
European Free Trade Association partners, or
unilaterally by granting General System of Preferences
treatment.

In the view of the Norwegian Government,
Macedonia deserves special attention and increased
support from the international community. In a region
otherwise marked by turbulence and violence,
Macedonian leaders have skilfully and peacefully
managed the transition to an independent State, now
seeking integration in Euro-Atlantic structures.

It is now our duty to support the Macedonian
people and the Government in their efforts. This will
be an important contribution to stability for and
peaceful coexistence between the nations of South-East
Europe.

