Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): As the Council
today is debating the situation concerning Iraq, on
behalf of the Vietnamese delegation let me first of all
extend our sincere thanks to His Excellency
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq, for his presence and his statement. I would like to
thank Special Adviser Ibrahim Gambari and Assistant
Secretary-General Warren Sach for their detailed
briefings. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your presentation, in your national capacity, on behalf
of the Multinational Force in Iraq.

During the past five years, Iraq has undergone
significant changes. The progress that the country has
achieved under extremely difficult conditions across
various political and socioeconomic fields, its
improved relations with neighbouring countries and its
reintegration into the international community deserve
our full recognition and encouragement. At the same
time, we wish to see Iraq achieve further concrete
improvements in, inter alia, ending the outbreak of
sectarian violence; resolving internal boundary
disputes; reinforcing the rule of law; strengthening
poverty reduction and social welfare development;
curbing illicit use of weapons and combating organized
crimes; promoting disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants; clearing a substantial
amount of foreign debts; and providing assistance to
more than 4 million refugees and internally displaced
persons. We therefore all realize that there are still
formidable challenges in security, humanitarian,
reconstruction and national reconciliation spheres for
the country to overcome.

A united, prosperous and stable Iraq, which has
been the fervent desire of the Iraqi people, who have
endured tremendous losses and difficulties for too
many years, will contribute to the peace, security and
stability of the region. While firmly supporting the
efforts of the Iraqi Government and the other parties
concerned in consolidating peace and security,
promoting sustainable development and strengthening
national reconciliation, Viet Nam recognizes and
supports the important role that the United Nations, the
countries of the region and the international
community at large can play, on the basis of respect for
the sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of
Iraq, to help Iraq strengthen its political process and
regional dialogue and to promote economic
reconstruction and humanitarian relief work.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and encourage it to further
assist the Government of Iraq to address key priority
issues, as mandated by Security Council resolution
1770 (2007). We also hope that the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board will continue to
enhance its audit and oversight capacity to ensure that
all resources from the Development Fund for Iraq are
transparently and efficiently disbursed in the service of
the best interests of Iraq and its people.

With its modest capacity, Viet Nam stands ready
to join the collective effort of the international
community in helping the Iraqi people to rebuild their
country. Viet Nam participated in the two conferences
on the International Compact with Iraq in Sharm
el-Sheikh and Stockholm in 2007 and 2008,
respectively. We look forward to continuing to support
the work of the compact in moving the country
forward.

Finally, Mr. President, let me thank you and the
United States delegation for the draft press statement,
which we support.

