Mr. Mazimpaka (Rwanda): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Our
congratulations also go to your predecessor, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, for a job well done last month. I wish to
thank you and, through you, the Security Council for
convening this open meeting, at which delegations can
express themselves on the contents of the report of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, document
S/2001/357 of 12 April 2001, which has just been
presented to the Council.

Rwanda fully cooperated with the Panel, as is
rightly recognized in the report; since the publication
of the report we have put forward the reaction of the
Government of Rwanda, which is set out in document
S/2001/402, to which reference has been made, for
everybody to read through in order to see our detailed
comments.

We believe that the mandate given to the Panel
was not carefully defined; this led to contentious
interpretations. In our view, there are four major issues
that made the Panel of Experts produce a report that we
do not endorse.

First, the report interpreted "illegality" to mean
activities carried out without the consent of a
legitimate Government or of an authority exercising
power and control over territory. Those concepts,
which are generally accepted, are, in the context of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, defined also in the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement: article 111, paragraph 18,
stipulates that State administration shall be exercised
by the Congolese signatories until new institutions
emanating inter-Congolese dialogue are set up. That
has not yet happened. Since that Agreement received
and, we hope, continues to enjoy the support of the
Council, we would have expected the Panel to adopt
the letter and spirit of the Agreement.

Secondly, the Panel extended the definition of
natural resources and other forms of wealth to include
services, transport, finance, and other movements of
goods and people. In our region, these are regulated by
multinational agreements, which include those between
our three countries 4 the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi and Rwanda - and the conventions of
the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
(CEPGL), as well as regional arrangements, such as
those under the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Northern Corridor
arrangement; these conform also to World Trade
Organization conventions.

Ignoring these historical ties among the peoples
of the region is prejudicial to the socio-economic well-
being ofthe people of the region, and more particularly
those of the Democratic Republic of the Congo cut off
from Kinshasa, who have been historically linked to
the world through eastern routes through Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda.

Thirdly, the sources cited by the Panel do not
reflect the efforts that the Government made to
facilitate access to information. The Panel had an
opportunity to meet Rwanda's head of State, President
Paul Kagame, for two hours. Nothing in the report
indicates that the Panel benefited from that meeting. It
is also true that none of the conclusions were put to the
President for discussion. The same goes for the large
number of ministers and officials who made themselves
available to discuss the issues with the panel.

Fourthly, the private sector, which was
characterized as pivotal in the illegal exploitation, was
never contacted to clarify their business practices or
credentials to the Panel. That is against the norms of
natural justice.

We can only conclude that the panel relied on
unacceptable sources variously described in the report
as deserters, a "high number of insiders living in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Europe"
(S/2001/357, para. 11) and "reliable sources" (ibid., passim) that are not identified. One wonders why the
Panel could not appreciate that such politically
motivated sources would only give information to
serve their own political agendas. Deserters would in
normal circumstances be defectors from one side to
another, and would only slur the side they had left.

We find it unusual that a panel of experts would
evaluate its own report, pass judgement and impose
punitive measures - as this one did - and that it
would do that on the basis of a report that the Panel
admits is today only 70 per cent complete. It surely
should not include condemnations of heads of State and
their families, companies and individuals without
meeting the burden of proof of guilt. The way heads of
State are treated in this report is simply unacceptable
and sets a dangerous precedent.

Since the report concludes that economic reasons
have superseded the security concerns of Rwanda,
allow me to reiterate the reasons why Rwanda has had
to defend its citizens against a murderous war waged
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Members of the Council may recall that, after the
genocide of 1994, the Security Council was on
numerous occasions seized of the matter of the
precarious security conditions caused by Interahamwe
militia and ex-Rwandese Armed Forces (FAR) soldiers
in refugee camps in Zaire. No solution was found by
this body. It became necessary for Rwanda and its
allies to find a solution to that situation. I am glad to
say that this was done with a measure of success,
because 1.5 million refugees were able to return home
and security was restored to Rwanda for a while.
However, the situation changed dramatically when the
Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Congo-Zaire (AFDL) Government of President Laurent
Kabila decided to regroup and rearm those forces.

Once again, appeals to the United Nations to
avert the looming crisis multiplied. The Security
Council set up an International Commission of Inquiry
that established beyond a reasonable doubt the
existence of well-organized forces bent on
destabilizing the Great Lakes region. Those included,
and were organized around, the Interahamwe and ex-
FAR militia, which at the time numbered 70,000. The
report contained in document S/l998/1096 described as
profoundly shocking the network of forces from
Rwanda, Burundi, Angola and Uganda, the unhindered
flow of arms to them, and the support they were
receiving from the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At that time western Rwanda,
the prefecture of Gisenyi, Ruhengeri, Kibuye and
Cyangugu and parts of Byumba, Kigali and Gitarama
were described as red zones by United Nations
agencies because of insecurity due to incursions by
those forces based in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The situation changed dramatically when
Rwandan forces were able to put an end to those
infiltrations and push those forces back into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - helped that time
by a rebellion against the Kabila Government. Security
was gradually restored in Rwanda and, though not
completely to date, in North Kivu, That situation
enabled Rwanda to continue to repatriate refugees and
to reintegrate them into our society. Close to 100,000
refugees have returned in the last six months alone, and
a total of 18,000 ex-FAR soldiers have been
reintegrated in the national army - the Rwandan
Patriotic Army (RPA) - at command, staff and other
ranks. The improvement in security and other
developments in the human rights area convinced the
Special Rapporteur to recommend, successfully, that
the Commission on Human Rights put an end to its
monitoring of Rwanda. We hope that this can be
achieved in the whole region once we succeed in
putting an end to the activities of the negative forces.

The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
brought in several countries and generated rebellions
against the Government. In a genuine attempt to find
solutions to the multiple causes of the conflict, the
belligerents negotiated the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement with the assistance of countries of the
region. That Agreement addresses the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
control over its resources, the rights of the Congolese
people and the security of neighbouring countries. The
Lusaka Agreement provides for mechanisms to rid the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of all the negative
forces. That is a task the Security Council can ignore
only at the peril of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. Signatories to Lusaka, today at
least, appear to be working in tandem to implement the
Agreement as it is, and need unconditional support
from this body. At this stage, the implementation of
both the Lusaka Agreement and Security Council
resolution 1341 (2001) is of paramount importance.

We are also busy preparing plans for the
disarming of the forces upon which the Security
Council had imposed sanctions in connection with
rearming through resolution 918 (1994). Had the
Council reinforced that resolution, the Lusaka
Agreement would be far advanced today and the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region would certainly have improved. We urge the
Council to re-examine its resolutions on the situation,
and in particular with regard to the activities of the
Interahamwe and ex-FAR troops, namely, resolutions
918 (1994), 997 (1995), 1011 (1995), 1013 (1995) and
1161 (1998), as well as the letter contained in
document S/l998/438 and the report contained in
document S/1998/1096. We also urge the Council to
take action without further delay so as to neutralize
these groups and their mushrooming allies - such as
the Forces pour la defense de la democratic (FDD) and
the Mayi-Mayi. All countries should be discouraged
from continuing to support these forces by all means
available to the Council.

It came to our attention that the Panel is seeking
the extension of its mandate to do what it terms the
remaining 30 per cent of the work to be done. The
Council may recall that in February 2001 the
preliminary report was considered inadequate and
inaccurate. At that time we pointed out those
inaccuracies. To our knowledge, the Panel never went
back to the field to cross-check the information. We are
also forced to deal with a "final" report that the Panel
itself admits to be only 70 per cent done, and on the
basis of which Rwanda, its leaders and its citizens are
unreservedly condemned. Such a request is simply
meant to pre-empt reactions from people and countries,
like Rwanda, that have been wrongly accused by the
Panel.

Rwanda proposes that this report should be
dropped altogether because it is inaccurate and
inconclusive and does not in any way interpret the
wishes of the Council. It does not reflect the genuine
desire of members to establish the state of affairs in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so as to recommend
ways and means of rectifying the situation, in the
interest of the Congolese people. It does not do justice
to countries like Rwanda, which went out of its way to
cooperate with the Panel.

However, should it please the Council to reopen
the investigations and correct the numerous lacunae in
the report just presented, then Rwanda wishes to
propose the following.

First, the Council and the Member States which
are the subject of this investigation should agree on the
terms of reference and spell out the appropriate
methodology. Secondly, clear definitions of terms
loosely used in the previous report, such as "illegal",
"legitimate", "power" and "control", should be
established in relation to the specific and unique
political situation prevailing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region. Thirdly,
treaties, agreements and protocols governing the trade
regime in the region should be duly recognized. And
fourthly, the responsibilities of countries of destination
of the resources should be determined with regard to
both import and export activities.

My delegation respectfully wishes to urge the
Security Council to keep on course insofar as securing
peace and security in the Great Lakes region is
concerned. The Council will be encouraged to know
that, since the last meeting between the Council and the
Lusaka signatories, the commitment to the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement demonstrated
then has borne some fruit. The disengagement exercise,
in spite of a few problems, is effectively complete.
Joint planning between the Joint Military Commission
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
resettlement of negative forces is under way, as
envisaged by resolution 1341 (2001). The inter-
Congolese dialogue, crucial for re-establishing
common State authority over the whole Congolese
territory, was due to be launched in Lusaka this
morning. The concept of the plans for the final
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was approved last month, and
planning will start soon.

The Lusaka process provides us with the only
realistic and long-lasting approach to the problems of
the Great Lakes region. Rwanda believes that its
security concerns cannot be minimized by any other
considerations. It believes also that in Lusaka all the
parties will find equitable solutions to the problems
that face their respective countries. The Security
Council and the whole United Nations system should
continue to accompany our countries in the quest for
the successful and timely implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement as it is.

