The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I should like to begin by thanking Stephen for
his briefing as well as for his initiative and stamina
in confronting the toughest humanitarian challenges
that the world presents, and through him may I pay
tribute to all humanitarian workers responding to
these humanitarian challenges, which are of a scale
so unprecedented, so unacceptable that it is almost
unimaginable. More than 20 million men, women and
children risk starving to death in the next six months.
That is equivalent to nearly the entire population of
Australia - absolutely astounding in 2017.

Let me focus briefly on South Sudan, Somalia and
then Yemen.

In South Sudan, we need to see the Government
bring an overdue end to the fighting and improve
humanitarian access. It is completely unacceptable that
people in famine-affected areas such Mayardit are not
receiving the food and medical supplies that could save
their lives. These are exactly the messages that we need
to keep sending at the highest levels, including at our
upcoming meeting on South Sudan chaired by the British
Foreign Secretary later this month. We need to match
our messages with our money. The United Kingdom is
the second-largest bilateral donor to South Sudan, but
we cannot do it alone. We are matching our money with
our deeds by strengthening the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan by almost 400 peacekeepers, including
military engineers and a field hospital. We call on
others to follow suit.

In Somalia, we have a crucial window to take
action before the drought takes hold. If we act early and
decisively, we can prevent a repeat of 2011, when more
than a quarter of a million people died through famine.
Again, we must all play our part. The United Kingdom
is providing emergency food and safe drinking water
to 1 million people, but more, much more, is needed.
If we do not step up, others will. Al-Shabaab is poised
to step into the breach left by any lack of national or
international resources. If we abandon the people of
Somalia, we risk reversing the political and security
gains of the past four years by forcing them to turn
towards Al-Shabaab in desperation. I therefore strongly
urge other donors to come forward.

In Yemen, the situation is equally grave. Civilians
are paying the highest price for the continuing conflict,
so we urge all sides to facilitate safe access for the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
to deliver vital, life-saving assistance. That means
that all parties must uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and do everything
feasible to prevent civilian casualties and damage to
civilian infrastructure, because the continued flow of
commercial supplies into Yemen will be critical if we
are to prevent famine. Eight-five per cent of Yemen's
food needs over the past year have been met through
commerical imports. All parties need to ensure the
continued facilitation of commercial and humanitarian
imports and their onward distribution, while we must
continue to support the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen in carrying its
out crucial work.

In tandem, we need to find ways to stabilize the
banking sector and solve the liquidity crisis so that
importers have the means and the funds to pay for foods
and basic goods. Again, we need to step up our own
efforts. Last year's United Nations appeal was funded to
only 60 per cent; this year, it is only 6 per cent funded.
We need to give generously so that that the Resident
Coordinator has the resources he needs to tackle the
crisis. For our part, the United Kingdom has increased
its humanitarian aid to Yemen to $125 million, and
in both 2015 and 2016 we helped more than a million
Yemenis with food, medical supplies and clean water.

Ultimately, however, it will remain difficult to
address Yemen's humanitarian needs while the conflict
is ongoing. We call on parties to engage meaningfully
with the United Nations Special Envoy's proposals for
peace, and to make progress towards a ceasefire and
an enduring political settlement. The United Kingdom
will continue to play a leading role in supporting his
efforts to achieve that.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 4.30pm.
