Mrs. Durisic' (Montenegro): Let me first thank
the Swedish presidency for having organized this
timely and important open debate on the protection
of children in armed conflict, as well as for its work
on resolution 2427 (2018), which the Security Council
adopted this morning. We also thank the briefers for
their remarkable presentations and their work on the
protection of children in conflict situations.

Montenegro fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would, however, like to make some additional remarks.

Conflicts have a devastating and enduring impact
on the world and on each individual. We should all be
disturbed by the Secretary-General's latest report on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465), as well as
by the briefers' presentations. As stated in the report,
which Montenegro welcomes, it is children in particular
who face obstacles ranging from discrimination,
marginalization and poverty to violence. Young people
are the main victims of conflicts today, and they are
dealing with unacceptable risks to their lives and
suffering as a result of attacks on schools and hospitals
and denials of humanitarian access.

The issue of children and armed conflict is a
global one that demands a shared response. In the
wake of some recent progress, we, as the international
community, must focus more on preventing violations
against children affected by conflict if we are to avoid
the possibility of losing entire generations in many
countries around the world. The Security Council has
made significant progress in this area, and its adoption
of resolution 2427 (2018) today is a step forward in
advancing the agenda on children and armed conflict,
protecting children's rights and ensuring that those
responsible for grave violations against children are
held to account. Montenegro considers the agreement
and implementation of United Nations action plans to
be a vital step in improving the protection of children.
All the parties listed in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's report should put such measures in place.

We must improve our efforts to prevent human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law. Montenegro has ratified the Optional Protocols
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
endorsed such non-legally binding commitments as
the Paris Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration.
We have also endorsed the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers and we strongly encourage
other Member States to do the same. We support
international peace operations as an efficient and
dynamic instrument for monitoring respect for human
rights and building sustainable institutions in conflict
areas. A strong component for the protection of
children should be incorporated into peacekeeping and
prevention mandates and the sustaining peace agenda.
That would also require peacekeepers, military and
security personnel to receive specialized predeployment
training in child protection.

In addition, we should prioritize the effective
reintegration of children formerly associated with
armed forces or groups. Both girls and boys must
receive the support they need to alleviate their suffering
and help them reintegrate into their communities
without prejudice or stigma. That requires education
and engagement. We believe it is crucial to ensure that
children continue to have access to education even in
times of crisis. Education can have a positive effect on
their development and give them the skills they need to
work for more sustainable peace and advocate for better
future themselves. Children are innocent bystanders in
times of conflict. They deserve protection and support
as well as justice and opportunity. We should redouble
our efforts at every level to protect them, get them back
to school and treat them as every society's vital assets.
Only that approach can enable us to have an impact
on the well-being of future generations and to face the
challenges of securing a lasting global peace.

