Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in French):
I believe that the message is very simple: bravo France.

(Spoke in Spanish)

I congratulate France because its entire delegation
has done splendid work. If this wrap-up session is
intended to give us the opportunity to evaluate or
criticize the work done during the month of March, I do
not believe our assessment could be higher or the level
of criticism any lower. That is simply because France
has worked at all times to promote and strengthen all
instruments of preventive diplomacy.

This month, the international community and the
members of the Council have had to respond to the
very diffuse threat of terrorism and non-State actors.
There have been few instances when we have dedicated
so much time to addressing the terrible threat of
terrorism. That is why I wish to highlight the debates
organized by France, in particular the wonderful debate
on minorities in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419). As
mentioned earlier by the representative of Chile, France
has also used all the tools at the Council's disposal to
be effective. I would like to highlight in particular the
splendid mission organized to Africa, as well as the
Arria Formula meetings, which are a fundamental
instrument for learning first-hand about what is
happening in the field and for giving non-members of
the Security Council direct access to the work of the
Council.

Also under France's skilful leadership, we made
the most of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. I am specifically referring to the intervention
of the High Representative of the European Union,
which was truly important for Spain as a member of the
Union (see S/PV.7402), and to the visit to Africa, thanks
to which the Security Council has been able to deepen
its ties with the African Union. That is a critical aspect
of our work.

With regard to Friday's meeting, presided by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France (see S/PV.7419),
it was particularly moving to hear the testimony of the
member of the Iraqi Parliament, which made all of us
aware of the gravity and tragedy of the situation faced
by many people outside of this magnificent Chamber.

With regard to working methods, I have listened
attentively to all statements, but particularly to that
made by the representative of Lithuania, who provided
an interesting self-assessment on the work of the
Security Council. I think he put his finger on it when he
said that we have to improve the degree of effectinvess
of the Security Council in the field. In other words, we
must increase the impact of Security Council decisions
on the ground; we sometimes get the impression that
the presidential statements or the press statements
remain somewhat intangible, with no direct impact on
the life of individuals.

Lastly, March has been a special month for Spain,
because it was the first time our Minister for Foreign
Affairs participated in an open debate (see S/PV.7419)
and because we undertook the great responsibility
of being a penholder. A penholder may seem like
a somewhat remote figure to non-members of the
Council, and it is difficult to ascertain just what the
penholder's responsibility consists of. We have learned
that penholders have a great responsibility. We enjoyed
success with the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, but that was due to the flexibility and
goodwill of all members of the Security Council.

To sum up, I would simply like to praise the
work that France has done over the past month. And,
because hardly anyone has noted it, I would also like
to highlight the splendid work done by the Secretariat,
which tirelessly supports the work of the presidency
and the Member States. I would also like to thank our
interpreters for their tireless work every day.
