The Deputy Secretary-General: The Council is
meeting today to continue the debate on a subject of
vital importance: the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Civilians account for an estimated 75 per cent
of war victims. The ongoing human suffering inflicted
by conflicts, from Afghanistan to Angola and from the
Middle East to the Great Lakes, is a daily reminder of
the need for a new and concerted response at the
highest political levels from Governments, which bear
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians, from
the Security Council, and from all others who can help
cover the considerable distance still to be travelled if
the international community is to find truly effective
solutions in this area of acute human need.

I would like to stress at the outset how glad I am
that the Council has invited the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to address this
meeting. Looking at the protection of civilians from the
perspective of human rights can help identify very
useful steps that the Security Council may wish to
consider. Mrs. Robinson will speak to the Council in
greater detail along those lines. My own remarks will
concentrate on a few key points arising from the
Secretary-General's report.

Wars today are often fought not between
sovereign countries or with regular armies, but between
different religious, ethnic and political groups and with
irregular armed groups. In those conditions, civil-
defence forces, vigilante groups and militias often prey
on civilians for their own private and destabilizing
purposes, and in some cases specifically target them.
Given such circumstances, the protection of civilians
must become a regular and central aspect of United
Nations peace operations and should be reflected in the
mandates and the design of such operations.

The second report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is now before
the Council for consideration, in document S/2001/33l.
As members know, the first report on protection
(S/1999/957) was issued in September 1999 and
contained 40 recommendations for action. The new
report complements the first report's findings and takes
a closer look at current trends in a few areas that are of
concern to the international community or that have
shown some encouraging developments in recent years.
Among those areas I wish to mention three.

First is the criminal prosecution of violations of
international criminal law. We have recently witnessed
remarkable progress, both domestically and
internationally, in efforts to end the culture of impunity
for those who have committed serious assaults on the
civilian population during an armed conflict. The
Secretary-General's new report urges the speedy
ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, and calls for reliable funding of the international
criminal tribunals, and in particular the special court
for Sierra Leone. The report also supports the use of
truth and reconciliation commissions, calls on Member
States to enforce international law, and opposes the use
of amnesties for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

Second is the question of access to vulnerable
populations. Access to affected civilian populations is a
prerequisite for any meaningful action and impact on
the ground. The Security Council has a pivotal role in
that respect, particularly in engaging with all parties to
a conflict, including armed groups not controlled by a
recognized State. Operations mandated by the Council,
such as those in Angola, Bosnia and Sierra Leone, have
been handicapped by their inability to establish
effective contact with such groups. Renewed efforts are
needed in that area, given the nature of today's
conflicts.

A third priority must be the separation of
civilians and armed elements in refugee camps or other
settlements where displaced persons gather. Recent
fighting in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia, for
instance, has displaced hundreds of thousands of
civilians. There, as elsewhere, mixed communities
often find themselves under the control of
unaccountable armed elements who may further
terrorize already vulnerable civilians, divert needed aid
to fighters, and establish bases for cross-border attacks,
all of which threaten even greater destabilization and
even regional wars. The Secretary-General's report
underlines the urgent need for the international
community to assist already-burdened host States in
separating armed elements from displaced civilians at
the earliest possible time in order to preserve the
civilian character of asylum, to prevent further
deterioration of security conditions and to deny such
groups a haven for their activities.

Last September, the States Members of the
Organization pledged in the Millennium Declaration to
expand and strengthen the protection of civilians in
complex emergencies. However, many of the main
recommendations of the Secretary-General's first
report have gone unimplemented. The Secretary-
General hopes that this meeting will help move from
words to deeds and from intention to implementation.
The Secretariat stands ready to report on progress made
in carrying out the 54 recommendations made in both
of the Secretary-General's reports, and to devise clear
steps to act upon those recommendations.

I wish the Council all success in these very
important deliberations.

