Mr. Tanin: At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and Italy on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am happy to
join this meeting today.

The most recent reporting period is well covered in
the Secretary-General's report (S/20l7/911) that we are
reviewing today. In addition, I will brief the Council on
recent significant developments that have taken place
since the end of the reporting period.

On 19 October, municipal elections were conducted
throughout Kosovo - the second Kosovo-wide local
elections since the agreement of 19 April 2013 on the
principles of the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. It was therefore the second time
that the four Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities in
northern Kosovo had participated in such elections.
Those elections saw a strong turnout, particularly in the
Serb-majority areas throughout Kosovo. They provided
the population of Kosovo the opportunity to select their
most immediate leaders and thus to express their views
on their political priorities, as well as the performance
and the delivery of the major competing parties. More
than 7,000 candidates competed across Kosovo.

A significant increase in Serb participation occurred
in the Serb-majority municipalities. The average
turnout in those municipalities was 43.4 per cent, which
can be compared with around 38 per cent in 2013. In the
four northern municipalities, the difference was even
more pronounced: a turnout of 44 per cent compared
with 24 per cent turnout in 2013. The European Union
(EU) deployed some 100 observers across Kosovo on
election day while the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe facilitated the voting in the
northern municipalities. Both organizations praised the
generally peaceful and orderly conduct of the elections.
However, the EU observers also stressed that, in the
Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities, the campaign
was affected by restricted competition and intimidation.

As I reported in August (see S/PV.8025), the
multiple election processes this year in Kosovo
produced a period in which few decisions could be
undertaken with the necessary authority in Pristina.
With the runoffs for mayoral elections scheduled for
19 November and the electoral process now nearing
completion, I am hopeful that this will soon change.
Some signs warrant cautious optimism. On 31 October,
the new Assembly of Kosovo, passed a second reading
of the Kosovo budget, despite the narrow majority
held by the Government. The Serb caucus and the
cabinet of the Prime Minister collaborated to achieve
that result. Meanwhile, we see signs of movement on
other particularly important social and economic issues
that have repeatedly been delayed during the lengthy
elections period.

This leaves the question of what lies ahead. During
the past three months, I have had the opportunity to share
views on the situation with a variety of interlocutors, in
Pristina, in Belgrade and more widely. I would like to
underline the fact that all sides generally share the View
that the state of affairs between Belgrade and Pristina
has the potential to evolve beyond the unfortunate long-
standing impasse.
On 24 October, 40 new judges and 13 new State
prosecutors from the Serb community were sworn
into office in Kosovo - a significant step in the
implementation of the first EU-facilitated agreement.
These judicial officials will work as part of a unitary
Kosovo justice system, and staffing and logistical
arrangements are also under way, with support from all
the international presences in Kosovo, including from
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). The parties are to be commended
for moving this forward. The judicial area had lagged
notably behind other implementation achievements,
such as police integration and implementation of
technical steps in the telecommunications and
utilities spheres.

However, it is equally important to note that overall,
the implementation of agreements achieved in 2013,
and even earlier, continue, at best, to be sporadic and
variable. Within the framework of the EU-facilitated
dialogue, technical implementation needs more
meaningful commitment from both sides. The most
obvious gap continues to be the lack of progress
towards the implementation of the agreed association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities.

Considerable headway has already been made,
and the EU-facilitated dialogue in Brussels remains
crucial as a core element in a Wider process. Alongside
that endeavour, the European Union's Berlin process,
addressing the future enlargement potential of the
European Union, has also progressed. Having begun at
a 2014 Western Balkans summit, it has been followed
by meetings in 2015 in Vienna, 2016 in Paris and 2017
in Trieste. Its strength lies in the inevitable conclusion
that economic growth, peace and prosperity depend on
the quality of relations among neighbours, the creation
of a beneficial space of connectivity and the prospects
for multifaceted interaction. My own discussions with
leaders in Belgrade, Pristina and Tirana have convinced
me that each of these important centres shares the same
understanding of that principle.

In relation to the Belgrade-Pristina political
dialogue, which has suffered from a long hiatus, what
I can say today is that both sides are well aware of
its importance and its potential during the coming
year. To that effect, informal consultations with
European Union facilitators have taken place over
several months, most importantly with the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini.

Signs of political will and commitment to move
forward seem increasingly evident. Populations are
understandably frustrated by the lack of opportunities
brought on by unresolved political mistrust and
tensions. With the end of the election cycle, the time
for action now moves ahead of the time for excuses.
In many practical areas, political bickering and the
failure to fully implement technical agreements place
unacceptable burdens on the population. As one
example, excessive administrative obstacles continue
to discourage travel and commerce, despite agreements
which purported to alleviate such impediments.

Allow me to offer another example, which has
arisen during the past few days. In accordance with its
mandate, UNMIK has continued to do everything within
its authorized powers to support the implementation of
the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA),
which UNMIK signed on behalf of Kosovo in 2006. In
practice, Pristina representatives working on CEFTA
issues attend all CEFTA meetings. UNMIK's basic
participation has always been in accordance with legal
statutes. Despite these facts, some actors have recently
sought to repoliticize, through public rhetoric, those
otherwise highly practical, functional and beneficial
arrangements. Permit me, in this forum, to be very
clear. UNMIK participation continues strictly to
the extent required by CEFTA members to ensure
its functionality, which in turn supports economic
opportunity throughout the region. UNMIK will
equally support any agreement reached by CEFTA
Members which would allow them to work effectively
together. In our view such arrangements are best
achieved through discussions among those concerned,
not through the media.

I have previously taken note here and commended
President Vueie's initiative for internal dialogue on
Serbia's stance towards the Kosovo issue. I have also
taken note that Prime Minister Edi Rama in Tirana
has stated that such internal examinations will not be
lost in Tirana or Pristina either. These forward-looking
positions do a real service to the people, as they seek
to address the facts head on. Despite the many looming
global challenges, leaders in the European Union have
also made focused engagement in the region a priority.
All parties now need to play their part as well. That is
the thesis upon which the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue
rests. It is important that the potential for embarking
on a sustainable peace process not be hindered by
inflexibility or simple inaction.
While dialogue and other diplomatic initiatives
can provide a new basis for peacebuilding, serious
work to address pressing and immediate issues also
needs urgent attention in Pristina. The much-needed
provision of economic and employment opportunities,
the need to counter public corruption and ensure public
accountability at all levels and, perhaps above all,
fighting organized criminality are crucial objectives.

Our mission in Kosovo is to work primarily at the
grass-roots level to support the impulse of people to
pursue the benefits of cooperation and reconciliation.
We apply the funds available to us to support ground-
level initiatives that shape the future and perspective of
the post-conflict generation in Kosovo. Talent knows no
boundaries of gender, ethnicity or political affiliation.

We find energy within this new Government, which
is already taking new steps to work in a multi-ethnic
partnership. We find it in region-wide initiatives to
remove the scourge of political interference in the
delivery ofjustice and the rule of law. We find it in the
bold initiatives being undertaken by all to fundamentally
examine the issues that will allow the Western Balkans
to continue to advance their European aspirations.

Our attention has also been focused on issues
that require more emphasis and are essential for
reconciliation and the rebuilding of trust. Those include
initiatives to engage women in the political process, help
bring attention to the untold stories of those targeted
during the time of conflict, promote the role of youth
in peace and security, and do more to resolve the cases
of many persons who are still missing from the war.
We stand in open partnership with all Governments
to address those issues. Likewise, we recognize the
immense challenges of ensuring the freedom of cultural
and religious identity in the fight against extreme and
close-minded Views, which are a threat and plague not
only in our area, but throughout the world at present.

UNMIK continues to play its role in working
towards a closer partnership with all international
presences on the ground and with all actors engaged,
particularly at a time when we are witnessing new
dynamics emerging in the region. The final objective of
the Mission remains clear. With the Council's support,
we will achieve sustained peace and the opportunities
it provides to individuals to fulfil their aspirations and
their potential.

