Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today's meeting. We also thank Ms. Mueller for
providing us with an up-to-date overview of the
assistance being provided in the various areas of Syria,
as well as the main concerns and difficulties on which
the Council must focus and work together so that it
can play the meaningful role with which it has been
charged, without divisiveness.

We were particularly touched today by the
incredible story of the young woman present among
us - Ms. Nujeen Mustapha - which once again
demonstrates the immense strength and resilience of
persons living with disabilities. Her perspective has
undoubtedly had a profound impact on us, and we are
grateful for her courage, openness and sincerity with
which she told us her story.

In all honesty, following the testimony that Nujeen
shared with us, I do not believe that any of us could
possibly hope to add anything new or insightful to
the discussion. Thanks to her participation in today's
meeting, I will take away several powerful messages,
including the fact that the dramatic plight of a person
on the long road to better living conditions can be
understood only when we hear what it means in her
own words, and that, in addressing that issue, we can
never lose sight of her concerns and point of view. Her
participation here has accentuated the need for the
Council to continue to open its doors to people like her,
who give a voice to those lacking one and who remind
us that, beyond the statistics and numbers, there are
millions of human stories. For my delegation, and me
in particular, that requires our serious commitment
to keeping the human aspect at the centre of the
deliberations of the Council and to working to find a
peaceful, credible, inclusive and definitive solution
to this conflict. In that perspective, I should like very
briefly to raise the following points.

Syrian civilians, especially women and girls,
continue to feel the effects of the conflict. The virtual
collapse of basic services, the rule of law and the loss
of civil documentation threaten their security and
access to health services. It is therefore necessary to
establish coordination mechanisms to provide care for
Syrian women, thereby contributing to the long-term
comprehensive health of the entire population.

The Dominican Republic is deeply concerned
about the increase in hostilities in various regions of
the northern part of the country, which have forced
hundreds of thousands of people to leave their homes
and take refuge in the camps there. We know that this
mass displacement, together with the recent floods
in the north-east and north-west, entails significant
operational and protection challenges. We therefore
commend the measures taken to date to meet the
needs of those people, but we know that considerable
challenges remain. Accordingly, we call on the parties
to respect the rules of international humanitarian law,
particularly with regard to the protection of the civilian
population, and to refrain from attacks on civilians and
vital infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools. That
includes counter-terrorism operations, which must also
respect and protect civilian populations. The statistics
pertaining to casualties resulting from those clashes are
not encouraging.

We reiterate our appeal and join others in calling
for the continued implementation of the Idlib ceasefire
agreement in order to maintain sustained access to
the millions of people who depend on cross-border
humanitarian assistance, pursuant to the relevant

Security Council resolutions. We deplore the recent
indiscriminate attacks that have affected schools and
health-care centres in the region, which in turn have
forced the displacement of thousands of people. Only
two days ago, we received reports of the deaths of three
children from the same family who were sheltering at
the same location while fleeing the bombardment of
their school.

Lastly, we reiterate the need for safe, timely and
unhindered access throughout Syria in order to reach
the almost 12 million people in humanitarian need.
In that regard, we urge the teams on the ground to
continue to strengthen their partnerships with local
entities, as well as with the Syrian authorities, so as
to facilitate the provision of assistance under the
humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence.

