Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to welcome the President
and to thank him for having travelled to New York
from afar to personally preside over today's meeting.
His having done so clearly demonstrates that he and his
country attach great importance to the United Nations,
the Security Council and the issue we are considering
today. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the relevant information he has provided, as well as
Under-Secretary-General Egeland for the briefing he
has just given.

In recent years the issue of protecting civilians in
armed conflict has been the subject of increasing
international attention and concern. The Security
Council has taken up the matter on numerous occasions
and has adopted relevant resolutions and presidential
statements. Other United Nations agencies have also
made great efforts. Many humanitarian organizations
have also played a positive role in relieving the
suffering of civilians in armed conflict. The basic
needs of thousands upon thousands of civilians for
food, water and medicine, can hardly be assured.
Civilians are the targets of repeated attacks of all
kinds. Thus, it is obvious that much remains to be done
by the international community concerning the
protection of civilians. In that regard, I wish to stress
the following points.

First, all parties to a conflict should strictly abide
by international humanitarian law and scrupulously
fulfil their obligations with regard to the protection of
civilians. The relevant United Nations agencies and
peacekeeping operations should increase their
advocacy of international humanitarian law and raise
the awareness of parties to a conflict of their civilian
protection responsibilities, and should ensure that the
relevant peace operations abide by provisions
concerning the protection of civilians. Moreover,
humanitarian relief workers and organizations should
strictly abide by the principles of justice, impartiality
and objectivity, and should refrain from involvement
with, or support for, any party to a conflict.

Secondly, facts have shown that military means
do not provide a fundamental resolution of conflict and
in many cases only serve to complicate matters and
result in greater casualties among innocent civilians.
Only focusing on prevention and addressing both the
symptoms and the root causes of conflict can result in
the fundamental settlement of a conflict, and in the
protection of civilians.

The international community should provide help
to effective countries or regions in conflict to formulate
comprehensive and integrated strategies of conflict
prevention, remove the root causes of conflict, promote
national integration and reconciliation and attain
sustainable development. Coordination and cooperation
should be strengthened within the United Nations

system, and among the United Nations system, regional
organizations and United Nations Member States.

The Security Council should make further efforts
to contain conflicts and promote and consolidate peace
processes. In addition, the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals would contribute to
the international community's efforts to prevent
conflicts. We appeal to all parties to address that issue,
and to take effective follow-up measures.

Finally, I would like to pay high tribute to
humanitarian workers who brave warfare and make
selfless contributions without regard for their personal
safety and their lives. They have not only brought food
and medicine to those in dire situations and need, more
important, have also brought hope for survival. We
condemn all attacks against humanitarian relief
workers and appeal to all parties to implement Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) in earnest and to
punish severely those responsible. We also appeal to all
countries to give positive consideration to accession to
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

