Mr. Wen Jiabao (China) (spoke in Chinese): It
gives me great pleasure to attend this meeting of the
Security Council. I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for your initiative and the Turkish delegation for its
efforts in preparing for the meeting.

We live at a time when the trend towards a
multipolar world and economic globalization is gaining
momentum. New changes are taking place in the global
economic and political landscape. The international
security situation is generally stable, but due to the
impact of the world financial crisis, destabilizing
factors and uncertainties are on the increase.
Traditional security issues, such as local conflicts, arms
races and territorial disputes, remain unresolved and
even deteriorate from time to time. Terrorism,
transnational crime, cybersecurity, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and other non-traditional
security issues are becoming more pronounced.

Faced with these complex and diverse security
threats and challenges, we must intensify multilateral
cooperation and take stronger collective action in
response. That is the consensus of the States Members
of the United Nations.

China believes that, as the heart of the collective
security mechanism, the Security Council should
further enhance its authority and assume greater
responsibilities, make greater efforts and play a greater
role in maintaining international peace and security. In
that connection, I wish to make the following four
proposals on the work of the Council in the new
circumstances.

First, we must hold high the banner of peace and
promote the peaceful settlement of disputes. That is a
fundamental principle that the Security Council should
always follow. In a globalized world where the
interests and destinies of all countries are intertwined,
peace is what we all desire and war is what we all
detest. History has shown time and again that dialogue,
negotiation and other diplomatic means are the only
effective way to settle disputes and achieve enduring
peace. In keeping with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter, the Security Council
should strengthen its good offices and mediation role
and make Vigorous efforts to persuade the parties
concerned to defuse tensions, iron out their differences

peacefully and prevent the outbreak or escalation of
conflict.

Secondly, the Council must improve its working
methods and enhance its problem-solving abilities.
United Nations peacekeeping is one of the major
resources at the Council's disposal to address conflicts.
The scale and mission of United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been expanding in recent years, and
mandates and functions have become more diverse. It
is important to sum up experience and improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council must adhere to the
Hammarskj 61d principles of impartiality, consent of the
parties and non-use of force except in self-defence. It
should consult closely with the parties concerned, step
up cooperation with regional organizations, make
overall arrangements for entry and exit strategies,
coordinate military and political efforts and authorize
the deployment of peacekeeping missions at an
appropriate time on the basis of thorough analysis of
all factors. The Security Council may decide to impose
sanctions under the United Nations Charter, but it
should exercise caution in doing so. Sanctions are not
an end in themselves, and, more often than not, the
wilful imposition of sanctions and pressure does not
help improve the situation at all. The only right
approach is to follow an integrated strategy that
accords top priority to diplomacy.

Thirdly, we must strengthen coordination and
remove the root causes of disputes and conflicts.
Disputes and conflicts often go hand in hand with
poverty and backwardness. The Security Council
should enhance coordination with the relevant United
Nations agencies to form synergies and help poor
countries afflicted with conflicts accelerate post-war
reconstruction, realize economic and social
development and improve the livelihood of the people.
This can help remove the breeding ground for conflicts
and prevent conflicts at the source, thus laying the
foundation for enduring peace and security. That
should be the direction of the Council's efforts.

Fourthly, we must highlight priorities and resolve
hot-spot issues in Africa. Most issues on the Security
Council's agenda relate to Africa, and most of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions are deployed in
Africa. To achieve world peace and stability, hot-spot
issues in Africa must be addressed and security and
stability in Africa must be realized. The international
community should be more attentive to the needs of
Africa, accommodate the concerns of African countries
and respect their will and their choices. The Security
Council should strengthen coordination and
cooperation with the African Union, take more active
measures to help settle hot-spot issues in Africa and
work with other United Nations agencies to channel
more assistance to African countries.

The Chinese people love peace, and China is a
responsible member of the international community. As
early as 2,500 years ago, the Chinese thinker
Confucius said, "Peace is the most valuable". As a
nation repeatedly plagued by the scourge of war, we
fully appreciate the value of peace, and also the
wisdom of "Do not do unto others what you would not
have others do unto you". We have followed an
independent foreign policy of peace and committed
ourselves to building friendly and cooperative ties with
all countries of the world.

We stand for the five principles of peaceful
coexistence, advocate a new concept of security based
on mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and
coordination, and endeavour to build a harmonious
world of lasting peace and common prosperity.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has vigorously called for and worked for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and has played a
important and constructive role in a range of major
regional hot-spot issues, including the Korean nuclear
issue, the Iranian nuclear issue, the Middle East and
the Sudan.

China has taken an active part in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China is the largest
contributor of peacekeeping personnel among the
permanent members of the Security Council. We have
sent a total of more than 14,000 peacekeeping
personnel to 25 missions. We have also sent escort
fleets as part of the international effort to combat
piracy off the Somali coast.

China is fully engaged in multilateral arms
control and disarmament affairs in an effort to uphold
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
China has also done a great deal of productive work in
the global effort to fight terrorism. China is firmly
committed to the path of peaceful development. We
pursue a national defence policy that is defensive in
nature. We will never seek hegemony or harbour
expansionist intentions. We will contribute to regional
and international development and peace through our
own development.

We will earnestly fulfil our international
obligations and shoulder our due responsibilities. We
will continue to uphold the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and become more deeply
engaged in the peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts of the Security Council. We will
work with other Member States to enable the Council
to play a greater role in maintaining international peace
and security.

Through our experience over the years, we have
come to realize that, even as peace and security may
seem a distant dream, if we all abide by the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter, keep in
mind our solemn resolve to combine our efforts to
accomplish those aims and strengthen our conviction
and cooperation, we will move ever closer to the
objective of common security and enduring peace for
all humankind.

