Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank China for organizing this
open debate on enhancing African capacities in the
area of peace and security.

Despite much progress, armed conflict and
insecurity continue to undermine progress toward
sustainable development in many parts of Africa. We
have committed to partnering with Africans with a
view to supporting African-led efforts to address peace
and security challenges on the continent and, in this
regard, there is much work to be done.

Canada's new feminist international assistance
policy emphasizes the importance of working with
African Governments to ensure that women are active
participants in shaping political solutions to violent
conflict; promoting the increased and meaningful
participation of women in peace operations;
protecting and promoting the rights of women and
girls; and to preventing and responding to sexual
violence - including sexual exploitation and abuse
perpetrated by peacekeeping personnel. When women
and girls play integral and meaningful roles in society,
States are more peaceful and resilient. We should
support our African partners, who are endeavouring
to advance holistic approaches to address drivers of
conflict, with a particular focus on empowering women
and girls.

(spoke in English)

It is also critical that we do more to strengthen
partnerships between the United Nations system,
individual Member States, and African regional
organizations and their member States. For example,
supporting new or expanded innovative training
initiatives for African countries, which provide
significant numbers oftroops and police to peacekeeping
missions, would serve to enhance the effectiveness of
both African-led and United Nations efforts to promote
peace and security on the continent, as could greater
sharing of analysis and lessons learned. Recognizing
this, as host of the 2017 United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial, which will take place in November
in Vancouver, Canada will be convening countries to
discuss ways to strengthen partnerships to enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peace operations. We
also commend the new Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security to further our coordination efforts.

Finally, we must focus more on enhancing the
financial viability of African Union (AU) peace
operations as a cornerstone of African leadership.
In that regard, Canada calls on all States to support
the efforts of the AU to increase African resource
mobilization to fund the operations and programmes
of the AU Commission, including in the area of peace
and security. For our part, Canada will keep an open
mind and looks forward to dialogue on the modalities
available to ensure successful AU peace operations.

By collaborating on advancing the women and
peace and security agenda, more robust partnerships,
and enhancing the financial viability of AU operations,
we can help our African partners realize their vision of a
more peaceful and prosperous Africa. We look forward
to continue working with our African and international
partners in this endeavour.

