Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir,
for presiding over the Security Council's debate, and we
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan
to the Council. We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General on Somalia (S/2013/326) and for his concise
and action-oriented briefing to the Council.

Pakistan welcomes the continuing transition
towards peace and stability in Somalia. The Secretary-
General's determination that Somalia is on the right
path to achieve stability and progress is reassuring.
The four-year strategic plan adopted by the Parliament
and the Government's six-pillar policy to revitalize
national institutions demonstrate the leadership's
strong commitment to rebuilding Somalia, which was
wracked by decades of strife and civil war.

The efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia
to establish credible State institutions and to reach out
to the various subregions will consolidate democracy
and federalism in the country. We applaud the close
personal engagement of President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud to pursue national reconciliation and hope
that his efforts will pave the way for the finalization of
the Constitution and the holding of national elections in
2016. In the context of that effort, the good offices of
the United Nations will be most helpful.

Despite the obvious progress made, Somalia still
faces daunting challenges. Power-sharing among
federating units, the distribution of revenues and
resources, the establishment of local administrative
institutions, the provision of basic services and the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
require strenuous efforts and adequate resources.

The most serious of all challenges is security
and stability, which is threatened by a defiant and
recalcitrant Al-Shabaab and other militant outfits.
Somalia cannot overcome those problems on its own;
it needs sustainable international support. Such support
was evident at the London Conference last month,
where concrete pledges were made to assist Somalia in
strengthening its armed forces and police, rebuilding
the justice sector and improving public financial
management. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Kingdom in organizing the Conference. We agree
with you, Sir, that Somalia should not be allowed to
backslide under any circumstances.

Rebuilding Somalia is closely linked to security.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
has brought vast areas of the country under the
Government's control. We commend the AMISOM
troop-contributing countries for their resilience in
fighting asymmetric threats posed by terrorists and
extremists.

It is gratifying to note that AMISOM. has made
crucial gains in all sectors ofits operations. To maintain
its high level of success, AMISOM. needs continued
international assistance in the form of predictable
logistical support, and enablers and force multipliers to
undertake its operations.

We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). It is
important that UNSOM. establish a significant presence
in the country and undertake its mandate-related tasks
with the full ownership of the Somali Government. We
congratulate Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Nicholas Kay on his appointment.

UNSOM. should also assist Somalia and the
international community in eradicating the menace of
maritime piracy. We appreciate the proposal made by
the Secretariat to include a multidisciplinary task force
on maritime issues in UNSOM. The recent reduction
in piracy-related incidents off the Somali coast is
encouraging. However, we should not lower our guard.

Pakistan will continue to support Somalia
bilaterally and as a member of the Security Council,
the Organzation of Islamic Cooperation Contact Group
on Somalia and the United Nations Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. As always, our Somali
brothers and sisters will find Pakistan a steadfast
partner.

