Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the Russian Federation for
convening today's open debate, which gives us an
opportunity to reflect on how terrorism accentuates
the precariousness of societies destabilized by conflict.
The Security Council must always be prepared to take
collective, preventive and effective action to safeguard
international peace and security.

The situation in the Middle East and North
Africa is a cause for concern for the international
community - who can doubt that? - because the
activities of armed and terrorist groups are worsening
the cycles of instability and multiple tensions among
communities that need to strengthen a coexistence
based on cohesion, inclusiveness and diversity,
as shared principles and values. Those principles
represent the heritage of humankind. Their application
is essential in the efforts to ensure confidence and
trust in the region, halt the renting of the social fabric
and create an atmosphere of better cooperation, or at
least understanding, among States, religions and ethnic
groups.

The conflicts in the region have been worsened by
terrorism associated with fundamentalism, which has
threatened the very existence of countries when such
groups control territory and establish an Administration
based on terror and intolerance. Recent experience has
shown us that the use of force can reduce the military
capacity of terrorist groups, but it cannot prevent the
diffusion of ideas to generate new recruits and inspire
Violent ambitions in people vulnerable to their message
of extremism. It is therefore imperative to replace their
terrorist ideology by an alliance of shared values that
includes a preventive, multinational focus that would
promote specific actions at the local, national and global
levels to encourage interreligious and intercultural
dialogue.

The voices of those in civil society with an
influence at the community level can play an important
role in that task. That central notion was addressed by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Council members
meeting at the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
meeting held in Madrid in July. The meeting also
took up the issue of foreign terrorist fighters, with a
draft ministerial declaration having been prepared for
adoption by the CTC. This is an issue on which it seems
to us that cooperation is essential.

The Islamic State is a destabilizing factor in the
Syrian and Iraqi conflicts. Their presence and spread
into other countries and regions is alarming. In the
areas that they control, they are deceptively presenting
themselves as a political and social movement that
is filling an order and unity vacuum in communities
polarized by conflict that lack governance and
economic, political and social opportunities.

I would like to recall that, during Chile's presidency
of the Council in January, we identified the linkage
between inclusive development and international
peace and security (see S/PV.7361). We did so because
we believe that the underlying causes of these crises
are related to various forms of exclusion - whether
socioeconomic, gender-based, ethnic, tribal, religious
or ideological - that can have an impact on local and
global levels as well, thereby posing a greater challenge.
It is therefore essential to address these failings
urgently. Whether or not it involves domestic processes,
for which each State has the primary responsibility,
the international community and the Security Council
should be part ofa collective effort. It requires thejoint,
concerted and effective action of the Council and the
entire international community to deal with the gravest
humanitarian problems afflicting millions of people in
the Middle East and North Africa.

Chile will make its contribution to host Syrian
refugees. I would like to highlight that Chile has already
made a contribution by receiving Iraqi refugees. But it
is also necessary for there to be real commitment on
the part of political actors in every affected State so
as to stop the violence, resolve differences through
dialogue and implement the resolutions of the
Council. In that regard, we certainly appreciate the
efforts of the Secretary-General's Envoys and Special
Representatives.

Chile believes that there are factors that encourage
terrorism. It is urgent to resume the peace talks between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of two sovereign States
living alongside one another in peace and security.
Turning away from that path will only bring more
conflict and terror.

We would also like to express our decisive support
in continuing to work with the international community
to eradicate terrorism, which violates fundamental
values. And I want to reassert the importance that all
measures in this fight should always be undertaken
while respecting the rule of law, in conformity with
international law, particularly international human
rights law, the rights of refugees and international
humanitarian law as set out in Human Rights Council
resolution 29/9.

The Security Council has worked tirelessly to
achieve the necessary consensus. It has adopted
resolutions to strengthen the multilateral mechanism
to combat terrorism and the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. That strategy must also be bolstered. The
inescapable challenge remains focusing efforts to
ensure the full and effective implementation of those
resolutions. That responsibility lies with all States
Members of the Organization. We know that it is
complex and not easy, but we are facing a global threat
that is aggravated by the attempt to impose religious
convictions and interpretations. There is no room for
indifference or inaction.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that prevention
is a central element in opening up avenues for greater
understanding and cooperation aimed at discrediting
the notion of terrorism being an alternative to motivate
those who aspire to a more inclusive society with
greater opportunities.

