Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Republic of Korea and its Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Yun Byung-se, for convening this meeting. I also
thank the Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General,
for his statement.

Resolution 1540 (2004) affirms that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. The Islamic Republic
of Iran, as a State party to all major international
treaties banning weapons of mass destruction, strongly
supports that assertion. As the Secretary-General has
rightly put it, "there are no right hands for these wrong
weapons". Therefore, the only absolute guarantee
against the threat or use of such weapons is their total
elimination.

Iran firmly believes that every effort should be
made, in accordance with international law, to rid the
world of the menace of those inhumane weapons and
to ensure that such weapons do not fall into the hands
of terrorists and non-State actors. At the same time, we
believe that our efforts to prevent the potential threat
of weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of terrorists should not distract our attention
from the real threat posed by the continued existence
of thousands of nuclear weapons in the stockpiles of
nuclear-weapon States.

The silence of the resolution on the imperative
of disarmament, as well as its failure to acknowledge
the link between non-proliferation and disarmament,
was one of the major deficiencies referred to by some
States, including mine, at the time of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). Those arguments are still
pertinent and valid. Accordingly, in our view the
international community should exert its maximum
efforts for the fulfilment by States of their legal
obligations and commitments under treaties on
weapons of mass destruction, in particular the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

In that context, utmost attention should be paid to
the universality of such treaties, in particular in such
a volatile region as the Middle East, where the nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction in the hands
of the Israeli regime not only continue to threaten
neighbouring and other States, but have so far thwarted
all efforts towards the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear and all other weapons of mass
destruction.

We strongly share the view that, while the Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, it has no right
to assume the role of prescribing legislative action
by Member States, since this is in conflict with the
political sovereignty of States and the independence
of their legislative powers at the national level. We
also continue to strongly support the view that there
is a clear conflict between the Council's adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the power and functions of
the General Assembly in the progressive development
and codification of international law.

Likewise, we believe that issues related to
preventing terrorist groups from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction should be addressed by the General
Assembly in an inclusive and transparent manner, based
on consensus. We firmly believe that, as recognized
in existing international treaties on weapons of
mass destruction, efforts to prevent access to such
weapons should not hamper, in any way, international
cooperation to promote the use of materials, equipment
and technology for peaceful purposes. This inalienable
right of States cannot and should not be compromised
under any circumstances.

As a State party to major international treaties on
weapons of mass destruction, the Islamic Republic of
Iran is fully committed to the objective of the total
elimination of all such weapons. Iran has enforced
crucial laws and regulations to prevent the access
of terrorist groups to such materials, equipment or
technologies, as stipulated in the resolution. Iran has
submitted reports required by resolution 1540 (2004)
and continues to support relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly.

In response to the unfounded allegations made
against my country by the representative of the
Israeli regime, while I categorically reject all of those
allegations, I would like to bring to the attention of the
Council the fact that, over the past 65 years, the Israeli
regime has waged more than 10 wars in the region. It
has aggressed all of its neighbours without exception
and attacked several other countries of the region. It is
the only country in the region that possesses all types
of weapons of mass destruction. It is the only country of
the region not to be party to any of the treaties banning
weapons of mass destruction. It is the only obstacle to
the establishment ofa zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction in the region. It
is the only country that refused to participate on the
Helsinki conference on the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East mandated by the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and it
is the only country to have attacked peaceful nuclear
installations in two countries in the region, one of those
attacks being condemned by the Security Council.

The Israeli regime is well known to be responsible
for many acts of State terrorism and cannot and is
not eligible to point fingers at others as a tactic for
diverting attention from its extremist and terrorist
policies. Its network of State terrorism has carried out
deadly operations all over the world, amounting to
a long list. To refer to just one very recent example,
innocent Iranian scientists working for the development
of their beloved country were brutally killed before
the terrified eyes of their families by agents of that
regime. They continue to threaten to kill more. The
international community should first and foremost stop
such heinous acts ofterrorism supported and sponsored
by that regime, whose representative now attempts to
hide behind the camouflage of unsubstantiated attacks
against others.

