Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, we have no choice but to
recognize that High Representative Inzko's analysis of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina can hardly be
called objective. His report (S/2011/682, annex) again
reflects considerable prejudice against the Bosnian
Serb leadership. In order to gain a more balanced idea
of the events taking place in Bosnia, we recommend
that members of the Council also read the letter from
the President of the Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodik, to
the Secretary-General on 10 November, and the sixth
report of the Republika Srpska to the Security Council.

The report of the High Representative creates the
impression of destabilization in the internal political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which in fact runs
counter to the agreed provisions of the draft resolution
on the extension of the EUFOR mandate. The primary
threat to the functioning of the Bosnian State -
according to the High Representative, who does not
offer proof - is the Republika Srpska and the actions
of its leadership, which is accused of violating certain
paragraphs of the Dayton Agreement. Such a
characterization of the actions taken by the Bosnian
Serbs is never mentioned in any communique of the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.
Otherwise, it would have stirred a swift response from
the High Representative himself, which did not in fact
happen.

Russia has noted on numerous occasions a lack of
proof regarding alleged violations of the Dayton
Agreement in the activities noted in the report, in
particular in connection with legislative measures on
State property, reform of the justice system and the use
of legal machinery to clarify the mandate of the High
Representative. Accusations about the provocative
rhetoric of the leader of the Republika Srpska do not
take into account his public commitment to the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Furthermore, there have been threats of
the use of force against Republika Srpska by Bosnian
political and State actors. As far as violations of the
Dayton Agreement and actions that threaten the
functioning of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
concerned, such violations are more likely to be found
in the hostile statements of the Bosnian leaders, and
should evoke a response from the international
community.

A typical example of his approach is the mention
in the High Representative's report of the removal of
the flags of Bosnia and Herzegovina in front of the
Government buildings of the Republika Srpska in
Banja Luka. Yet no mention is made of the many cases
of the exclusion of Serbian symbols in State and
cantonal entities of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation, nor of incidents where writing in Cyrillic
was erased from road signs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The intervention of the High Representative in
areas outside his Dayton mandate also raises questions,
in particular in matters of budget and tax collection.
We believe that the use of his extraordinary powers in
January by the High Representative to adopt the budget
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina was unjustified and set
back the search for compromise among the peoples of
the State.

Worthy of note was the episode involving the so-
called crisis in the judicial and constitutional system of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The compromise reached
between the leaders of the Republika Srpska and the
European Union Directorate-General for External
Relations and the resulting beginning of a structured
dialogue under the aegis of the European Union
highlight the unjustified and counter-productive nature
of the use of coercive measures with respect to the
Bosnian parties and underline the effectiveness of
decisions reached through dialogue. In his report,
however, the High Representative was critical,
interpreting the situation from a deliberately negative
point of view as one that was getting worse.

We are surprised at the segment of the report
dealing with Croatia. The accusations levelled at the
main Croatian parties by the High Representative are
absurd, in particular as he contributed to the near-
exclusion of those parties in the formation of the
leading Government bodies of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The patronizing tone of the High
Representative is unacceptable with respect to the
process of forming the new Council of Ministers based
on last year's general elections. At the most recent
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board, held on 6 and 7 July, all international
participants in the settlement recommended that
Mr. Inzko refrain from intervening in that process.

Also of concern is the High Representative's
categorical claim regarding the impossibility of
positively resolving the issue of eliminating the post of
the Brcko District Supervisor. Like many of its partners
on the Steering Board, Russia believes that all
substantive issues in that regard have been solved. The
High Representative's imposition of additional
conditions runs counter to the agreed provisions
detailed in the outcome communiques of the Steering
Board's meetings on 30 March and 7 July.

At the same time, the High Representative makes
no reference to a number of positive processes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The substantive agreement
between Dodik and Lagumdzija on the financing
programme under the instrument for pre-accession
assistance in the framework of the EU allowed for a
break in the stalemate and paved the way for a
disbursement of €96 million. Since October, Bosnians
and Croatians have been working diligently to reach an
agreement on the establishment of Government bodies
in the cantons of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation.

All of those positive elements attest to the ability
of the parties to agree and find a compromise, precisely
without international pressure or intervention. It would
seem that the bureaucracy of the Office of the High
Representative is deliberately drawing attention in the
report to the negative quantitative aspects of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while ignoring
the qualitative progress made by the various Bosnian
parties in finding common ground. In doing so, the
High Representative seeks to validate the continued
existence of his Office.

Along those lines, we continue to believe that an
important task for the international community at the
current stage of the Bosnian settlement is the transfer
of responsibility for the future of the country to
Bosnians themselves. In practical terms, that means
abolishing the Office of the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and implementing the
agreements established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board and the 5+2 formula.

In view of the continuing negotiations of EU
member States on the future of the Office of the High
Representative, we once again to express our serious
concern at the planned gradual closure, including the
idea of transferring the Office outside the borders of
Bosnia.
We note the decoupling of the post of the
European Union Special Representative from the
Office of the High Representative, as well as the
appointment of Mr. Sorensen. We are convinced that a
sine qua non condition for success in the work of those
two international presences in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is strict compliance with their mandate. We believe that
their respective responsibilities should not overlap. We
are convinced that any decision critical to the country's
future should be taken by the Bosnian people
themselves, with broad agreement among the three
constituent peoples - Bosnians, Serbs and Croatians.

We believe that the work of resolving key issues
in the Bosnia and Herzegovina should be based on the
internationally agreed framework consisting of the
Security Council and the Peace Implementation
Council.

