Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I will
now make a statement in my national capacity.

I would first like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Toure, as well
as the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Mauro
Vieira, for their briefings today.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau has improved as
compared to that of five years ago and, in that regard,
the international community has made tireless efforts
to consolidate constitutional order in the country.
However, Guinea-Bissau has been undergoing a
political crisis over the past two years and, although
the situation remains stable in general, the uncertainty
surrounding a possible resolution of the crisis threatens
to undermine the calm in the country.

Let me point out that the political crisis in Guinea-
Bissau is not based on ideological, partisan, religious
or ethnic differences. Rather, it results from, and is
fuelled by, the personal differences of some of its main
political leaders. If we continue along that path, we will
find ourselves only one step away from undermining
all the efforts made to date. That is not because the
international community has left Guinea-Bissau to its
own devices. On the contrary, the United Nations, the
countries of the region and other international partners
have provided Guinea-Bissau with all the necessary
tools to become a success story. But those efforts will
continue to be in vain if its political leaders do not do
their part.

Today we are facing a political crisis with domestic
roots, where the political class seems to ignore the
support initiatives of the international community.
The last and most important effort to resolve this crisis
is the six-point road map and, within it, the Conakry
Agreement. Uruguay urges that the provisions contained
in the Agreement be implemented without further delay
in order to find a solution to a crisis that primarily
harms the civilian population of Guinea-Bissau. We
commend ongoing efforts towards dialogue, which
undoubtedly contribute to resolving the situation and
to encouraging the participation of women in political
decisions. However, we reiterate that tangible results
will not be achieved until leaders take concrete steps to
implement the Conakry Agreement.

The worrying information contained in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/695)
concerning various restrictions on the freedom of
expression is noteworthy. We encourage the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau to ensure that fundamental freedoms
are respected, promoted and protected for all of the
country's inhabitants.

In connection with the sanctions imposed under
resolution 2048 (2012), allow me to offer some
observations in my capacity as the representative of
Uruguay, on the basis of the information I obtained at
first hand during my visit to the country from 13 to
15 June, during which I met with the highest-ranking
Government authorities, politicians and civil society
groups. We believe that the penalties applied to certain
high-ranked military officials in Guinea-Bissau have
been a fitting and useful tool that has played an important
role in the consolidation of the democratic order in the
country, and we welcome the commitment and action of
the international community in that respect.

My interlocutors were almost unanimous in their
view that, to date, the members ofthe military subject to
sanctions have conducted themselves in a praiseworthy
manner and have refrained from interfering in national
politics. The individuals listed on the sanctions list
in accordance with resolution 2048 (2012) are not
responsible for the political impasse that reigns in
Guinea-Bissau today. The sanctions regime as well
as the list of individuals subject to sanctions pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012) have remained the same
since their establishment, although the circumstances
certainly have changed. The Security Council should
initiate a frank, critical and constructive review on
this matter, including the definition of criteria for an
eventual removal of names from the list of individuals
subject to sanctions.

