Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Government of Haiti, allow me to commend
the Secretary-General on the quality of his report
(S/2014/617) on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The report was submitted
pursuant to resolution 2119 (2013) and complements and
expands upon the one issued on 7 March (S/2014/l62).
It focuses on key facts and developments in the past
five months and provides a balanced and objective
picture of the overall situation in Haiti in terms of
stabilization and security, political, economic, social
and humanitarian aspects, and on the recovery.

The rigorous assessment ofMINUSTAH's activities
undertaken by the Secretary-General provides accurate
insights into the many achievements and successes,
but also on the road still ahead towards consolidating
the rule of law and democracy and strengthening
institutions, including the Haitian National Police
(HNP). The report includes a set of quite sage
recommendations that were formulated on the basis of
a clear analysis of the situation on the ground and the
current and future challenges. They should enable the
Security Council to make a realistic decision as to the
possible reconfiguration of the mandate entrusted to
MINUSTAH 10 years ago.
The Haitian Government has considered with the
greatest interest the contents of the report, which is
all the more timely for having been issued on the eve
of crucial parliamentary and municipal elections that
everyone acknowledges constitute a major test not only
for MINUSTAH and Haitian institutions, but especially
for the future of democracy in Haiti.

The Government also took note of the Secretary-
General's recommendation to the Security Council
to renew the mandate of MINUSTAH for a specified
period, along with the reconfiguration made necessary
in the light of the achievements, improvements and
progress, but also the current and future challenges and
developments in the field.

I find it necessary, on behalf of the Government
of Haiti, to provide some information and additional
assessments that I think will be useful as part of this
debate when it comes to the evolution of situation in
Haiti, on the one hand, and the recommendations of the
Secretary- General on the extension and reconfiguration
of the mandate of MINUSTAH, on the other.

First of all, the Government of Haiti is overall
pleased with the general observation of the Secretary-
General, who was able to evaluate for himself, during
his visit on 14 and 15 July, the significant progress
in Haiti over the past 10 years. As he observed, the
situation in terms of security has improved. The
strengthening of key institutions continues. The
performance of the Haitian National Police continues to
improve. The relative stability in the security situation
is illustrated by the sharp downward trend in cases
of abduction. Many of the displaced as a result of the
most devastating earthquake in the country's history
have now left the camps and have been resettled. With
regard to combatting the cholera epidemic, the report
stresses that Haiti is on the path to success, although we
cannot but deplore the high number of deaths - 8,570
cases - as well as the number of those afflicted by the
disease, which should give some idea of the breadth of
the tragedy.

In the legislative realm, the report notes a number
oflaws that have been adopted as well as the ratification
of various international conventions, in particular with
respect to human rights, the rights of the child, women's
rights, the protection of the most vulnerable members
of society and the fight to combat corruption.

The report provides irrefutable evidence of
progress in stabilizing the situation of Haiti since
MINUSTAH's initial deployment, in 2004, We have in
particular acknowledged the report's call to the Haitian
Government to continue strengthening the institutions
tasked with enhancing respect for the rule of law.

We have also noted the Secretary-General's special
concern about possible backsliding in Haiti's political
transition as a result ofthe delay in scheduling elections.
In that regard, I would like to stress that Haiti's Head of
State and its Government remain faithful to their solemn
commitment, reiterated to the Secretary-General on
the occasion of his recent visit to Haiti in July, to hold
legislative, municipal and local elections within this
calendar year. Such elections are fundamental for the
continuity of the country's democratic institutions. In
order to implement the El Rancho Accord, agreed in
March 2014 by the executive and legislative branches
along with political parties - in short, by all the
main actors in Haiti's political life - at the end of the
inter-Haitian dialogue convoked by President Martelly
under the aegis ofthe Chair of the Episcopal Conference
of Haiti, the Government spared no effort to resolve
pending contentious issues, make up for delays and
assuage tensions among the parties, principally between
the legislative branch and the executive, with the goal
of holding unimpeded, honest, democratic, transparent
and inclusive elections.

Today, however, as we must acknowledge, the
electoral process is at a standstill. The Secretary-
General's report says as much, indicating that opposition
parliamentarians consistently opposed any attempt by
the Senate to vote on the amended electoral law by
repeatedly preventing the required quorum from being
reached. The Haitian Government is well aware that
Haiti is at an important juncture in the consolidation
of stability and democracy" as the Secretary-General
quite rightly stresses, and that the holding of inclusive
elections in 2014 is essential for the continuity of the
Parliament in 2015, for the consolidation of democracy
and the rule of law and to promote socioeconomic
development, which is necessary to improve the living
conditions of the population and achieve enduring
stability.

Conscious of the serious stakes involved, President
Michel Joseph Martelly and Primer Minister Laurent
Lamothe fully share those views. For that reason,
they continue to invest all possible effort to establish
consensus. With the strong support ofthe Haitian people,
which eagerly awaits the opportunity to participate in
elections that have been deferred for too long, they
are determined to fulfil their solemn commitment by
assuming their full responsibility with respect to the
electoral process. They call upon the United Nations,
the Security Council and all Haiti's partners to support
their efforts to that end, in order to overcome the
remaining hurdles on the road to the elections, whose
first round, initially expected to be held on 26 October,
must, without question, take place this year.

With regard to stabilization and security, the
Government welcomes the operational support that
MINUSTAH's forces have given the Haitian National
Policeandtheprogressachievedinitsprofessionalization.
On the matter of renewing MINUSTAH's mandate,
the Government of Haiti shared its views and its own
assessment of the situation with the United Nations
assessment mission to Port-au-Prince during the past
summer. It fully shares the Secretary-General's analysis
with respect to the indisputable gains achieved along
the priority tracks of the Stabilization Mission, and
the need to consolidate those gains. In the light of its
own assessment of the risks and threats to the country's
internal and external security, and in full agreement
with the conclusions of the study of the overall stability
of the situation, the Haitian Government agrees with
the recommendation to the Security Council to extend
MINUSTAH's mandate by one year, until 15 October
2015, with the understanding that this extention should
take place within the framework of a progressive
disengagement of the Mission and the gradual transfer
of its responsibilities to the Haitian national authorities.

Along the same line of reasoning, the Haitian
Government supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a two-step drawdown of
MINUSTAH, which would have a reduced presence on
the ground but would maintain an appropriate military
component that would assist Haitian institutions only
when a situation exceeds their capacity to maintain law
and order. We hope in particular that the reconfigured,
renewed mandate will allow the Mission to ensure a
presence that meets Haiti's real needs and current
demands. We are convinced that its presence will
continue to provide valuable support to Haitian
institutions, above all in the context of the upcoming
electoral cycle, which, along with this year's legislative
and municipal process, includes presidential elections
in 2015, as the Secretary-General's report points out.

In that spirit, the Haitian Government will continue
to lend its full support to the Security Council and the
Secretary-General with a view to developing a plan for
consolidating the achievements of the past 10 years and
for articulating a new vision for MINUSTAH's scope

of action beyond 2016. The Government also reiterates
its commitment to ensure that national institutions
assume their full role and responsibilities within the
new configuration to be implemented, which, alongside
national institutions, will require consolidation as the
foundation of democracy, the rule of law, security and
sustainable development in Haiti.

We express our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his report, which will certainly guide the Council's
work. I would also like to reiterate the determination of
the Haitian Government to continue to collaborate with
the Security Council towards fully achieve the mandate
with which MINUSTAH was tasked.

In conclusion, I would also like to reiterate the
gratitude of the Haitian people and their Government
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honore' for her unwavering commitment to the cause
of peace and to dialogue among all sectors of Haitian
society. President Martelly, Prime Minister Lamothe
and the entire Haitian Government are grateful to all the
Member States that, in the best spirit of international
solidarity and international cooperation, continue to
support the Haitian people in its long march towards
the irreversible process of building the rule of law and a
truly democratic society by their generous contribution
in troops and human, financial, technical and material
resources to MINUSTAH over a decade.

On behalf of the Government, I take this opportunity
to commend the staff of MINUSTAH, which is carrying
out a huge, complex and often difficult task, as well as
the staff of the United Nations working both in New
York and in the field in Haiti.

