Mr. Spoerri: I am honoured once again to have
an opportunity to brief the Security Council on a topic
that is at the heart of the mission and mandate of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
central to all aspects of our daily work in armed conflict
zones around the world. On behalf of the ICRC, my
thanks go to the Argentine delegation for the invitation.

Without being unduly pessimistic, it is fairly certain
that, in terms of concrete progress on the ground, good
news will be in short supply at today's debate, as it
was in all the preceding ones in recent years. While
considerable progress continues to be made on the
normative and policy fronts towards the protection
of civilians, including the historic adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty in April, the reality on the ground
continues, sadly, to reflect a dire lack of protection.

In some of the diverse contexts in which the ICRC
works, the situation of large numbers of civilians caught
up in armed conflict is nothing short ofcatastrophic. Not
only are many of today's armed conflicts increasingly
protracted and increasingly complex in both their
causes and consequences, they are also characterized
by an alarming contempt for the rules of international
humanitarian law on the part of belligerents.

The result, simply put, is a spiralling escalation
of human suffering. In some cases, men, women and
children are deliberately targeted - killed or wounded,
raped, forced out of their homes, their property
destroyed - abused in every sense. Many others suffer
ill treatment in detention or go missing. Their plight
and the anguish of their families often continues long
after a conflict ends.

The elusiveness oflasting political solutions to many
of today's armed conflicts has effectively consigned
millions of people to chronic suffering and hardship,
with humanitarian actors left to try to alleviate the
worst of it, despite sometimes formidable constraints.
However, neither the complexity and intractability
of many of today's armed conflicts nor the burden of
the global economic crisis can be an excuse for States
to ignore their primary responsibility to the people
affected by the conflicts.

The most critical challenge to the protection of
civilians, among the five core challenges first set out by
the Secretary-General in his 2009 report (8/2009/277)
on the issue, is the need to improve respect for
international humanitarian law by States and non-State
armed groups, in international and non-international
armed conflicts, regardless of their causes. That also
entails strengthening accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law, both by parties
to conflict and by individual perpetrators, whether
at the national level, including judicial action based
on universal jurisdiction, or through international
tribunals.

Working to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, and thereby endeavouring to help
protect civilians, is a fundamental tenet of the ICRC
mandate and work, and it is reflected in our impartial,
neutral and independent approach. On the ground,
that entails continuous engagement with all parties
to a conflict, including non-State armed groups, and
building pragmatic relationships with the relevant
political forces at both the local and the national levels
in a confidential manner, thus building trust. It means
remaining close to the beneficiaries and responding to
actual needs in a particular context, negotiating access
step-by-step and scaling up operations when necessary.
That helps to facilitate the broadest possible acceptance
and respect, and thereby the broadest possible
humanitarian access to civilians in need. It also helps
to ensure the safety of our staff.

Yet the risks in pursuing such an approach are ever
present, both for the ICRC and for Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies with whom we work closely in many
challenging and volatile contexts. Indeed, it is primarily
a lack of respect for international humanitarian law by
the parties to a conflict that impedes humanitarian
access and endangers humanitarian personnel.

As we mark World Humanitarian Day today, we
acknowledge humanitarian workers everywhere and
pay special tribute to those who have lost their lives
in the line of work. For both the United Nations and
the ICRC, the attacks 10 years ago against our staff
and facilities in Baghdad will bring back particularly
painful memories. Tragically, attacks against
humanitarian personnel have continued unabated in
numerous countries around the world.

If anything, those terrible events have further
strengthened the ICRC's resolve to achieve broad-
based acceptance and understanding of its impartial,
neutral and independent humanitarian approach, and
to continue to build its security strategy based on
that acceptance. Today, as 10 years ago, finding the
right balance between the humanitarian impact of our
programmes and the risks faced by our staff - fully
mindful of the impact that halting operations has on
vulnerable people - is an ever-present challenge in
the ICRC's daily work. We will continue to rise to
those challenges and persistently negotiate our way
through to those most in need, all the while pressing the
parties to conflicts, both States and non-State armed
groups, to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

I would like to briefly mention one specific issue of
particular concern to the ICRC, one that I have reiterated
at successive briefings to the Security Council, namely,
the issue of violence against health care. I am talking
about direct attacks on hospitals, ambulances and
health-care personnel; about blocking ambulances from
accessing wounded people, or holding them up for hours
at checkpoints; the harassment of health-care workers,
who sometimes see their colleagues killed or arrested
for having treated opposition fighters or civilians and
fear for their own lives; and about the diversion of
medical supplies.

In order to have a better overview of the magnitude
of the Violence affecting healthcare, the ICRC has
collected non-exhaustive data in 23 countries. Between
January 2012 and May 2013, the ICRC noted more than
1,200 incidents affecting the delivery of, and access to,
health care, including the killing of 112 medical staff,
and approximately 250 incidents involving attacks
on, or denial of access to, ambulances that were often
delivering life-saving support. In summary, a blatant
disrespect for the special status of health facilities,
transport and personnel is still all too common.

Working to address the most serious yet
underreported humanitarian problem remains one of the
ICRC's priorities. Some progress has indeed been made
in terms of mobilizing concerned stakeholders and
raising awareness and understanding of the issue. Yet
a prevailing disrespect still exists among belligerents
for the inviolability of health facilities, transport and
personnel, which is ultimately making safe access to
health care impossible for untold numbers of people in
need. The ICRC therefore once again urges members
of the Council to initiate or actively support efforts to
address this urgent humanitarian concern, and to press
others to do the same.

Respect for the laws of war not only provides
protection for civilians during armed conflict but also
helps facilitate post-conflict recovery. Conversely,
attacks on civilians and key civilian infrastructure,
such as health and educational facilities, can have
harmful repercussions long after a conflict ends.

On a more positive note, I would like to return
to another point I raised during the most recent
protection-of-civilians debate in February (see S/PV.6917). The ICRC has consistently highlighted the
unacceptable human cost of the widespread availability
of conventional arms, and called for the adoption of a
strong Arms Trade Treaty. We were therefore pleased to
see that happen in April.

We now urge States to swiftly ratify and implement
the Treaty, to translate normative progress into tangible
results on the ground. The historic achievement of
the Arms Trade Treaty lies in its establishment of a
global norm prohibiting the transfer of weapons where
they would be used to commit or to facilitate serious
Violations of international humanitarian law, among
other grave crimes. Provided that norm is implemented
in a consistent, objective and non-discriminatory
manner, it will go a long way towards achieving the
Treaty's explicit humanitarian purpose of reducing
human suffering and saving civilian lives. In practice,
that entails carrying out a rigorous risk assessment
prior to authorizing arms transfers, and refraining from
transferring weapons to parties to armed conflicts that
have a track-record of serious Violations of international
humanitarian law. A look at a number of current armed
conflicts, however, reveals an evident gap between the
transfer requirements expressed in the Arms Trade
Treaty and the transfer practice of some States.

Achieving the effective protection of civilians
through improved compliance with international
humanitarian law requires a concerted effort by a
range of stakeholders, the ICRC being just one of them.
As I mentioned in February, the joint Swiss-ICRC
initiative to strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law - which emerged from the thirty-
first International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent - continues to gain momentum. Most
recently, in June, more than 70 States participated
in constructive discussions held at a meeting held in
Geneva to affirm strong general support for a regular
dialogue among States on international humanitarian
law and to look at possible functions of a compliance
system. As requested, Switzerland and the ICRC will
formulate concrete proposals and options, in particular
on the form and content of a periodic reporting system
on national compliance; the form, content and possible
outcome of thematic discussions on issues pertaining to
international humanitarian law; the modalities of fact-
finding, including possible ways to make use of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission;
and on the features and tasks of a meeting of States.

However, the main onus remains on States, and I
end with the ICRC's plea for them to show the requisite
political will to turn legal provisions into a meaningful
reality and to show good faith in protecting the victims
of armed conflicts - conflicts that, in View of some
of the challenges I have mentioned today, are likely to
become ever-more complex and intractable in the years
to come.

