Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the fraternal
country of Italy on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
important open debate.

We endorse the statement made by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We wish to thank Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-
General; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
and Ambassador Sma'il Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, for their
presentations this morning.

In resolution 2331 (2016), the Security Council
unanimously condemns all instances of human
trafficking in areas affected by armed conflict, since
such trafficking is a human rights violation and a
criminal activity that helps the financing of and
recruitment for terrorist groups. In that connection,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2388 (2017)
this morning.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2017/939) highlights the frightening statistics with
regard to the proliferation in human trafficking. It also
notes the link between armed conflict and trafficking
in persons and describes conflicts throughout the world
and their serious repercussions. In that connection, we
note that forced migration results from those conflicts,
which have compelled millions of people to leave their
countries in pursuit of a life of dignity elsewhere. We
are horrified by the thousands of victims who have lost
their lives as a result.

We reaffirm that, as the Secretary-General said,
there is no place for slavery in today's world. It is one
of the most serious human rights violations and may
constitute a crime against humanity. In that regard,
we wish to recall the importance of dealing with the
migratory flows and to do so in a comprehensive
and humane way, and of strengthening development
cooperation so that we can understand the underlying
causes of that trafficking.

Recent reports establish the link between armed
conflict and trafficking in persons. They include
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
trafficking in persons in armed conflict pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2331 (2016), the December
2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons from
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the reports of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children (see A/HRC/32/41 and A/71/303). They all highlight the fact
that human trafficking in areas affected by humanitarian
crises and by armed conflict takes different forms,
including exploitation, sexual abuse, slavery and similar
practices. Slavery is also used as a tactic of terror,
including by groups such as Da'esh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab. Women and girls continue to be victims of
such trafficking, forced into marriage and offered as a
reward to terrorist fighters. Those are serious human
rights violations and a source of financing for terrorist
groups and transnational crime networks.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
an essential tool in the fight against the proliferation
of the scourge of human trafficking and in tackling the
root causes that subject people to such trafficking. The
fight against human trafficking and the achievement
of sustainable development go hand in hand, and it
is very encouraging that 3 of the 169 targets of the
2030 Agenda focus on combating the various forms of
human trafficking.

The State of Kuwait believes that it is important

to analyse the root causes of the increased human
trafficking, in particular in cases of armed conflict. We
reaffirm our commitment to safeguarding human rights
and to continuing our efforts to combat trafficking in
persons. To that end, we adopted Law No. 91 of2013 ,on
Trafficking in Persons and Smuggling of Migrants. We
have also acceded to various international agreements
on combating trafficking in persons.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Council therefore has the accompanying
responsibility to combat human trafficking in
situations of armed conflict. We must all strengthen
the international legal framework of the Council in that
regard. Clearly, we must focus not only on combating
human trafficking and the link with armed conflict but
also on strengthening international cooperation in order
to make full use of the existing mechanisms, including
by strengthening effective cooperation among the
various United Nations agencies.

In conclusion, I wish to pay particular tribute to the
role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Labour Organization
and the International Organization for Migration and
to the tireless efforts of all United Nations specialized
agencies that have played a leading role in combating
all forms of human trafficking. Kuwait reiterates its
commitment to continuing its efforts and to supporting
international efforts to combat this crime by adopting
laws to deter it and by strengthening the international
framework in order to put an end once and for all to the
crime of trafficking in persons.

