Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
thanks Mr. Pascoe for his briefing to the Council. We
would like to associate ourselves with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We also thank
the Permanent Observer of Palestine for his
comprehensive statement.

The Middle East peace process, including the
question of Palestine, has been on the agenda of the
Council for more than 60 years without resolution.
Perhaps we need to collectively ask ourselves the
question: Is there anything we could or should do
differently that may lead to the desired outcome?

We pose that question in the light of the fact that
we have repeatedly articulated the problems, but we do
not seem to move forward in terms of addressing them.
As we continuously congregate in this manner to
discuss the matter every month, without making any
concrete progress, the people of Palestine and Israel
are no nearer to living in peace as neighbours than they
were 60 years ago.

My delegation is of the view that the Security
Council should recommit to the following key
principles. The Security Council has the Charter-given
mandate to address all matters of international peace
and security, without exception; and, in view of that
responsibility, the Council cannot delegate or outsource
its responsibility to address the situation in the Middle
East, in particular the Palestinian question.

A few months ago, we were hopeful that the
direct talks on final status issues between the leaders of
Israel and Palestine would yield positive results.
However, that move was once again frustrated by
Israel's intransigence with regard to the halting of
settlement construction in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem. The continuous building of
settlements, the freezing of which is a condition for the

Palestinians to go back to the negotiating table, seems
to be a major setback to the peace talks. As
documented in many international legal texts,
including article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which prohibits the occupying Power from transferring
its own civilian population to the territory that it
occupies, the building of those settlements is illegal. In
that regard, we call on Israel to act in good faith and
reimpose a moratorium on settlement construction as a
show of goodwill and confidence in the negotiations.

It is more than 16 years since the signing of the
Oslo Accords, which represent the beginning of formal
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Instead of resolving the matter, or at least improving
the situation, it has become worse. More Palestinians
have been displaced; there has been more curtailment
of movement and access; and many more illegal
settlements have been built.

However, the continued settlement building
ominously changes the geographical make-up of
Palestine and has the potential to render impossible the
capacity to bring about a two-State solution, in line
with the overwhelming call for the creation of a
sovereign, independent, democratic, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully
alongside the State of Israel on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The creation
of a viable Palestinian State with the rights and
responsibilities inherent to statehood, within a peaceful
environment, is in the interest of Israel, as its security
can be achieved only through peace.

South Africa calls on both parties to return to the
negotiating table, as they know best the critical issues
that continue to divide them. Among other issues, those
relate to borders, settlements, water, Jerusalem,
security and refugees. The international community can
assist the parties only once they themselves resolve to
commit and show the political willingness to find a
lasting solution. Certainly, an imposed solution will not
work.

The blockade of Gaza continues to frustrate the
lives of the inhabitants of that territory and has
contributed directly to the increase in unemployment
and poverty, thus impacting negatively on people's
livelihoods. The blockade has also resulted in delays in
the provision of humanitarian assistance, as the entry
of humanitarian agencies, such as the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the

Near East (UNRWA) and the United Nations
Development Programme, into Gaza has been limited.
We therefore call on Israel to end the blockade of
Gaza, which is illegal in terms of international
humanitarian law, including article 23 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and myriad Security Council
resolutions.

Despite the many challenges facing UNRWA and
other United Nations agencies in Palestine, the
Organization continues to play a vital role in the
enhancement of the livelihoods of the Palestinian
refugees and people. South Africa continues to support
the Agency and its activities, including for this year. In
addition, in partnership with the India-Brazil-South
Africa trilateral mechanism, South Africa continues to
support Palestine, including by providing support for
projects in Gaza.

South Africa also condemns the continued
shelling of Gaza by Israeli forces and concomitantly
calls on the people of Gaza to refrain from the
indiscriminate firing of rockets into Israel. Recently,
the Secretary-General acknowledged that

"the situation in the Middle East is tense and is
likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of
the Middle East problem can be reached"
(S/2010/607, para. 13).

In light of this observation, we call on the Council and
other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the
holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

In conclusion, my delegation takes note of the
recent recognition of the State of Palestine by more
Members of the United Nations. We cannot avoid the
reality of an independent State of Palestine. Our
responsibility remains to ensure that it is viable,
contiguous, sustainable and in a position to exist
peacefully with its neighbour, the State of Israel.

