Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Republic of
Angola very much welcomes and is satisfied with the
adoption of resolution 2310 (2016) this morning.

Having signed the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-
Ban Treaty right after the conclusion of the Treaty
negotiations, Angola ratified it only in 2015 due to the
military conflict with apartheid South Africa, that, as
is known, disposed of a nuclear arsenal. After the end
of apartheid, South Africa took the wise decision to
give up its nuclear arsenal. By doing so, it contributed
decisively in materializing the African position
enshrined in the Treaty of Pelindaba, which made
Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone.

The adoption of today's resolution takes place
just a few days after the Security Council considered
the question of nuclear proliferation on the Korean
Peninsula. By adopting resolution 2310 (2016), the
Council is taking a comprehensive stand on the issue of
nuclear tests. We would like to make three comments
on the issue.

First, resolution 2310 (2016) makes real sense
if it represents an effective contribution to the
universalization of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty through its ratification by all Members of the
United Nations and the entire international community.

Secondly, the resolution makes full sense in the
case the Treaty constitutes an effective measure of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, thereby
contributing to the attainment of a nuclear-weapon-free
world. More than instruments of war, nuclear weapons
are instruments of annihilation, since their objective
is basically the destruction of human lives and of the
means of human existence, without a real military
purpose.

Yesterday in the General Assembly debate (see A/7l/PV.15) we heard very poignant testimony by the
President of the Marshall Islands about the tragic human
and environmental consequences for the South Pacific
region caused by the nuclear tests that took place in the
region some decades ago.

Thirdly, Angola voted in favour of this resolution as
a singn of its clear stance against nuclear proliferation.
We would welcome the further adoption by the Security
Council of clear measures, without double standards, to
condemn nuclear testsa in the different regions where
we still see the question of proliferation prevailing. We
believe that, with double standards and without our
clear stance, we would be weakening the resolution we
have just adopted this morning.

