Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, and Poland for organizing
today's open debate on the issue of children and armed
conflict. I also express my sincere gratitude to all the
speakers for their valuable contributions.

This year we are celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949,
which have been universally ratified. In that regard,
Switzerland calls on all Member States that have not
yet done so to ratify the Protocols Additional to the
Geneva Conventions. Those treaties are essential to the
protection of civilians, including children, in armed
conflict. I would like to highlight four points.

First, in order to ensure the effective protection
of children in armed conflict, the credibility of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established
in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005) must
be guaranteed in all circumstances. Switzerland
therefore requests the Secretary-General to provide a
comprehensive, impartial and accurate list of parties
committing grave violations of children's rights,
supported by reliable evidence. An evidence-based
approach is critical.

Furthermore, it is of major importance that all
perpetrators of serious violations be listed in sections
A or B of the annex to the reports of the Secretary-
General according to clear and transparent criteria. It is
also necessary that no party concerned be prematurely
delisted as long as it continues to commit grave
violations against children's rights. In accordance with
the 2010 annual report of the Secretary-General on
armed conflict and children (S/2010/181), the timely
implementation of an action plan must be the formal
and sole path leading to delisting.

Secondly, in order to implement action plans in a
timely manner and thereby have a genuine impact on the
ground, Switzerland calls on the Secretary-General and
Member States to allocate sufficient human, financial
and technical resources for the protection of children in
armed conflict. It is particularly critical to ensure the
adequate allocation of resources and their effective use
with regard to action plans involving armed non-State
actors. Switzerland supports the deployment and work
of child protection specialists, for example, in Syria,
whose role is essential to achieving the goals of the
action plans.

Thirdly, the Security Council must be more
consistent in its consideration of the children and armed
conflict agenda with regard to all thematic issues and
country situations. We welcome the positive role played
to that end by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as illustrated by the recent adoption of
the conclusions on Syria and Myanmar, as well as the
work under way on Yemen.

Fourthly, Switzerland calls on Member States to
take concrete measures to stop attacks on schools and
deter armed forces and non-State armed groups from
using schools as shields. My country calls on Member
States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.

In conclusion, Switzerland reiterates its full support
for the mandate and work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office.

