Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation would like
to congratulate the Polish presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a very
timely and pertinent subject considering the current
circumstances of growing security challenges around
the world. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his statement and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
In 2016, the Security Council adopted resolution
2286 (2016). It constituted a milestone in setting a
course of action for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. It calls on States and non-State parties
to conflict to respect international law, facilitate safe
access for medical and humanitarian personnel engaged
in medical duties, prevent and address acts of violence
and attacks on medical and humanitarian personnel and
integrate practical measures to protect the wounded
and the sick.

While we recognize that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, the fact is that
countries in armed conflict often lack the capacity and
institutions they need to implement their obligations.
The primary responsibility for taking action against
the perpetrators of atrocities must rest with the State
concerned. For that, it is essential that States strengthen
their law-enforcement institutions, establish the rule
of law and promote a safer environment for their
citizens. The international community should support
the capacity-building efforts of such countries. At
the same time, we must also address violations by
non-State parties, which often operate outside the
effective control of the Government and deliberately
harm civilians in order to achieve their objectives. The
protection of civilians in conflicts and the provision
of humanitarian assistance should be guided by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, neutrality, objectivity and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. The
politicization of humanitarian issues must be avoided.

Conflicts are the cause of civilian insecurity and
instability, which endanger the social fabric of peaceful
coexistence. For that reason, we should focus on conflict
prevention and resolution, and on building sustainable
peace. In that regard, the peaceful settlement ofdisputes,
negotiation, mediation and dialogue should be applied
as vital tools to prevent and resolve conflicts. We must
remind ourselves of the important nexus between
achieving peace, realizing sustainable development and
eliminating poverty. Conflicts and instability can have
lasting effects on a country's development. Without
peace, there can be no sustainable development or
social justice. There can be no lasting peace without
the rule of law, respect for human rights and inclusive
and sustainable development that leaves no one behind.

The greatest national endeavour of Myanmar today
is forging a lasting peace and bringing to an end the
seven decades of armed conflict that have brought
untold suffering to our people since the country's
independence. Without peace, stability and the rule of
law, we will never be able to realize our ultimate goal
ofbuilding a genuine democratic federal union that can
guarantee security, freedom and progress for its people.
To that end, we have initiated a nationwide ceasefire
agreement with various ethnic armed groups. Of some
20 armed groups, 10 have now signed the agreement,
and we continue to work hard to bring the others
on board.

We have embarked on implementing a political
process to tackle the root causes of the conflicts and
achieve sustainable peace. The 21st Century Panglong
Peace Conference was launched in 2016 as a political
platform that brings together all stakeholders in a
political dialogue for peace and to lay the foundation
for our democratic federal union. Two successful
sessions of the Conference have been held, and the
second of them, in May 2017, reached an agreement on
a 37-point agreement known as the Union Peace Accord
Part One, which will constitute part of the basis for a
future democratic federal constitution. Preparations are
now under way for a third Panglong Conference.

Building and sustaining peace is not an easy task.
It requires political will, courage and determination
and cannot be achieved overnight. It is also essential
to advocate for a culture of peace and national
reconciliation. But peace is the only way to safeguard
humankind from violence, conflict and human suffering.

I would like to conclude by reassuring the Council
that Myanmar will continue its efforts to enhance the
safety of vulnerable people caught up in conflicts. We
would also like to express our sincere appreciation
to all our friends around the world and to the United
Nations for supporting our peace process. We will work
unceasingly to fully realize lasting peace and put an
end to civilian suffering due to conflict and strife.

