Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me
take this opportunity to express our appreciation
for the work of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and that of her Office, and her
commitment to continuing to advance the cause of
international justice. As mentioned by the Prosecutor,
justice, including ending impunity and providing
accountability, continues to play an important role in
addressing the root causes of conflict and is key to
ensuring long-term stability.

Both the report and the briefing by the Prosecutor
highlight that the States Members of the United Nations
must cooperate with the Court and underscore the
importance of the support of the Security Council and
other stakeholders for the mandate of the Office of
the Prosecutor. We note the Office's observation that
reported violence against civilians in Darfur appears
to have decreased slightly, as compared to the previous
reporting period, but we remain concerned about the
accounts of clashes, attacks on villages and aerial
bombardment in the Jebel Marra area, as well as the
consequences of such actions, including casualties
among civilians, their further displacement and the
destruction of their homes.

Notwithstanding the decrease in the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur, the
problem still exists and requires our close attention and
an appropriate solution. In that regard, and in the context
of the authorities' decision to close all IDP camps by
the end of the year, we note that resolution 2363 (2017)
stresses that any return should be safe, voluntary and in
accordance with applicable international law. In other
words, due to the limited level of access to health care,
schools and work in the areas of concern, any forced
return should be prevented.

The volatile human rights situation in Darfur is
also cause for great concern. Sexual and gender-based
violence must be closely monitored and prevented.
Persons in vulnerable situations in particular, including
women and girls, must be protected. Furthermore,
despite the release of some detainees, reported arbitrary
arrests and detentions require scrutiny and review.

The discussed withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
must be compensated by an increased presence of the
United Nations country team and closer cooperation
among relevant stakeholders. Increased efforts by the
authorities to provide security, promote intercommunal
reconciliation and deal with the root causes of the
conflict are crucial. The adoption and implementation
of an agreement on the cessation of hostilities by the
Government and armed movements, as well as the full
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, are equally important. We cannot forget the
importance of the international community's support
for the peace process and the development of the region.

Poland supports the ICC and the Office of
Prosecutor Bensouda in ensuring accountability
and achieving justice for the victims. We endorse
the Office's request that the Council take effective
measures to enable the Court to carry out its mandate in
Darfur. As identified in the report, such measures may
include adopting a persuasive course of action against
States that were referred to the Council by the Court
in its non-compliance decisions and related referrals,
facilitating financial assistance from the United Nations
and effectively encouraging all States to cooperate with
the Office's investigations.

