Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States): The
United States welcomes new Special Representative
Rucker to the Council. We are pleased that Mr. Rucker
has been appointed by the Secretary-General to lead
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) at this critical time. Mr. Rucker has
done an admirable job as the Head of UNMIK's Pillar
IV, particularly in advancing the privatization of
Kosovo's former State-owned enterprises. We look
forward to supporting his efforts to help UNMIK build
meaningful self-government in Kosovo, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We also
look forward to working closely with UNMIK and
Kosovo's Provisional Government in furthering
progress on standards implementation. While the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/707) notes
progress in that area, more must be done to make
Kosovo a place where all communities can live freely
and safely.

While we applaud Prime Minister Ceku for his
Government's completion of several of the Contact
Group's priority standards, ongoing efforts to complete
the remaining items must be intensified, with particular
attention paid to passing internationally accepted laws
on languages and cultural heritage and implementing
the comprehensive rental programme for housing
currently administered by the Kosovo Property Agency.

We strongly condemn the 26 August incident in
northern Mitrovica that resulted in injuries to several
civilians. We call upon all sides to reject any form of
violence, and we note the importance of bringing to
justice the individual or individuals responsible for that
crime and other violent incidents in Kosovo.

We also note with concern recent political
developments in northern Kosovo and call upon all
parties to act with restraint and in coordination with
UNMIK and President Ahtisaari in seeking solutions to
the longstanding tensions in the region. Belgrade must
also do its part to help improve the situation in
Kosovo. In particular, the Government in Serbia should
take immediate steps that would support Kosovo Serb
participation in local institutions, return cadastral
records taken from Kosovo and rescind its directive
instructing many Kosovo Serbs not to accept salaries
from Kosovo's Government.

United Nations Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari
continues to enjoy our full support, and we look
forward to future Security Council consultations with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. It is
incumbent upon both Pristina and Belgrade to enhance
their cooperation with President Ahtisaari. After eight
months of negotiations on technical issues, both sides
must now make difficult compromises on
decentralization, protection of religious and cultural
heritage and community rights.

As noted by the Contact Group in January, all
possible efforts should be made to achieve a negotiated
settlement in the course of the year 2006. Delay on
resolving Kosovo's status benefits neither side and
creates further instability. Both sides must be realistic
about the outcome of the status process. Kosovo must
remain multi-ethnic, and the settlement must be
acceptable to the people of Kosovo. Additionally, there
will be no return of Kosovo to the pre-l999 situation,
no partition of Kosovo and no union of Kosovo with
any other, or part of another, country.

