Mr. Yabou (Gambia): Transitional justice is a long- standing concept, the success of which is evidenced by the fact that countries in conflict and post-conflict situations across Central and Eastern Europe, Africa and Latin America have all adopted the outcomes of its processes to usher in sustainable peace. We in the Gambia are grateful to you, Madam President, for organizing this open debate, which avails us of an opportunity for countries like mine to contribute by sharing our ongoing experience with this body. I also join others in thanking all of our briefers today. The Gambia has come a long way - from the clutches of a brutal dictatorship through the dark days of political impasse to our restored vibrant democracy of today. Our story is one that should be shared thanks to the progress we have managed to achieve and continue to nurture with the support of the international community. While attempting to limit my intervention to the concept note (S/2020/98, annex) and the questions formulated to guide the debate, allow me to share with the Council the following key elements that guided and informed our own transitional justice as we endeavoured to consolidate and sustain the peace that our electorates yearned to preserve following the political impasse we endured in December 2016. First, to establish a transitional justice process, the Government thought it necessary to first embark on a countrywide consultation with a view to gaining the buy-in or consent of the population to support an inclusive, nationally led and nationally owned processwith the active inclusion and participation of women and young people. Secondly, after that countrywide consultative process, the Government deemed it wise to set up a truth, reconciliation, and reparations commission that represented the views of the majority concerning truth-seeking, reconciling communities and paying reparations to victims by providing psychological support and care, including medical and health care. Thirdly, a successful transitional justice process must take into account the need to establish the rule of law by giving due consideration to concerns raised by the population and civil society groups, including the media. A fully participatory and inclusive constitutional review commission was therefore set up to review the current Constitution of the Gambia. The commission did not limit its engagement to within the country, but also reached out to the diaspora as part of its ongoing consultations with all stakeholders. Fourthly, in order to further strengthen the gains made in human rights protection, the Gambia has, for the first time, established a national human rights commission that is now functional. Moreover, the Government is now meeting its reporting obligations under the various human rights instruments and treaties. Fifthly, the population must be reassured of the future by unveiling a truly inclusive development plan that is capable of predicting a development trajectory ambitious enough to restore hope. Sixthly, and finally, is the issue of security sector reform. Although a lot of work still needs to be done in that endeavour, the Government of the Gambia has established the Office of the National Security Adviser to lead efforts towards the successful implementation of security sector reform policy and strategy. None of the six key elements I mentioned are achievable without the timely intervention of the international community. On the part of the Gambia, our success and achievements are all thanks to the early and timely support of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as well as critical funding from the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and other partners. The Gambia's political transition benefited immensely from a healthy dose of optimism and catalytic transformation. With the launch of various reform programmes and transitional arrangements and thanks to the support of the PBF and other donors, we are now witnessing good governance that is built on the rule of law and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms Political stability and participatory democracy have become the order of the day. Freedom of press is once again being consolidated with the proliferation of more print media, private television stations and new media houses. Civil society is now operating with freedom, vibrancy and without fear of Government clampdown or interference. Many of our young people who undertook perilous journeys across the Sahara and the Mediterranean are now returning home. They need employment and social reintegration, for which the Government continues to seek the support of our partners. Finally, the dividends of democracy, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the new Gambia must be sustained. All the positive developments we have witnessed would not have been possible without the real-time support of the PBF and other partners. The role of the PBC as a player in global peace and security has transcended and must transcend beyond its advisory role to the Security Council in the areas of conflict prevention, development, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
