Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to begin by thanking the delegation of Chile for
its initiative of convening this open debate. I welcome
your presence here, Madame, to preside personally
over this important meeting.

I wish to thank Mr. Kalomoh, Mr. Malloch Brown
and Ms. McAskie for their statements.

National reconciliation is an important condition
for lasting peace and stability in post-conflict regions.
When conflicts end, if the parties concerned do not put
aside their old grievances, a genuine consolidation will
hardly be possible and the flames of conflict are likely
to be rekindled. In many instances, post-conflict
national reconciliation requires joint efforts on the part
of all the parties concerned, as well as support and
assistance from the international community, in
particular the United Nations.

Over the years, the United Nations has played a
useful role in post-conflict national reconciliation
processes, thereby acquiring a great deal of experience.
We believe that if it is to be successful in helping to
facilitate post-conflict national reconciliation, the
United Nations should effectively address three
specific relationships. The first of these is the
relationship between immediate needs and long-term
goals. Generally speaking, national reconciliation is a
process that cannot be completed overnight. Each
phase of the process should have its own focus. The
first priority, at the outset of the post-conflict national
reconciliation period, is that former combatants lay
down their arms so as to create a secure environment.
In this phase, the focus should be the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
into society. The advantage that the United Nations has
in this field must be brought fully into play.

From a long-term perspective, durable national
reconciliation must be based on the creation of
adequate economic conditions. After the situation has
stabilized, the United Nations should actively mobilize
the international community to effectively help the
countries concerned to achieve economic
reconstruction and development.

Secondly, as regards the relationship between
justice and stability, national reconciliation requires
that the perpetrators of acts that violate international
humanitarian and human rights law be punished in
order that justice be upheld. At the same time, efforts
must be made to avoid a negative impact on the peace
process and to forestall the development of new
conflict in society. In certain circumstances, therefore,
amnesty is indispensable to national reconciliation. In
the words of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, if
we always and everywhere insist on uncompromising
standards of peace, a delicate peace may not survive.

Over the past 10 years or so, some post-conflict
countries have taken a variety of measures to ensure
justice for victims. Such measures include the
establishment of truth and reconciliation commissions
and special courts, the holding of national dialogues
and the improvement of the justice system, for all of
which the United Nations has provided assistance.
Relevant United Nations agencies need to take stock of
their experience in this regard so as to ensure that
United Nations actions have a positive impact on
national reconciliation, as well as on the peace process.

Thirdly, with regard to the relationship between
international support and ownership by the parties
concerned, post-conflict national reconciliation is not
possible without the support and assistance of the
international community and the United Nations. At the
same time, national reconciliation within a country will
depend, in the final analysis, on the efforts of all the
parties concerned in the country. The support and
assistance of the international community must
therefore be based on an understanding of and respect
for local conditions, traditions, history and culture, and
its focus must be on their local interests and needs.
Nothing should be imposed upon them.

China supports an active role by the United
Nations in helping the countries concerned to achieve
post-conflict national reconciliation. In view of the fact
that various phases of the national reconciliation
process often involve a number of different United
Nations departments, we hope that the United Nations
will enhance its internal synergy and take stock, on an
ongoing basis, of its experiences and of lessons learned
so that its role in the process can be further improved.

