Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Unfortunately, we must state that the flames of
war continue to blaze throughout Africa. In the past year
their number has even increased. We are concerned that
internal political crises are having a destabilizing effect on
the situation in entire regions.

In recent months the United Nations, the Security
Council and the Secretary-General have done a considerable
amount of work to identify the causes of conflicts in the
African continent. It is clear that the way to settle them
lies first of all in overcoming chronic political, ethnic and
socio-economic problems.

Clearly, there exist no quick and radical remedies
that could resolve problems of such magnitude. It will
take comprehensive and painstaking joint efforts on the
part of Africa's friends and the Africans themselves in
order to break the famous vicious circle:
underdevelopment, social problems, political and military
instability, conflicts and failed development programmes.

It is encouraging that we have come to this meeting
with certain positive results behind us. The documents
specifying the tasks that stem from the recommendations
presented in the Secretary-General's April report on the
causes of conflicts and promotion of peace and
development in Africa have been prepared and agreed
upon. We support the proposals that the Council resume
its informal discussion of the progress made in the
implementation of decisions taken today in December,
following the submission of the Secretary-General' s report
on that issue.

But I cannot fail to take note of the significant
increase in activity by the Africans themselves. The
activities of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the subregional organizations for conflict prevention and
resolution demonstrate Africans' readiness and
determination to assume greater responsibility for solving
their problems.

There is no doubt that without secure and lasting
resolution of local conflicts there is no guarantee that
African countries will truly embark on the road to
sustainable and dynamic development and their complete
integration into the world economy. The establishment of
an effective pan-African system geared to both conflict
prevention and resolution and the comprehensive
implementation of post-conflict rehabilitation objectives
should be a key element of the strategy for reinforcing
peace. We also consider it important to encourage in
every possible way the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution to function at
full capacity.

We think that the Africans' efforts should be
supported by the authority and capacities of the United
Nations. The issue is not to be regarded as a substitution
for the efforts of the Africans themselves, but rather as
mutually reinforcing cooperation and assistance on the
part of the United Nations and other organizations and

 

countries in establishing pan-African peace-building
mechanisms.

In addition, we consider it important to actively use
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations that
encourage regional organizations to show greater initiative
in the field of preventive diplomacy and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. This presupposes the expansion of
the practice of regional peace-building operations backed by
the Security Council.
At the same time, of course, Charter-stipulated
principles regarding the role of the Security Council in
launching peacekeeping operations should be complied
with. Military operations conducted by regional structures,
especially those involving the use of force, are permissible
only if they are explicitly authorized by the Security
Council. This incontestable rule applies also to the actions
of coalition forces formed on an ad hoc basis.

Russia intends to render every possible assistance to
resolving the problems of the African continent, working in
tandem with those countries with which we have
traditionally maintained friendly, partnership relations.
Africa has been and continues to be an area of priority
concern for us.

Along with the activities carried out within the
framework of the United Nations, we are considering
various options regarding how to broaden our practical
involvement in strengthening the Africans' peace-building
potential - first of all in such areas as transport and
technical support of humanitarian relief projects and
training rescue team members and personnel for
peacekeeping operations. Mindful of the concern many
African countries have with regard to the problem of mines,
we are ready to provide our expert services in demining, in
particular in Angola, Mozambique and Egypt. We have
submitted our proposals on these and a number of other
issues to the United Nations Secretariat. We will provide
data for the United Nations database now under
development regarding on our capabilities to train
peacekeepers. We are open to proposals on other possible
joint projects that could make use of Russia's capabilities.

