Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to join others in thanking Mr. Guehenno for his
very useful update and also to pay tribute to Hans
Haekkerup and to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
considerable success that they have achieved under his
leadership. We are very glad to hear the news about the
appointment of Mr. Steiner to succeed Mr. Haekkerup.
He will have the full support of my Government.

We are, I think, at a critical juncture in the
development of Kosovo's self-governing institutions,
and this is a key milestone in the road map set out in
resolution 1244 (1999). We had very successful and
peaceful elections, fostered by UNMIK and others in
the international community, that involved all people in
Kosovo. That was a significant achievement. Those
elections were successful beyond what anyone really
could have imagined when UNMIK first arrived in
1999.

However, things have not proceeded as smoothly
since the elections as we might have hoped. Three
attempts to form a government have failed, talks have
stalled, and a new member of the Democratic
Assembly from the Democratic League of Kosovo
(LDK) has been murdered. We condemn this act of
violence and call on all of Kosovo's newly elected
leaders to show their clear commitment to the
democratic process and the rule of law by speaking out
against this crime and working together to form a
government.

There will not be room in Kosovo's future for
those from any ethnic group who support violence and
criminality, or work to undermine the rule of law and
the will of the people. I think that the murder of the
LDK Assembly member underscores the critical need
to have a strong Police Commissioner in place as soon
as the incumbent departs on 28 January.

It is time, I think, for Kosovo's politicians and its
people to move on. Of course, we accept that there are
bound to be legitimate differences between the parties.
This is natural. But it is time to bridge those
differences and to move forward in establishing the
provisional institutions of self-government. I think that
the Secretary-General has it quite right in his report,
when he points, in paragraph 43, to the special role and
responsibility of the Assembly members themselves in
setting an example, in leading and in showing that
actual work is possible to promote inter-communal
relations and to promote reconciliation.

There should be no more patience with
obstructionism or with the intimidation of those who
would participate. The path ahead can only be one of
commitment to democracy and to the rule of law in a
multi-ethnic Kosovo.

UNMIK has made a great effort to implement the
transfer of power and responsibility that the Council
laid out in resolution 1244 (1999). We commend its
efforts and call on Kosovo's new leaders to rise to the
challenge and to work constructively to build a secure,
democratic and better future for all of Kosovo's
residents. They must not waste this opportunity.

