Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Group of Five States for the Sahel (G-5)
here in New York, the Ambassadors of which are right
behind me, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving us this opportunity to take the floor on the
occasion of the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017),
concerning the Force conjointe du G5 Sahel, endorsed
by the African Union.

I wish to convey to the members of the Security
Council and to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
the gratitude of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Kei'ta, President of the Republic of Mali and Acting
President of the G-5 Sahel, on behalf of his peers of
Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad, for
this important resolution, which the Council has just
adopted unanimously.

There is no need to highlight the importance ofthis
Force for the stability of our shared space and for the
hope that it raises in our populations, which have been
sorely tried by transnational organized crime, which, if
not quickly contained, will strike a heavy blow at the
very foundation of our States. The creation of the Joint
Force is therefore part of the shared will of our Heads of
State to pool their efforts and their means to effectively
combat terrorism, organized crime and trafficking in
persons, which nowadays is a true threat to international
and regional peace and security. Resolution 2359 (2017)
is a clear message of the firm stand of the international
community against terrorist groups, which came
together recently to further destabilize our subregion.
It is also a message of sthe international community's
solidarity with the peoples of the Sahel.

We place great hope in the rapid deployment of the
Joint Force, which is called to put an end to criminal
activities along the shared borders of our countries.
Moreover, the Joint Force will also contribute to the
creation of conditions that will enable the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as the Ambassador of
France just highlighted, to fully carry out its mandate.
It will create an environment that will foster the
proper implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which emanated from the
Algiers process, and that is conducive to the carrying
out of infrastructure projects of the G-5 Sahel Priority
Investment Programme.

I thank Council members for having understood
that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is not just another
additional or superfluous force. Its operations will
complement those of the forces already present in the
region, that is, the defence and security forces of our
respective countries, the French Operation Barkhane
and MINUSMA. Coordination mechanisms between
all those forces are provided for in the strategic concept
of operations of the Joint Force.
Along with the security aspect, I must highlight
that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force gives high priority
to issues of development, good governance and the
resilience ofpopulations. The establishment ofthe Joint
Force therefore expresses the will of the Heads of State
of the region to create the conditions for development,
security and lasting peace, as we are convinced that
there can be no lasting peace without development,
and vice versa.

I can assure the Council that the operations of
the Joint Force will be respectful of gender, of human
rights and of international humanitarian law. For all of
the reasons I have just mentioned, I call for increased
and more consistent support from our bilateral and
multilateral partners in order to mobilize the necessary
means for the effective operationalization and the
efficient functioning of the Joint Force. In that regard,
I welcome the contribution already announced by the
European Union, and I am pleased that the resolution
provides for the upcoming holding of a conference to
mobilize and coordinate contributions from bilateral
and multilateral partners.

We wish to move quickly because criminal groups
will not wait. I can already assure members of the
complete commitment of all of our States to rise to the
challenge of implementing this resolution. Our Heads
of State are ready to quickly operationalize the Force
with our own resources as we wait for the support of the
international community.

With that in mind, an Extraordinary Summit of the
Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, with the participation
of the President of France, is scheduled for 2 July
in Bamako. Major General Didier Dacko has been
appointed Commander of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. He
is already in place to establish the force headquarters,
and the battalions of each member State are being
created with the means available.

Ending as I began, I reiterate the infinite gratitude
of the States of the G-5 Sahel to each Council member
for this historic and important decision, and also for
their sense of commitment, which has made it possible
to arrive at this outcome.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
