Mr. Gonzalez Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Paraguay, 1
would like to congratulate your country, Mr. President,
on the way it has led the Security Council this month,
enabling us to hold important debates on issues that
demand urgent and thorough attention on the part
of the membership of the United Nations. Today we
meet to discuss its new peacebuilding architecture, an
issue that is particularly important considering what a
challenge it is to try to achieve settlements, peace and
reconciliation for post-conflict societies.

One might think that the importance of
peacebuilding and its architecture is merely relative,
vital only to those countries that endure the tragic
experience of conflict. But the level of attendance and
interest in this debate underscores the commitment that
every State made to the task of adapting its structure,
procedures and multilateral approach to today's new
requirements in order to make them clearly more
effective.

While the current peacebuilding architecture is
barely 10 years old, the pace of events and the results
we have achieved have brought us to the realization that
where we are now is at the end of a phase. As a nation
that promotes peace, we contend that complying with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations demands that we come up with new methods of
work that include early warning systems and effective
monitoring mechanisms. That can be achieved through
budgets that are more needs-based, the more efficient
management of available financial resources and better-
trained human resources, all of this within a modern
institutional framework that will enable us to sustain
peacekeeping results. But above all, it will enable us to
prevent a relapse into conflict.

I need not remind the Council that billions of
dollars have been allocated for quite some time now
by the international community to programmes aimed
at stabilizing post-conflict situations, without the
necessary conditions for sustainability required to
ensure that their effects are perceptible in the medium
and long terms. In such cases, we could affirm that,
given the absence of such a structure and objectives,
the resources of States have not been efficiently used in
the context of the weakening and exhaustion of funding
sources.

We therefore highlight the crucial importance
of coordinating efforts to ensure that the effects and
benefits of development are linked with those resulting
from similar endeavours undertaken on the basis of
the guiding principles of peacebuilding, as there is no
doubt that the progress made in terms of development
will inevitably have the effect of consolidating the
prevailing elements that strengthen peacebuilding and
improve post-conflict conditions.

Finally, and without suggesting this is less
important, we want to stress the necessary and urgent
optimization of resources that should accompany
any reformulation of the peacebuilding architecture.
We believe that regardless of the modalities for
reformulation, it would be unacceptable to think of yet
another drain on financial resources without clearly
defined objectives and results, as has happened in
the past. The international community is already
engaged in too many joint efforts, such as achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals and a new climate
change agenda, to stress only the most important,
which require ongoing and increasing efforts in all
areas and the maximal optimization of existing and
future resources.

