Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also express our gratitude
to the delegation of Viet Nam for its outstanding
conduct of our work last month.

Allow me also to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing and Ambassador Wolff for describing the
situation with regard to the implementation of the
mandate of the Multinational Force in Iraq. I further
thank the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
important statement.

We are pleased to note that the overall situation
in Iraq is improving, but it is clear that major
challenges remain, in particular with regard to security.
Fortunately, we note encouraging signs at the national
level and welcome the ongoing compliance with the
ceasefire in Sadr City, announced on 11 May, allowing
for the gradual restoration of essential services and
State authority in that neighbourhood. We also stress
the good cooperation among local communities in
preventing acts of violence and the ongoing capacity-
building of the security forces.

The return to the Government of groups that were
boycotting the political process reflects the
considerable progress that has been made at the
political level. Burkina Faso welcomes the dialogue
begun among the Iraqi parties and facilitated by the
meetings held in Helsinki on 29 April and in Baghdad
on 5 July. We urge them to maintain and expand that
process and to comply with the decisions taken at those
meetings.

Furthermore, the risks of disagreement
concerning the constitutional review process, the draft
electoral law and hydrocarbons legislation must be
mitigated. Equally important to national reconciliation
is the delicate question of internal boundaries, which
should be resolved as soon as possible through
negotiation.

My delegation appreciates the regional efforts
being made, in particular the high-level contacts
between Baghdad and countries of the region, several
of which have already announced the reopening of
their diplomatic offices and the return of
representatives of regional organizations. We urge the
entire international community to promote regional
dialogue and to maintain its support for the
International Compact with Iraq, the implementation of
which will help in rebuilding and developing the
country.

We welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in particular in the quest
for a solution to the issues of disputed internal
boundaries and electoral assistance. We welcome the
considerable fall in the number of attacks on the
international zone and encourage all Iraqi parties to
continue to cooperate with the Mission.

The Secretary-General's report describes a human
rights and humanitarian situation that is still very
worrisome. The Iraqi Government and all parties
involved in Iraq must take the necessary and effective
steps to guarantee respect for human rights, combat
impunity and improve the overall humanitarian
situation. The international community has a duty of
solidarity with the Iraqi people. The country still faces
a multitude of challenges, and that is why we support
the renewal of the mandates of UNAMI and the
Multinational Force, as sought by the Iraqi
Government.
