The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the United Arab Emirates. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Mr. Samhan Al-Nuaimi (United Arab Emirates)
(interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the delegation
of the United Arab Emirates, I am honoured to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I wish
you every success. By the same token I would like to
thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
the Gambia, for his fine work in conducting the
deliberations of the Council during the past month.

My delegation carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General on Africa. It clearly reflects an
objective and comprehensive analysis of the current
situation in this continent. Although there have been
positive developments in some political and economic
spheres over the course of the past decade, these
improvements have yet to affect many areas of Africa.
These areas are still threatened with regional, ethnic and
civil conflicts.

Past experiences have proven that issues of peace,
security and stability and problems of social and
economic development are interdependent and
complementary concerns. They are mutually reinforcing.
Consequently, increasing or containing any of them
cannot be achieved without influencing the others. The

 

series of bitter conflicts and tragedies that some African
States have witnessed are saddening manifestations of this
reality, which has caused staggering material, human and
environmental losses which in turn have worsened complex
situations and impeded the processes of integration into
global economic development and changes.

The delegation of the United Arab Emirates supports
the conclusions and proposals in the report of the Secretary-
General, since they constitute new modes of thinking and
means of enhancing activities in Africa whether in the
fields of peacekeeping or of humanitarian assistance and
post-conflict peace-building. Yet at the same time we see
the necessity of mobilizing regional and international
capacities aiming at enhancing Africa's resources and
human capabilities so as to enable Africa to undertake
required reforms and to play its roles effectively in the
global economy and trade as a significant component of
international cooperation.

This, in our view, requires the adoption of five basic
steps.

First, the African States and the international
community need to manifest the political will to implement
a joint comprehensive strategy that ensures the containment
of existing conflicts through peaceful means of negotiation
in accordance with the principles of the Charter, the
provisions of international law and the international rules of
human rights.

Secondly, there should be a rapid political response to
contain conflicts, taking into account the elements peculiar
to each individual situation through the adoption of more
developed early-warning mechanisms. This would help
maintain peace and prevent crises from breaking out by
sending more effective peacemaking missions, promoting
initiatives for negotiation, mediation, good offices and fact-
finding missions and resorting to legal settlements and
arbitration in cases of intractable conflicts.

T hirdly, cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, as
well as other relevant organizations, should be enhanced.
This would be in addition to the expansion of the
participation of and partnership among States that are
contiguous to areas of conflict and other States which are
interested in containing such situations peacefully and
contributing to implementing relief and reconstruction
programmes, as well as to rebuilding the infrastructures of
institutions that have been destroyed. The capacities and
freedom of action of the international and humanitarian
agencies and organizations, which perform a distinctive
role in achieving these noble goals, must be supported.

Fourthly, the working methods and procedures of the
Security Council should be reviewed. Double standards
should be avoided, particularly with regard to the use of
sanctions regimes, whose objectives must be improved in
accordance with what the Secretary-General has indicated
in his report. Sanctions should be confined to weapons
only and should not include economic sanctions, which
have proven their inefficiency and their adverse impact on
people's lives. The United Arab Emirates would like to
take this opportunity to urge the Security Council to lift
the economic sanctions imposed on Libya. This is
particularly important given the two decisions taken by
the International Court of Justice.

Fifthly, joint development investment programmes
and financial and technical assistance to Africa should be
enhanced, whether they come from States acting
unilaterally, from the World Bank, or from other financial
and economic institutions and funds. This would enable
countries to implement necessary reforms and changes in
their economic and social institutions and deal with their
heavy foreign debts and help them gain access to world
markets as real partners in achieving the goals of
international development.

The United Arab Emirates has been keen to develop
its relations with African States on the basis of our
historical and political relations as well as of our joint
interests and goals. Through the directives of His
Highness Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahyan, the
President of the State, we, in our general policies, are
paying particular attention to providing assistance and
various forms of support to African States, whether
humanitarian, through the humanitarian Zayed Institution,
the Red Crescent or other organizations; or
developmental, thorough the Abu Dhabi development
fund. The latter has contributed to the implementation of
many joint development projects and concessional funds,
which exceeded $3 billion. Similarly, we are writing off
debts and the interest on them for a number of African
States, particularly the poorest.

In conclusion, we call for activating the role of the
United Nations and its organs and specialized agencies, in
addition to that of the international development
institutions, in cooperation with the African States so as
to help such States solve their existing political, economic
and social problems. This would enable them to meet the
requirements of decent standards of living and prosperity

 

for their people and enable them to build a future in which
peace, stability and development can prevail.

The President: I thank the representative of the
United Arab Emirates for the kind words he addressed to
me and to my predecessor.

The next speaker is the representative of the Comoros.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.


