Mrs. Arrieta Munguia (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico welcomes the holding of this open
debate, which will encourage the breaking of silos
and call into question inertia in facing the enormous
task of sustaining peace. This is a systemic challenge
that requires us to put an end to the fragmentation
within the Organization and to participate in an active,
coherent and coordinated manner. In that regard, we
welcome the participation of the Secretary-General
and Minister Kishida, as well as the briefings made by
the representatives of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the African Union.

Now more than ever, it is necessary for us to
establish an effective dialogue between the Security
Council and the key actors of the Organization. It is
worth drawing attention here to the role played by Japan
during its non-permanent memberships of the Security
Council and as Chair of the PBC Working Group
on Lessons Learned in promoting this dialogue. In
particular, we welcome the comprehensive changes that
will be brought about by the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016),
which together set out a road map for sustainable peace.

We are talking about a new narrative that focuses
our efforts on conflict prevention and on a proactive,
strategic and long-term approach, without neglecting
the fact that each stage of a conflict is crucial and that
its root causes must be addressed. Those root causes
are closely linked to the three pillars of the work of the
United Nations, given that we cannot think about peace
and security without also thinking about development
and human rights. We are convinced that strengthening
the rule of law and accountable and transparent
institutions is as important as promoting sustainable
and inclusive development. Against that backdrop, the
new concept of sustainable peace is based on Goal 16
but goes beyond it, creating a perfect synergy with the
2030 Agenda. This paradigm shift also draws attention
to the need to place people at the centre of our efforts. It
is a call to invest in communities and preserve a healthy
social fabric in order to create more opportunities for
development and for political and social stability.

Over the past several years, we have learned a
number of lessons. The international community has
confirmed that the stability of conflict-affected ctries
does not depend solely on improving security, but that it
also depends on respecting human rights, strengthening
the rule of law and promoting development. Mexico
recognizes that some of the challenges facing Africa
in supporting peace processes are related to democratic
transition and building democracy. That is why, since
2009, we have been providing technical assistance and
training in election matters to African countries that
have requestedthem. Mexico expresses its willingness to
continue providing electoral assistance and cooperation
to those countries in need of them. Nevertheless, the
recent resurgence of conflict in Africa attests to the
need to go beyond electoral processes and to promote
the inclusive and active participation of all segments
of society - in particular, that of women and young
people - in peace processes.

Moreover, sustainable peace requires us to
unite our efforts both within and outside the system,
hence the great added value of establishing strategic
alliances with regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union. Mexico reiterates that
the Peacebuilding Commission's advisory role and
its long-term perspective need to be taken advantage
of on a periodic basis by regional and subregional
organizations in Africa, particularly in the context of
African countries that are on the Commision's agenda.
Doing so would improve coordination and also help to
develop and share best practices in peacebuilding.

We would also like to call on the Security Council to
promote and to regularly take advantage of the specific
and strategic, defined advisory role of the PBc in the
periodic review carried out by the Security Council
of the situations on its agenda and of those situations
related to the establishment, review and drawdown of
peacekeeping operations. Our main message here is
that we need to find more creative solutions in all the
processes related to the peacebuilding architecture. To
that end, Member States would have to commit to going
beyond the traditional and obvious ways in which we
have been supporting conflict-affected countries. As
an example, and under the modality of South-South
cooperation, Mexico and Cuba, through the World
Health Organization, provided assistance to countries
affected by the Ebola epidemic. Mexico provided
resources for the team and supplies for the Cuban
medical brigades that were deployed to Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, the countries most affected by the
health emergency. The results were very positive. Such
best practices in cooperation could be replicated in
other areas, including in the Peacebuilding Fund.

Mexico will continue to play an active and
constructive role as the leader of the Group of Friends
of Sustainable Peace. That is why I am very pleased to
mention that some 30 countries took part in the Group's
first meeting, out of a conviction that sustainable peace
must be transformed into a living objective that has
a strong cross-cutting presence throughout the entire
United Nations system. This includes a change in our
approach to the way we work to achieve a peace that
can sustain itself and that is sustainable for all.

