Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Allow me to express my
sincere gratitude to cote d'Ivoire for its presidency and
for convening today's debate.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to make a few remarks in my national
capacity.

Today's topic allows us to brainstorm on how
to make the best use of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which addresses regional
arrangements. Indeed, regional organizations naturally
have a deeper expertise and understanding of regional
security matters.

With respect to our region, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has at
its disposal a useful toolbox for preventive and early-
warning purposes, including its mechanisms, such as
the High Commissioner on National Minorities and the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
The Council ofEurope also has an important instrument
at its disposal - the Commissioner for Human Rights.
I can speak from country's own experience. For
almost two decades, Georgia has enjoyed very fruitful
engagement and cooperation with the United Nations
and the OSCE. They both have done invaluable work in
terms of conflict prevention and resolution in the now
occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia.

Both the United Nations and the OSCE deployed
their missions in Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region - the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia and the
OSCE Mission to Georgia, respectively - and their
work was vital on the ground. Ironically, both were
discontinued by a permanent member of the Security
Council, which cast a veto in a similar manner, thereby
creating a vacuum of international presence.

Luckily, the European Union stepped in and the
European Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM) was
dispatched to monitor the situation on the ground.
While the importance of the presence of the EUMM
cannot be underestimated, unfortunately it is yet unable
to fulfil its mandate, since the Russian Federation, as
the occupying Power, is blocking access to the occupied
regions.

The United Nations, the European Union
and the OSCE are complementing each other as
the three co-Chairs of the Geneva International
Discussions - the format launched as a result and to
implement the 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement
between Russia and Georgia. The Geneva International
Discussions is a valuable instrument to address security
and humanitarian needs on the ground but, like the
EUMM, the full potential of the Geneva International
Discussions is yet to be unlocked. Progress on key
issues remains elusive due to the lack of political will
on the part of Russian Federation, while the work of the
Incident Prevention and Response Mechanisms, under
the umbrella of the Geneva International Discussions,
is becoming unduly politicized and hampered. It
is crucial to safeguard the Incident Prevention and
Response Mechanisms and return without further delay
to the usual work setting, in full respect of the founding
principles and ground rules.

Lastly, given the close interlinkages and mutually
reinforcing nature of security, development and human
rights, strengthening engagement on prevention
between the Human Rights Council and the wider
United Nations system is of vital importance. In that
context, we regard cooperation under agenda item 10
of the Human Rights Council, on technical assistance
and capacity-building, as an extremely practical and
efficient tool for preventive purposes.

