Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): For
over three years, Syria has been foundering each day
a little further into the horror of an indiscriminate
violence that kills in a climate of absolute impunity.
That absolute impunity is one of the reasons that the
parties to the conflict in Syria continue to engage in a
bloodbath in which civilians are the first victims.

Evidence of atrocities in Syria accumulate as
succeeding reports are issued, whether it be the reports
ofthe Independent International Commission ofInquiry
established by the Human Rights Council, the reports
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Caesar (S/2014/244, annex) on systematic
torture committed on an industrial scale in Syrian
prisons, or non-governmental organizations" reports,
including on the use of barrel bombs against the civilian
population. Syria is at war, yes, but war does not justify
everything. Even war has its rules under international
law, and those rules are violated every day in Syria.

More than 160,000 people have already died in the
Syrian conflict. The list of atrocities in Syria is too
long for us to list them all, but I would like to mention
here the untold suffering inflicted on children in the
conflict. More than 10,000 children have been killed.
Countless children have been injured or maimed by
aerial bombardments in populated areas, with Syrian
Government forces indiscriminately using cluster
munitions and barrel bombs. Children are arrested,
recruited as combatants, arbitrarily detained, abused
and tortured. A number of children have been victims
of sexual violence or have disappeared. All parties to
the conflict have targeted schools and hospitals or have
used them for military purposes.

To end the conflict and atrocities in Syria, it is
essential to work for a political solution. Everyone
recognizes as much. But the efforts to reach a political
solution are at an impasse, mainly because the Syrian
authorities refuse to discuss a genuine political
transition. For our part, we cannot accept the political
impasse being used by some ofour partners as an excuse
to prevent us from taking action against impunity in
Syria. Fighting against impunity is not incompatible
with the search for a political solution - quite the
contrary. To fight against impunity is to fight against
precisely the elements that fuel war and violence. To
fight against impunity is to deter perpetrators from
committing more crimes. We deeply believe that
justice is an essential ingredient - an indispensable
ingredient - to restoring peace in Syria.

That is why, since January 2013, along with
57 other States, Luxembourg has pleaded relentlessly
with the Security Council to refer to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) the situation
that has prevailed in Syria since March 2011, without
any exceptions and without distinguishing among the
alleged perpetrators of crimes. The victims in Syria
are begging us to give them at least that, a glimmer
of hope that ultimately they will have justice and the
perpetrators of the heinous crimes that have been
committed in the country will be held accountable for
their actions. The ICC was established precisely in order
to end impunity for the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a
whole, and to ensure the effective prosecution of such
crimes when a State is unwilling or unable to do so.
That is certainly the case in Syria.

For that reason, Luxembourg sponsored and voted
in favour of today's draft resolution (S/2014/348),
proposed by France to the Security Council, to refer the
situation in Syria since March 2011 to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. Beyond what divides
us, there is a set of shared values, a shared humanity
and a shared belief in the dignity and worth of human
beings that should unite us and generate unanimity in
the Security Council. The draft resolution proposed
by France reflects those shared values. Without
polemicizing, it was aimed at referring to the ICC all
violations committed by all parties to the conflict in
Syria - the widespread violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law committed by
the Syrian authorities and pro-Government militias,
on the one hand, and the violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law committed by the
non-State armed groups, on the other.

It is with deep regret that we have to conclude that
our shared humanity and values have not prevailed
today, and that the draft resolution could not be adopted
because two permanent members, Russia and China,
voted against it. This double veto is doubly damaging
because it will have a serious impact on the future of
the Syrian people, who daily endure the horrors of
an endless spiral of violence, and because it affects
the Security Council's credibility and effectiveness,
condemning it to inaction in the face of impunity.
Today's vote has highlighted the impasse the Security
Council finds itself in, thanks to the abuse of the right
of veto. In that regard, Luxembourg supports France's
proposal that the five permanent members refrain from
resorting to the right of veto in cases of mass atrocities,
genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. A
voluntary code of conduct such as this would help to
strengthen the Council's credibility and, above all, its
effectiveness in protecting civilian populations.
Despite today's vote, we will not throw up our
hands. Faced with the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Syria, we will never stop
calling forjustice for the Syrians. And we will not give
up the hope that our shared humanity will ultimately
prevail.

