Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank you, Mr. President, for the prompt
convening of today's meeting. We were one of the
countries that requested it.

We also thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
their briefings.

Since the beginning ofthis year, the State ofKuwait
has occupied the Arab seat in the Security Council. One
of our most important priorities, which we made clear
before wejoined it, is to defend and uphold Arab issues,
voice the concerns about them and work to find peaceful
solutions. We deeply deplore the lack of any real and
genuine progress on any of these issues, in particular
that of the Syrian crisis, which regrettably continues to
deteriorate. Security Council resolutions on such issues
are not implemented. The Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security but is
unable to shoulder that responsibility. It is divided as
it faces those dangers and threats. Therefore the crises

continue, along with the suffering of the people in
the region.
The State of Kuwait condemns in the strongest
terms the heinous rocket and barrel bomb attacks
against residential areas under siege in eastern Ghouta,
including the latest attack on Douma, on 7 April.
Five days ago we marked the first anniversary of the
Khan Shaykhun incident (see S/PV.8221), in which
chemical weapons were used, as confirmed by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. It also
identified who used them.

Two days ago, scores ofcivilians, including children
and women, were killed or injured in attacks and air
strikes against Douma. Many cases of asphyxiation
were recorded. Several international reports confirmed
that the crimes committed in both incidents were
tantamount to crimes against humanity and war
crimes, which reminds us once again of the request
we all made in the Chamber for the establishment of
a new mechanism to determine whether or not and by
whom chemical weapons had been used, and to hold
the perpetrators in Syria accountable. The mechanism
must guarantee impartial, transparent and professional
investigations in all chemical attacks in Syria in order
to end impunity. For the past five years - specifically,
since August 2013 - the perpetrators of chemical
attacks in Syria have enjoyed impunity. They have not
been punished, even when we witnessed the very first
crime of the use of chemical weapons in eastern Ghouta.

We do not want to mark the first anniversary
of the attack in Douma without a conviction. We
call for the Council to establish an accountability
mechanism that would determine the perpetrators of
the chemical-weapons crimes anywhere in Syria - be
they a Government, entity, group or individual - so
that they can be held accountable in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2118 (2013). The Council
must shoulder its responsibility with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
use of chemical weapons in Syria is a genuine threat
to the non-proliferation regime. The continued attacks
against civilians in medical facilities and residential
areas, through air strikes or artillery, are all flagrant
violations of the international community's will and
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2401 (2018), which demanded a 30-day
ceasefire, at the very least, without delay.

The provisions of resolution 2118 (2013) are clear
and definite. They call for accountability for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, which is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. However, current events are a clear violation
of the provisions of the resolution. As members of the
Council, we cannot accept the status quo, which is
the continued use of chemical weapons in Syria. It is
another disappointment for the Syrian people, whose
suffering caused by the use of such weapons in different
parts of Syria we have been unable to end.

The Council has a collective responsibility. The
suffering Syrian people are sick and tired of tuning
into meetings of the Council without seeing tangible
results on the ground. At several junctures throughout
this bloody conflict the Council has been able to find
common ground to end the crisis. However, we must
overcome our political differences and establish a new
accountability mechanism in Syria that is professional,
credible and impartial. Such elements are available in
the draft resolution under discussion, which has been
put forward by the United States. It includes updates
on the incident in Douma. We call on all members of
the Council to build on that draft as a good basis for
negotiations on a future mechanism.

We continue to seek a political solution as the
only means to end the crisis in all its dimensions. The
political road map is clear and agreed, based on the
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and on
resolution 2254 (2015). It seeks to maintain the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria and meet the
legitimate aspirations and ambitions of the Syrian
people towards living a dignified life.

