Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first of all to express my thanks to your delegation,
Mr. President, for the initiative of convening this debate.
In particular, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his substantive participation and for his very
comprehensive report on the role of United Nations
peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants.

Eight months ago, we expressed our profound
concern that, in a number of conflicts, the various parties
or factions continued to engage in armed struggle, despite
the fact that peace agreements had been concluded by the
warring parties and despite the presence in the field of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We continue to
be troubled by this situation.

Likewise, on that occasion we acknowledged that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of
ex-combatants should be seen not as isolated elements,
but as a continuous process involving wide-ranging efforts
to secure peace, stability and development.

There can be no doubt that the basis for the DDR
process is the political resolve of the parties concerned,
which requires the assistance of the international
community. This political will must be embodied in a
peace agreement that meticulously outlines the process.
Such an agreement would provide operations with a clear
mandate and facilitate contributions by the international
community of the necessary experts and resources.

 

We should not lose sight of the fact that the
disarmament activities of peacekeeping operations can profit
from the measures undertaken by Member States to combat
illicit trafficking in arms. For its part, demobilization is
emerging as the decisive factor in ensuring the continuity
of the process. Hence, the importance of ensuring that this
phase be completed as quickly as possible and give way to
the reintegration phase with a view to establishing the right
political and social environment.

I need hardly emphasize that the needs of children in
conflict zones must be addressed and that their rights
should be an explicit priority in the processes aimed at
establishing and fostering peace and resolving conflicts.
And finally, there is no doubt that proper coordination of
efforts among the various actors involved and an ample
supply of personnel and resources - particularly financial
resources - are indispensable if the processes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants are to be successful.

It is especially appropriate to address the issue of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants in the context of peacekeeping, because these
activities represent the first step - indeed, perhaps the key
step - towards preventing a recurrence of conflict,
securing lasting peace and creating conditions conducive to
sustainable development. The challenge is immense, but the
task is so important and the human and financial costs of
conflict are so great that we must do all in our power to
help peoples escape from recurrent cycles of violence.

We are moving in the right direction. Let us spare no
effort. Let us move forward with determination. Success is
within our reach.

