Mr. Guterres: The United Republic of Tanzania
has been an extremely generous country, hosting
hundreds of thousands refugees for decades. That is
remarkable proof of solidarity, for which the world
should be grateful. I thank you, Mr. President, for
having given me the opportunity to be here today. The
Security Council and its resolutions are key
instruments to address forced population displacement
and its impact on peace and security.

Seven years ago, as Prime Minister of Portugal, I
had the opportunity to work closely with the Security
Council in advocating for a strong international
response to ensure respect for the rights of the East
Timorese. Those were the most compelling moments of
my political life, and the Council's engagement on that
occasion confirmed for me the power of this body as an
agent for positive change.

With that in mind, I wish to express the strong
support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for resolution
1625 (2005) on strengthening the effectiveness of the
Council's role in conflict prevention by addressing the
root causes of conflict, promoting development and
good governance, eradicating poverty, supporting
national reconciliation and protecting human rights.

My Office deals only with the symptoms of a
disease; the Security Council may have the power to
cure it. That is both a significant ability and a weighty
responsibility.

I would like to start by briefing the Council on
two urgent challenges that UNHCR faces today: the
Sudan and the Great Lakes region, where we are
dealing with many of the cross-cutting issues on the
Council's agenda.

Sudan-Chad is probably the largest and most
complex humanitarian problem on the globe. Six
months ago, during my first visit to the region as High
Commissioner, the situation appeared to be moving in
the right direction. A peace deal had been reached in
southern Sudan. It held even after John Garang's death,
and had the potential for a positive impact in Darfur
and the east. International scrutiny appeared to have a
stabilizing effect in the former, with hopes that the
Abuja talks would reach a peace agreement before the
end of the year. I pay full tribute to the efforts of the
African Union, but, unfortunately, we did not have the
positive outcome that some may have taken for
granted. The situation has taken a turn for the worse,
and there is a risk that talks might face an impasse.

Today, violence and impunity, never completely
in check, are again everyday occurrences in Darfur.
Humanitarian workers are regularly cut off from the
displaced and those they are trying to help. This month
we were forced to raise the threat level for staff in
areas of western Darfur, even as staff observe the
systematic destruction of crops and rising gender-based
violence.

The insecurity has now spread across the border
into Chad. Just a few days ago, armed rebels took
several Government officials hostage and attacked the
village of Guere'da, where UNHCR cares for over
25,000 Sudanese refugees. The increasingly unstable
conditions in the border area, which is home to
200,000 refugees, have compelled us to relocate part of
our staff without prejudice to the services for the
refugees themselves.

The international community could face a
catastrophe in Darfur. Averting it will require bold
measures and the full involvement of the African
Union and the United Nations. If we fail, if there is no
physical protection for those in need of aid, we risk a
much greater calamity than what we have seen so far.

I appeal to this body today in the strongest terms.
I am aware of the discussions under way on the
evolution of a more robust security force and the
delicate question of its nature and composition. But
preventing a disastrous human toll in Darfur requires a
peace agreement, not as a solution to the problem, but
as a start to a complex process of reconciliation. To
reach that peace agreement, we need the full
commitment of the Council and all its members,
working together in support of peace and putting
pressure on all the parties involved. Who can defy you
if you act together?

To the South, the voluntary repatriation of
Sudanese refugees began last month with a first group
of returnees from Kenya. Tripartite agreements for
repatriation are being signed with the Governments of
Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic. Movements from Ethiopia
and Uganda will begin in February and March, and our
aim is to return - or help to return - 50,000
Sudanese from refugee camps in neighbouring
countries in the coming months. Given the dimensions
of the operation, we estimate it will take three to four
years to help all refugees return home to South Sudan.

Repatriation is strictly voluntary. But even with
the fragile situation in areas of the South, we cannot
overlook the courage and determination of the
estimated 75,000 refugees who have already come
home spontaneously. Tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons have also returned to the South,
mainly from Khartoum.

International assistance is crucial for the
sustainability of returns to the South. When I spoke
with Sudanese refugees in Kenya, Uganda and
Ethiopia, I saw how much they wanted to go back. I
will never forget listening to people of all ages talk
about their hopes - for a home of their own, for
education, for peace. But in South Sudan there are only
14 kilometres of paved road, almost no schools, almost
no hospitals and a civil administration that is extremely
thin on the ground. We cannot wait to answer the
refugees' wishes to return. Massive economic and
political support to the transition is necessary now -
not when everything is in place and all the rules of
conditionality are met. By then it could be too late.

Eastern Sudan is less noticed by international
observers. But its security situation is deteriorating
rapidly. A peace agreement is also imperative, even if
we know that stability in the region is closely tied to
developments in Eritrea and Ethiopia. More than
100,000 Eritreans remain as refugees in Sudan, one of
the oldest refugee groups cared for by UNHCR.
Tensions between Eritrea and Ethiopia last year drove
several thousand new Eritrean refugees into Sudan and
Ethiopia. Any deterioration in relations between the
two countries clearly threatens a sizeable population
displacement.

The Great Lakes region features similarly
complex challenges for humanitarian agencies such as
UNHCR. Two situations the Council is following
closely are of particular importance to my Office -
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Last year, 66,000 people went home to Burundi
with our help. But the rate of refugee returns has
slowed significantly over the past few months, and
movement may stop altogether unless every measure is
taken to build the confidence of prospective returnees
in their reintegration. And let us be honest, those
conditions are not present yet. Economic support to
Burundi and to the humanitarian agencies is crucial
now for security and consolidation of the peace process
and success in repatriation.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo finds
itself in a similar situation after years of unrest.
Repatriation has started and continues from several
neighbouring States, particularly Tanzania. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has also been
selected as one of three countries to pilot a new, inter-
agency cluster approach to internal displacement,
through which UNHCR has been asked to assume the
lead in the areas of protection and shelter. This will be
a pioneering approach in protection, with UNHCR
working in close cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).

Stability and international support are paramount
to the success of these humanitarian efforts. But just
last week, up to 20,000 people, mostly women and
children, fled from conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and crossed into Uganda at three border
points. Different displacement movements are still
going on in every direction. This scene is the type of
recurrent insecurity that has made humanitarian
interventions next to impossible. UNHCR has sent
relief aid and staff to the border areas - assistance, in
fact, that was destined for repatriating Sudanese. The
tragic killing of the peacekeepers in Garamba Park by
elements of the Ugandan Lord's Resistance Army is a
clear demonstration of the complexity of the problems
we face.
As with Sudan, threats to peace and development
in the Great Lakes region do not end with a single
country, or two, or even three. Security and solutions
cannot be parcelled out one nation at a time. Both
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
underline how crucial it is to employ, and for this body
to support, a regional approach to peacekeeping and
political missions. The Security Council's forthcoming
debate on peace and security in the Great Lakes is very
timely in this regard. These two situations are also a
good reminder of the importance of and the problems
associated with the conceptual framework of the
responsibility to protect.

The number of refugees worldwide is at its lowest
level in almost a quarter of a century. Unfortunately,
the same does not apply to internal displacement.
Several sizeable repatriation operations have
contributed to the decrease in refugees, led by
Afghanistan, where more than four million people have
returned home since 2002. Returns to African nations,
such as Angola, Sierra Leone and Liberia, and
countries of the former Yugoslavia have also been or
are becoming very successful. Refugees and internally
displaced are among the most obvious beneficiaries of
the end of conflict. When the gunfire stops and wars
fade, millions of them seize the opportunity to begin
life over again in their countries of origin.

But that picture is incomplete. What the past
decade has demonstrated is that refugees must not be
seen as uninvolved beneficiaries of a peace and
recovery process, or simply as an afterthought.
Refugees return with schooling and new skills, and this
in itself is a critical factor in any post-conflict
situation. Over and over, we see that their participation
is necessary for the consolidation of both peace and
post-conflict economic recovery. True, sustainable
peace and recovery are necessary to allow refugee
returns, but refugee returns are every bit as essential to
sustained peace and recovery.

These are also our objectives in other parts of the
world, such as in Iraq. UNHCR remains engaged in
close coordination with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to find durable solutions
through return and reintegration, as soon as conditions
permit, for some 1.3 million internally displaced
persons in Iraq and another estimated one million Iraqi
refugees in the region. Resolving land and property
issues is one of the priorities that will help this process.
UNHCR hopes, circumstances permitting, to enhance
its presence and capacity inside Iraq.
Given the unbroken line from population
displacement to peace and recovery, the failure to
follow that line steadily from relief to development
ranks as one of the international community's most
consistent failures. Links between humanitarian aid
and development efforts are simply not working in
most cases.

Humanitarian aid is not a guarantee against the
recurrence of violence or of displacement. The absence
of an effective transition from short- to longer-term
assistance reduces the life expectancy of solutions.
Large-scale population returns are difficult to sustain if
development stalls and instability grows. Without
adequate resources for development, institution-
building and reconciliation, societies can again
unravel, dormant conflicts can reignite and civilians
can be forcibly displaced once more.

UNHCR is not a development agency and does
not intend to become one. But we are raising awareness
of the need to include refugees and the displaced in
national development programmes, and we will be a
reliable partner in the United Nations Development
Group. Afghanistan has shown us that there is both the
need for and the possibility of engaging in new ways
with recovery actors. If we do not work from both
sides to forge the links, relief and development will
never sustain each other.

That is why from our perspective the decision to
create a Peacebuilding Commission was one of the
most significant events of 2005. Too little of the
international community's attention and resources have
traditionally been devoted to rebuilding societies torn
apart by war and violence. I look forward to working
closely with the Peacebuilding Commission to address
not only the relief-to-development gap, but also the
complex needs of societies emerging from conflict.
UNHCR will appreciate being seen by the future
Commission as a relevant partner. We also intend to
play an active part in its Support Office.

This is an appropriate moment to recall the vital
role of women in peacebuilding. More than five years
after the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), it is also time to note that we have a long way
to go to reach the goal of equal participation by
women.

Furthermore, I strongly hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission will ensure that recovery
processes continue long after the attention of the
international media has moved elsewhere.
Humanitarian relief and development support must
follow the real needs of the people, not the agendas of
television networks.

The best remedy is prevention, and vigilance is
essential in all parts of the world. UNHCR is closely
watching developments in the Central African
Republic, where the spread of armed gangs and general
lawlessness in the north have forced thousands of
people to flee to Chad and Cameroon. There is still
time to act and, with limited resources, to prevent
another major crisis in the near future.

Prevention is not an easy job; the situation in
cote d'Ivoire proves that. The outrageous attacks on
United Nations offices in Guiglo are a clear
demonstration of the crucial need to find an effective
solution to the four-year-old crisis. The population
displacement that would result from open conflict in
C6te d'Ivoire is unpredictable in scale and impact.

The Security Council's actions related to the
protection of civilians and of displaced persons in
particular are of great importance to our Office. The
mandates of peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding strategies must include solutions for
displaced populations. The safety of humanitarian
workers must be ensured too. I take this opportunity to
welcome the adoption by the General Assembly of the
Optional Protocol to the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

As a protection agency, we face two major
challenges today: preserving asylum in an age of mixed
population flows, and stopping the rise of intolerance
in modern societies.

The reasons for many migratory movements are
complex but can be dramatic, like the serious socio-
economic decline in many countries of sub-Saharan
Africa, which leaves no other alternative for survival.
Preserving asylum requires that we be able to find
those in genuine need of protection when they are
concealed by mixed flows. The challenge of
identifying such individuals grows along with their
numbers and the risks they are willing to take, as we
have seen in the Mediterranean and, tragically, again
last weekend and even yesterday in the Gulf of Aden.

Credible protection must incorporate measures
against fraud and abuse to safeguard the credibility of
the asylum system. UNHCR stands ready to work with
all Governments to support their efforts to improve
legislation and asylum procedures. I appeal strongly
for a concerted crackdown on human trafficking and
smuggling. Protecting refugees requires tough
punishment for those who profit from these irregular
movements.

UNHCR fully recognizes the right of countries to
responsibly manage their borders and define their
migration policies. But it is essential that such
measures do not preclude the right of those in need of
international protection to physical access to asylum
procedures and adequate refugee status determination,
in accordance with international law.

Addressing intolerance is perhaps an even greater
challenge. Intolerance is the rejection of strangers, of
people from elsewhere, of those who are different.
Intolerance is fostered by populism, both in politics
and in the media. As a result, the public is often led to
view terrorism, security problems and asylum and
migration issues as shades of the same motif.

Terrorism must be fought with total
determination. We need to make certain that terrorists
are not granted asylum. But we need to make just as
certain that asking for asylum in itself is not a crime.

Racism, xenophobia, ethnic conflict, violent
nationalism and religious fundamentalism are
unfortunately still very much alive and are serious
threats both to social cohesion in societies and to peace
and security throughout the world. Preserving peace
and security means fighting the ills rooted in populism
and intolerance. I appeal to all members to join
together in confronting them.

