Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and
Ambassador Vieira for their briefings today.
I would like to commend the hard work conducted
by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), under the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Viegas Filho, in support of the State and the people of
Guinea-Bissau.

When the Council last convened to discuss
UNIOGBIS on 30 August (see S/PV.8337), many
members were cautiously optimistic about the steps
taken in 2018 in Guinea-Bissau to bring the country
back on track to realizing the promises of the 2016
Conakry Agreement. Today, I suspect that many of us
share concerns that such aspirations might once again
be in jeopardy.

I would like to raise three specific points today.

First, I would like to recognize the critical role
that UNIOGBIS, together with the Guinea-Bissau P5
group and other partners, has played in accompanying
Guinea-Bissau in laying the ground for the political
and institutional reforms that we hope will enable
the country to move decisively beyond the political
crises that have plagued it. Alongside the Economic
Community ofWest African States (ECOWAS) Mission
in Guinea-Bissau, UNIOGBIS has played an essential
preventive role in the country. Through its good offices
function, UNIOGBIS continues to be a trusted and
valued partner for Bissau-Guineans. The impact of
the mission's support to civil society organizations,
and women's organizations in particular, in mobilizing
political will around the Conakry Agreement is a
tangible indication of the depth of trust.

Secondly, I would like to welcome President Vaz's
decision yesterday to hold legislative elections on
10 March 2019. While we regret that the anticipated date
of 18 November was not met, we are optimistic that the
revised time frame will ensure that legislative elections
are concluded in due time before the presidential
elections, which is critical to ensure that constitutional
provisions are respected and pivotal to long-term
stability. In that respect, I would urge the leadership in
Guinea-Bissau to take steps to make progress with the
stability pact envisaged under the Conakry Agreement.
Guinea-Bissau has made important strides in meeting
its own objectives in terms of development and human
rights. Let us ensure that political instability does not
undermine those gains.

Thirdly, I want to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1086) and the findings of
the strategic assessment mission, which we found to
be both informative and refreshingly self-critical. That
kind of approach helps facilitate the work of the Council
enormously. The United Kingdom is committed to
seeing a phased drawdown ofUNIOGBIS and transition
to national stakeholders, with the support of entities of
the United Nations country team. In that respect, we
would encourage the Secretary-General, UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations country team and all partners to
initiate the development of an integrated transition
plan, with immediate effect.

In conclusion, and as we close our work this year,
I want to underline the importance of the year 2019
for Guinea-Bissau. With legislative and presidential
elections on the horizon, watershed political moments are
imminent. The withdrawal of UNIOGBIS will require
a new form of partnership with the United Nations,
based on a new development assistance framework
to follow the United Nations Partnership Framework
Terra Ranka plan. Longer-term constitutional, judicial
and security-sector reform will take time and it will
be important that the Bissau-Guinean authorities are
supported to sustain those endeavours long beyond the
departure of UNIOGBIS. Building the capacity of the
United Nations country team and continuing to work
closely with ECOWAS, the African Union and other
Guinea-Bissau P5 group actors to ensure continuity of
support is essential. The Conakry Agreement provides
the framework for mitigating against future political
crises and provides a starting point for longer-term
institutional reforms.

The United Kingdom looks forward to starting
the new year with a constructive discussion on how,
working together, we can further our partnership with
Guinea-Bissau in pursuit of those objectives.

