Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I thank
you once again, Mr. President, for coming from far-away
Canada to chair this important meeting. I am delighted to
see that you have some members of the Canadian
legislature here with you today. We have been lucky
enough to have had many members of the United States
Congress here with us in the past six months. I am
delighted whenever I see members of any national
assembly or legislature here. I think it is the essence of
the strengthening of the United Nations to do this and I
welcome your colleagues from the legislative branch.

The United States will be very pleased to vote in
favour of the important draft resolution before us today.
We commend Ambassador Fowler, his delegation and the
entire Government of Canada for their sustained
dedication to this task. Bob Fowler has proved that one
can be extremely methodical and very careful, and still
accomplish something in the United Nations. I
congratulate him for his diligence, his perseverance and
his persistence. The Canadian delegation and Ambassador
Fowler have set a standard by which other sanctions
regimes against non-state actors will be judged.

Our Government has worked closely with the
sanctions team under Ambassador Fowler. He has briefed
our Government at high levels on this issue in order to
explain to us how we might better assist the sanctions

 

regime. I can report today that his efforts with the United
States Government directly have been very fruitful.

We also welcome the Foreign Minister of Angola, Mr.
Miranda, back to the Council and we look forward to
hearing his report. I hope that he will report to President
Dos Santos that the Security Council is continuing its
vigorous efforts to honour its commitments to Angola.

In the past, UNITA's ability to evade the three
sanctions packages allowed it to defy the will of the
majority of the Angolan people and of the international
community. UNITA's sanctions-busting activities, aided and
abetted by the parties identified in the report of the Panel
of Experts, allowed it to pursue a military option that
brought death and destruction to a long-suffering nation.

The people of Angola have waited too long for
UNITA's military leadership to forsake armed resistance
and enter into the peaceful democratic life of the country.
The road is littered with UNITA's broken promises. The
fundamental expectation of the international community
remains the full demilitarization of UNITA, the full
extension of state administration to all areas of the national
territory and the full demobilization of all armed UNIT A
personnel. The people of Angola waited four years for
UNITA to accomplish these tasks, only to be deceived once
again.

However, the four years of the Lusaka Protocol
produced a Government of National Unity, integrated armed
forces and a multi-party National Assembly. These gains
should be safeguarded and developed. The United States is
committed to the Lusaka Protocol and its institutions,
including the role of the troika of observer States, and to
the freedoms guaranteed under the Angolan Constitution.
This includes, importantly, the rights of a free press, which
are, unfortunately, under threat in Angola today. The issue
of a free press is of grave concern to my Government and,
despite our support of the sanctions and our efforts to work
closely with the Government of Angola, we do not believe
we can or should ignore this problem.

Our vote today in support of the draft resolution will
underscore the strong Council View that UNITA leader
Jonas Savimbi is in defiance of the will of the people he
claims to help and represent. The primary cause of the
present crisis is Savimbi's unwillingness to comply with his
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Mr. Savimbi should
read the writing on the wall here in this meeting today. The
noose - as one of the previous speakers said - is closing.
He should take action on his own to stop the pain and
suffering he is causing to the people of Angola. If he
does not, he will lose anyway, but at much greater cost to
the people of Angola and to himself.

Since his refusal to accept the results of the 1992
election, he has waged a war against the people of
Angola. He has exercised veto rights over the political,
economic and social life of the country, not because he
possesses a superior ideological vision or an electoral
majority, but because he has fielded a military force.

Security Council sanctions are designed to erode
UNITA's ability to export diamonds and import military
supplies, and I note the high importance we attach to the
new undertakings by the Government of Belgium in
regard to the diamond issue.

We note the Government of Angola's call for new
elections and the wide support this proposal has received.
This shows that the Government understands that all
mandates must be periodically reviewed by the people
and that the opposition itself is eager to launch into a new
campaign. As long as the elections are carried out in an
environment of open democratic processes and with
appropriate monitoring, we will support them. If all of
Angola's parties are given the political space to operate
freely, if the mass media and civil society movements can
speak without fear of reprisal, then Angola will be ready
for new elections, regardless of what Mr. Savimbi
believes or attempts to do.

Keeping sanctions pressure on UNITA will continue
to erode Mr. Savimbi's military options. Of course, unless
he sees the handwriting on the wall and ends his
performance - his behaviour - it will not happen
overnight. But I think the evidence is already showing
that the dedication that your country, Mr. President, has
brought to this task has made a major contribution. The
additional efforts that have been announced recently, plus
this very important and excellently drafted Security
Council draft resolution, have all made a major
contribution. We continue to support your efforts, Sir, and
we look forward to working together with you over the
next six months, and beyond, in pursuit of the goals the
Security Council, speaking on behalf of the international
community, has articulated here today.

