Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Pedersen for
their informative briefings. We reiterate our support
for their efforts to improve the living conditions
of the Syrian population and achieve peace in that
country - an aspiration that the Dominican Republic
fully shares.

The Dominican Republic supports all diplomatic
means for resolving this crisis regardless of whoever
takes the initiative to that end. That goal is undoubtedly
an ambitious task facing great challenges going forward,
in the light of the fragile and volatile situation in the
north-western part of the country. The 500 confirmed
civilian deaths over a three-month period, with more
than 400,000 displaced people and repeated attacks on
health-care and educational infrastructure, paint a truly
bleak picture.

We welcome the investigative process announced
by the Secretary-General and hope to see its results as
soon as possible. Furthermore, we support the draft
resolution submitted by the co-penholders as a clear
demonstration of the Council's commitment to peace
in Syria.

We believe that, at the present juncture, it is
essential to maintain our focus on the ultimate goal of
our efforts. For the Dominican Republic that objective
is clear - ensure a credible political process for and by
Syrians, with the facilitation of the United Nations, that
opens the door to a new national framework based on
the rule of law, respect for human rights and sustainable
development. We acknowledge the progress made on the
composition and rules ofprocedure of the constitutional
committee and await progress on its mandate. Those
three elements should be considered holistically. We
urge Ambassador Pedersen to continue advocating that
approach and solidifying the role of the United Nations
as guarantor and facilitator of the process.

In Ambassador Pedersen's most recent briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.8567), he conveyed to us the
feeling of distrust and lack of faith on the part of the
various stakeholders, in particular the opposition and
civil society, in the political process. For the Dominican
Republic, such sentiments jeopardize a sustainable
political solution. In order to reverse it, we believe it is
essential that the parties move forward with concrete
measures in the following direction.

First, they should move forward with the full
implementation of the September 2018 ceasefire
agreement. In areas under the control of the Government,
people must be able to return to their normal lives
without fear. That includes the millions of displaced
persons and refugees, whose return depends on viable
conditions for a dignified and safe life. The parties
should also advance the process to release detainees,
starting with the immediate suspension of arbitrary
detention and the unilateral release of women, children,
those who are ill and people with disabilities, as an act
of good faith. And they should ensure that all segments
of the society are included in the decision-making
process, in particular Syrian women.

The catastrophic humanitarian situation that
continues to unfold in the north-west of the country
could end up burying any opportunity that lies ahead
in the political process. Therefore, halting all hostilities
that endanger the lives of civilians must be pursued at
all costs. Retaking Idlib, however, cannot be pursued
at any cost. International humanitarian law must be
respected, civilian infrastructure must be protected and
humanitarian access must be maintained.

We underscore that any consideration of
establishing a possible safe zone must ensure the safety
and well-being of, and humanitarian access to, the
population. Furthermore, security and assistance must
be provided for the hundreds of thousands on the border
with Turkey. We encourage the donor community to
intensify efforts to fund the humanitarian response
plan as soon as possible. A sustainable solution to the
conflict will emerge only from the political commitment
of all parties, including external ones, to the peace and
prosperity of the Syrian people - their main objective.

