Mr. Nankervis (Australia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also wish
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/746)
and briefing, as well as Ambassador Momen for his
statement and valuable work as Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Peacebuilding is vital work. We know that about
half of the countries emerging from conflict relapse
into violence within five years - the situations
preoccupying the Council today provide ample evidence
of that. Ensuring that we take advantage of the critical
post-conflict window to shore up peace is one of the
most important endeavours we can undertake. Australia
looks forward to working with others to advance the
peacebuilding agenda in the Council. We hope to draw
on experiences from peacebuilding partnerships in our
own region.

We welcome progress within the United Nations
system, including work to enhance mission integration
and efforts to clarify roles and responsibilities, such
as the designation of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations designation as ajoint global focal point for
the rule of law; enhanced partnerships with the World
Bank and regional organizations; and work to improve
deployment of personnel with the right skill sets,
including importantly those from the global South,
through the civilian capacities initiative.

I would like now to focus on three aspects of the
Secretary-General's report.

I would first like to address the question of
transitions. Transitions and drawdowns can be
as important to maintaining stability as initial
deployments. We welcome the vital work under
way on the part of the Secretariat to develop a
transitions policy. It is a particularly topical issue,
given the many transitions in progress, including the
drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), on the subject of which we
welcome the presidential statement issued yesterday
(S/PRST/2012/27), the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the planned drawdown
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone. The Joint Transition Plan of the Timor-
Leste Government and UNMlT provides an especially
useful model.

Australia, the Solomon Islands and regional partners
are also working together to draw down the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI)
in 2013. Key lessons from that experience include the
importance ofbeginning transition planning early and of
emphasizing national capacity development. Successful
transitions require inclusive national ownership, as well
as flexibility and strong coordination with multilateral,
bilateral and non-governmental partners. They should
be conditions-based, not driven by artificial timelines.
The participation of women is vital.

That leads to my second point of focus, namely,
women's participation. The issue is not simply one
of equity. Experience consistently demonstrates
that peacebuilding processes that involve women
are more likely to succeed. The Secretary-General's
report points out that only modest progress has been
made on the seven-point action plan for gender-
responsive peacebuilding (see S/2010/466). We must
do better. Australia welcomes the Secretary-General's
commitment to the issue as a priority for his second
term.

Enhancing women's participation is incumbent
on us all. Australia has been learning lessons on the
issue through peace operations in our region. Since
2009, for example, the Regional Assistance Mission
to the Solomon Islands' Gender Adviser has provided
advice across the range of the mission's programmes
and Government agencies. RAMSI's assistance in
addressing gender inequality also focuses on removing
barriers to women's participation in Government.

The third issue I want to address is sustained
international support. Peacebuilding is a long-
term endeavour. Transforming institutions rarely
takes less than a generation. It requires a long-term
commitment. International support must be guided
by the overarching principle of national ownership, if
it is to be effective and sustainable. We welcome the
efforts of countries emerging from conflict to clearly
define their peacebuilding priorities. Australia is proud
of our partnership agreement with Timor-Leste, which
aligns our support with Timor-Leste's own Strategic
Development plan, and provides clear, measurable
targets for Australian assistance.

Finally, Australia believes that the PBC
has an important role to play. The Commission
needs to prioritize impact in the field. Its country
configurations, for example, should continue to work
in support of national actors and United Nations
leadership teams. Australia has consistently urged a
closer and more organic relationship between the PBC
and the Council, emphasizing the advisory role that
country configurations can play, especially on mandate
renewals and transitions, and their potential role in
early warning.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council
of Australia's commitment to ensuring that the
peacebuilding agenda delivers results on the ground
for the 1.5 billion people living in countries affected by
repeated cycles of violence.

