Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, I wish
to pay tribute to you, Mr. Minister, for having taken
the time to travel to New York in order personally to
preside over this important Security Council debate. I
should also like to pay tribute to your country, Senegal,
whose presidency has focused in particular on the issue
of strategic cooperation between regional organizations
and the United Nations, with specific attention devoted
to the African Union (AU).

(spoke in English)

Numerous reports have highlighted the fact that the
current international peace and security architecture
is under significant pressure given the complexity
of the peace and security challenges that the world
faces today. The complexity of today's crises is likely
only to increase, placing ever-greater demands on
this architecture. Forging an effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union is
therefore of the greatest strategic importance to our
collective security.

The African Union's proven ability to act as
first responder is a critical element of the evolving
international peace and security architecture. Since
the establishment of the Union in 2002, the AU and
the subregional organizations have demonstrated a
clear comparative advantage in two particular types of
situations: first, in missions where offensive operations
are needed and the United Nations is unable to deploy
forces in a timely manner; and, secondly, where the
Security Council is unable to mobilize the requisite
political consensus to initiate action. The AU has blazed
a path in its deployment of missions to Burundi, Darfur,
Somalia, Mali and the Central African Republic.

However, while the AU has the mandate,
experience and political will to deploy rapidly in
order to deliver in these cases, it is unable to sustain
such missions over the medium to long term because
it lacks sufficient means. For this reason, in 2015 the
African Union Heads of State and Government made
a commitment at the twenty-fourth ordinary session of
the Assembly to finance 25 percent of the cost of AU-
led peace-support operations from AU member States'
assessed contributions. This decision was reaffirmed at
the twenty-fifth ordinary session of the Assembly and
culminated in the Assembly's financing decision in
July this year, at the Kigali Summit.

Against this background, the AU has consistently
argued for predictable and sustainable financing
through United Nations assessed contributions for AU-
led peace operations that the United Nations cannot
itself undertake but that are regarded as critical to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The AU's view is that in deploying such missions, it
is doing so on behalf of the Security Council, which
retains primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international security in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.

There is general agreement that the current financing
arrangements for AU-led peace-support operations are
neither reliable nor predictable, especially in the context
of high- tempo combat operations. While partners have
demonstrated much flexibility and innovation - and I
wish to take this opportunity to express the profound
appreciation of the African Union for the support of
our partners - there is nonetheless a consensus that
the current financing arrangements continue to be
unsustainable. That is borne out by current experience
as partners, facing their own financial pressures back
home, are forced to cut back on the support provided,
most notably to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM).

In that respect, the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO),
which are consistent with the Common African
Position of the AU itself, are pertinent. In particular, it
will be recalled that the HIPPO report (see S/2015/446)
recommended that

"United Nations-assessed contributions be
provided on a case-by-case basis to support African
Union peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council" (S/2015/446, para. 249 (a)).
It should be noted that the joint African
Union-United Nations review of available mechanisms
to finance and support AU peace-support operations
authorized by the Security Council concluded that
access to United Nations-assessed contributions had
provided a reliable, predictable and sustainable means
of financing AU peace-support operations. From that
perspective, we can all agree that it is critical that
African Union peace-support operations authorized by
the Security Council be given the necessary support to
effectively address increasingly complex mandates in
increasingly challenging environments. The evidence
also shows that both the United Nations and the AU have
already shown considerable innovation and pragmatism
in identifying modalities to provide financial and
materiel support to AU missions, including through
assessed contributions in specific cases. It also shows
that access to United Nations-assessed contributions
provides the greatest predictability and sustainability
for certain types of missions.

Agreement on the principle that United Nations-
assessed contributions could be made available
to support United Nations-authorized AU-led
peace-support operations is therefore not a new
proposition. It is already being implemented in the case
of AMISOM, albeit in an ad hoc and partial manner.
The fact that we are having this debate on that critical
question today demonstrates that there is the strategic
imperative and the collective political will to move away
from ad hoc financing arrangements to a partnership
based on greater predictability, mutual accountability
and the two organizations' respective authorities,
competencies and capacities. The detailed proposals in
the report of the AU High Representative for the Peace
Fund, known as the Kaberuka report, provide a solid
foundation for the evolution of the strategic AU-United
Nations partnership in the area of peacekeeping.

This is a necessary evolution that will only enhance
the overall effectiveness of our international peace and
security architecture. We appreciate and recognize
the fact that there is much detail to be worked out
over the coming months, and we are confident that
our two institutions can quickly establish a joint
process to develop more detailed implementation
modalities to move us towards a substantive framework
draft resolution on predictable financing for AU-
led peace-support operations in 2017. We will need
to think deeply about the nature of the missions that
could benefit from that type of support from the United
Nations. It is clear that broader partnerships will still
be required to support the AU in that complex area,
but the AU-United Nations partnership will remain a
central pillar.

I would like to conclude by encouraging all
Council members to support the adoption of the draft
resolution under consideration, which, among other
things, expresses the Security Council's willingness
to consider how such a partnership could be realized
and identifies the tasks to be completed by the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission
to take the process forward. We also wish to recall
that this is an issue that has been on the agenda of the
African Union since 2007, having emerged initially
through the difficult experience of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan, which had to transition into the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur as a result ofthe AU lacking the funds to sustain
the Mission.

Experience has clearly shown that the lack of
financial support for AU missions has had a direct
impact on the overall success of those missions and
subsequent United Nations missions, since the AU
is forced to transition to United Nations missions
prematurely. Greater predictability would allow the
AU to properly stabilize the situation before handing
matters over to a United Nations mission, which could
be in the best interests of the AU, the United Nations
and peace and security in general.

The international system is going through a period
of profound reassessment, as old certainties are being
questioned and new fault lines of conflict emerge,
linked to growing inequality, migration, climate change
and governance issues, among other things. The United
Nations cannot, on its own, adequately respond to
those challenges; therefore, partnerships with regional
organizations such as the African Union will only
grow in importance. It is therefore vital that we work
to ensure that together we put in place the appropriate
architecture to meet those weighty challenges.

