Ms. Wensley (Australia): Australia is extremely
concerned about the continuing advance of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic in Africa and elsewhere. We associate ourselves
fully with the South Pacific countries' statement to the
Council.

I have a prepared statement, which I will circulate.
I wish simply to highlight several points.

The priority that Australia accords the fight against
HIV/AIDS in Africa is reflected in our aid programme.
Despite the fact that our international development effort
is primarily directed towards the Asia and Pacific region,
Africa does receive a high proportion of our global
HIV/AIDS expenditure. As a relatively small donor in
Africa, we will continue to direct a significant proportion
of our overall aid to Africa towards HIV/AIDS and to do
our best to play a supporting role in this area.

We have committed ourselves to spending $10
million over four years to help fight HIV/AIDS in
southern and eastern Africa in particular. Our HIV/AIDS
programme in Africa targets rural communities and the
more vulnerable members of society, including women
and children. In implementing the programme, we are
working very closely with the Governments of African
countries, with multilateral agencies and especially with

 

local non- governmental organizations - not something that
I have heard a great deal about in today's discussion, but an
aspect that we think is very important in the effective
implementation of programmes.

In our future bilateral projects, we will continue to
seek to strengthen partner Governments' capacity to engage
in long-term planning to address the social and economic
impact of the epidemic. In that respect, I have heard many
speakers place emphasis on the value of research, and they
have particularly emphasized the importance of medical
research. But for our part we think that there is very
important research that needs to be done in other areas and
which should be maintained. The sort of thing I am
thinking of is the kind of study that was done at the
Australian National University by the demographics area,
which was a 10-year study of AIDS in Africa. That
produced very important data - things like studies of life
expectancy in Zimbabwe, which has been reduced from the
50 years expected in the year 2000 to now 37 years. That
sort of data is very important for us all to be factoring into
our long-term planning to deal with the AIDS pandemic.

We wish also to place particular focus in our strategies
on youth and on mothers at risk of transmitting HIV to
their children. One initiative that we have taken recently
which may be of interest is to fund something called an
"optimal feeding practices programme" to reduce the risk
of mother-to-child transmission in southern Africa.

I would like to make three final points that are not in
my written statement but are in response to matters raised
in the discussion today, which I have found extremely
valuable.

First, I have noticed a constant interest in best-practice
lessons learned and in education and awareness-raising. The
focus of this discussion today is Africa, but AIDS is present
in Australia and in our region, and we have very well-
developed national and regional programmes at those levels
that we would wish to share and to draw on, in consultation
particularly with the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS.
In that respect, references to the clearing house and
the response that Peter Piot gave earlier in the day
underline, I think, the importance of that concept's being
developed and refined further, picking up on many of the
points made in today's debate.

The second point is that I detected a certain
impatience, perhaps, towards the end of the day, with a
long list of speakers, a certain diminishing attention span,
and I noted the comment by our colleague from the
United Kingdom that just the very fact that we have had
this debate was probably enough. And perhaps there has
been some repetition. But from the viewpoint of non-
members of the Council in particular, and of non-African
Member States, there are two very valuable things about
having a long list of speakers. First, it involves us in the
business of the Council as non-members, and secondly, it
is really important, not just that we are raising awareness
here, but that Member States speak and can convey
statements back to their own Governments.

Donor countries need to sensitive, galvanize and
mobilize our own communities in the support for AIDS,
and this sort of debate has an enormously beneficial
impact on helping us to sensitize our own communities,
not just the international community. After all, democratic
Governments are going to act only in response to
pressures from their communities and from their
electorates.

The third point is that the Permanent Representative
of Jamaica referred in her statement to peacekeeping. I
hope that Member States will bear what she said in mind
at the resumed session of the Fifth Committee in May and
June, which focuses on peacekeeping finance. I make that
point not just because I am the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, but because one of the problems with the
United Nations is that we over-compartmentalize our
work, and what Member States say and do in one forum
and one part of this system does not necessarily flow
through to their actions in other parts of the United
Nations.

What I would hope, in picking up the challenge that
Jeremy Greenstock laid down, and in asking what we are
going to do to follow up and where is the follow-through,
is that we will make an active and determined effort to
examine how what we have said here as Member States
is reflected in the decisions and the actions that we take
elsewhere, whether it be in the Commission on Human
Rights in Geneva or the Commission on the Status of
Women - which is especially important in view of the
vulnerability of women, to which so many people have
referred - whether it be in the meetings of executive
boards or in the decisions that are being made about
resource allocation, in committees dealing with
peacekeeping or in the preparations for the Millennium
Summit.

 

There have been a lot of calls here for people to be
creative and committed, but I think that we have to be
opportunistic and look at everything we are doing in this
House and in this Organization to give reflection to the sort
of concerns that have been expressed here, and that we
should be consistent in what we say and do as Member
States in addressing this epidemic and the threat that it
represents to international stability and security.

