Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I would like to join
my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
Allow me also to pay a warm tribute to Ambassador
Mahugu of Kenya for his wise and skilful guidance of the
proceedings of the Council in February.

A series of intense negotiations and considerable
sacrifices have shaped the momentum of the Middle East
peace process, which began in Madrid in 1991 and was
formalized in the Declaration of Principles and subsequent
agreements. Despite often deep ' frustrations, the
international community hoped that Israel would honour its
commitment to the peace package in all its aspects.
Unfortunately, Israel has often faltered, under various
excuses and pretexts, in fulfilling its obligations.
Nonetheless, with the recent signing of the Hebron protocol,
the prospects for a continued partnership in peace between
the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government grew
brighter. The basis for final status negotiations on Jerusalem
and other remaining issues was laid out in a workable
framework. It was in this context that Bangladesh
welcomed the signing of the Hebron protocol and expressed
the hope that all parties would work towards the creation
and nourishment of a climate for achieving a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. At the same time,
we reiterated that the immediate withdrawal of Israeli
troops from allioccupied Arab and Palestinian lands was an
essential prerequisite for this goal.

We were jolted by the recent decision of the Israeli
Government to build new settlements in Jabal Abu Ghneim
in East Jerusalem. Clearly, this move not only violates the
spirit and terms of the agreements to which the Israeli

Government is a party, but also raises serious doubt about
the sincerity of the Israeli Government towards the entire
peace process. Israel is now trying to preempt the
outcome of the negotiations on the final status by
changing the legal and demographic composition of the
Holy City of Jerusalem. But we want to remind Israel that
Jerusalem is not only a city as close to the hearts of the
Palestinians as to the Israelis themselves; it is a place of
crucial importance to the entire Muslim world, in
particular, and to the international community in general.

Jerusalem constitutes the critical test of Israeli's
sincerity and commitment to the peace process. It is a
commitment Israel has made so many, times to the
international community. No mistake should be made that
the Israeli move on Jerusalem stands in clear violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Israel must not
underestimate, the devastating backlash which this hasty
and provocative decision on East Jerusalem might
unleash. This could throw the entire region back into a
spiral of uncertainty and chaos. The international
community is not ready to tolerate any situation that has
been created deliberately to satisfy the objectives of
domestic political aspirations in Israel.

Bangladesh therefore expresses its deep concern and
deplores the illegal and provocative measures initiated by
Israel, which may jeopardize whatever progress has been
achieved in the ongoing peace process in the Middle East.
Bearing in mind the special responsibility of the Security
Council in respect of the overall peace process in the
Nfiddle East, it is our earnest hope that the Security
Council will take urgent steps to ensure that the Israeli
Government reverses its decision to build settlements in
Jabal Abu Ghneim and desists from any settlement
activity in the occupied territories in future.

