President Sall (spoke in French): I would
genuinely like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting on implementing the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peacekeeping Operations.

Peacekeeping missions are often deployed in
hostile environments, where armed and extremist
groups target our peacekeepers - not to mention the
lack of cooperation from certain host countries. Too
often, current missions are going beyond the strict
peacekeeping security framework and taking on
aspects such as economic and humanitarian assistance,
protecting human rights, providing assistance to
displaced persons and even refugee management within
host countries. The recommendations set out in the report
(see S/2015/446) ofthe High-level Panel, as well as those
in the subsequent report (S/2015/682) of the Secretary-
General, call for bold measures whose effective
implementation should allow peacekeeping operations
to enter a new phase in accomplishing their missions. I
would like to congratulate Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his resolved determination in advancing
the agenda on peacekeeping operations reform.

I would now like to focus on the relationships
between stakeholders. I believe that the Security
Council should strengthen its cooperation with
countries neighbouring conflicts as well as with
regional and subregional organizations - specifically
with the African Union. With that in mind, the eleventh
annualjoint consultations between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which this year took place in Addis Ababa on 7 and
8 September, should help to further harness the benefits
of that dynamic of cooperation. To that end, defining
the mandates of operations should, from now on, be
based on objective and complete information. Before
any forces are deployed, we must first conduct a frank
and clear assessment of requirements, in particularl
with regard to resources and equipment.

I would like to focus on the example of the
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), which we are all familiar with. It is
currently the United Nations most deadly mission, with
peacekeepers being killed throughout the year. Imagine
what MINUSMA would be like without the presence of
the French forces of Operation Barkhane, which took
on the baton of responsibility in January 2013. Despite
the presence of 10,000 Blue Helmets in Mali, today
our soldiers still face unsafe circumstances. Sahel
countries and the African Union have frequently called
for the strengthening of the mandate, to make it more
robust and, accordingly, to provide United Nations
forces with the equipment required and clear missions.
As we know, it is not always a matter of maintaining
peace, as sometimes we have to impose peace to save
human lives. We cannot do that against well-equipped
hostile forces. Therefore, I think that the very nature of
peacekeeping mandates must evolve to avoid spending
endless amounts of money - with the outcome, as we
just heard from the Chair ofthe Panel, being ineffective.

Another key issue that the Security Council must
address is that of strengthening triangular discussions
among the Security Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat in order to foster a spirit
of partnership, cooperation and mutual trust. In terms
of regional offices, I think the Chair is correct in
saying that preventive diplomacy should be prioritized.
Therefore, we must boost the quality of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. In my
view, they should be respected persons who are able
to speak directly with the Heads of State of the region
concerned. Whatever the case, we need thinking on
this issue. In fact, I think it is not simply a matter of
United Nations officials, but also of having people in
place who can have influence on Heads of State, since
it is the Heads of State who can get those responsible to
get things done.

As Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, Senegal has contributed to the undertaking
of implementing the recommendations of the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
report, by organizing thematic discussions to support
stakeholder dialogue. Similarly, along with the United
States of America, Senegal co-initiated resolution 2320
(2016), on cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, which served to launch a
consultation process between the two organizations
to define the modalities and mechanisms to enable
effective management of the issue.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
commitment to peacekeeping missions. It is laudable
that, through resolution 2154 (2014), the Security
Council commemorated the Senegalese presence
by establishing, on 8 May 2014, the Captain Mbaye
Diagne Medal for Exceptional Courage, to honour
United Nations military, police, civilian and associated
personnel who have endured extreme danger in the
service of humankind and the United Nations.

The professionalism of our troops also depends
upon their ability to refrain from any act of misconduct
that could tarnish the image and reputation of the
United Nations.

