Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I am glad to welcome Mrs. Ogata once again to
the Security Council.

I have two comments and two questions. My first
comment is very simple: we share your assessment,
Mr. President, of the briefing which was just given to us by
Mrs. Ogata, and we reaffirm our support for the activities
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR).

My second comment regards the subject with which
Mrs. Ogata began her statement - namely, the fate of the
regional representative of UNHCR in the Northern
Caucasus, Mr. Cochetel. We have already discussed this
question with Mrs. Ogata today at our meeting with her,
and I wish to reaffirm that the Russian Government is
doing everything necessary in order to ensure the release of
Mr. Cochetel as speedily as possible. We spoke in detail
about efforts in this area when Under-Secretary-General
Sergio Vieira de Mello was in Moscow recently, and we
are counting on this question's being resolved in the very
near future.

Now I wish to ask my two questions. We have heard
today that the problem of the refugees and displaced
persons in Kosovo - which we hope will be successfully
resolved - should not force us to forget about the
problems of refugees in other countries in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia, where there are an enormous
number of people still unable to return to their homes.

Mrs. Ogata has already noted that the process of the
return of the refugees - in particular, the return of the
national minorities - is not going very quickly. We
encourage UN HCR and, naturally, the High Representative,
to do everything possible to speed up this process. This is
important not only for Bosnia, but also for Croatia, in the
territory of Eastern Slavonia.

Therefore, my question is, as the problem of the mass
return has not yet been resolved, what is the situation
regarding rendering international assistance to those
countries in whose territory there continue to be hundreds
of thousands of refugees? Are there sufficient means for
that? And, if not, then why not? Perhaps there is a need
to appeal to donors for additional support here.

My second question is the following: Mrs. Ogata
spoke of the existence of the "soft" option for action in
conflict situations, of the possibility of the establishment
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and of the
"medium" option by which the regional organizations
could deploy their peacekeeping operations. I agree that
all of these options need to be taken fully into account,
and I am sure that when necessary, the Security Council
will support each of these three options.

Recently, however, voices spoke up in favour of
what we might perhaps call the fourth option. Statements
have been made to the effect that the humanitarian crisis
in a given country in itself is already sufficient grounds
for unilateral armed intervention, without any kind of
decision by the Security Council. As regards the political
and international legal implications of such statements, we
understand the sense here that this is a totally
unacceptable approach, running counter to all the bases of
the existing system of international relations. I would like
to know - regarding the humanitarian aspect of this
problem - whether there are possibilities now for
Mrs. Ogata to say what might be the humanitarian
consequences in case such ideas of unilateral
humanitarian interference with the use of force were
implemented, regardless of the existence of decisions of
the Security Council. What might be the consequences for
the humanitarian situation and for operations of the
humanitarian agencies?

