Mr. Westcott: I have the honour to speak this
morning on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia,
Albania and Turkey; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Armenia,
align themselves with this statement.

Like others, before anything else Ijoin in expressing
our condemnation ofthe atrocity that has taken place in
Peshawar, Pakistan. We express our condolences to the
Government, the people and the families of the victims
of those involved. We recall similar attacks against
schoolchildren in Nigeria and elsewhere, which equally
deserved our condemnation at the time.

I would like to thank the Chadian presidency for
bringing to the table the subject of cooperation with
regional organizations in the field of peace operations.
The fact that the issue has been discussed three times
in the Security Council this year is testimony to its
relevance. The European Union expresses its support
for presidential statement S/PRST/2014/27, which has
been adopted and issued today.

Chad itself has played a critical role in tackling
regional peace and security challenges on the African
continent and in its immediate region, so Chad knows
that the kind of security threats that we now face almost
invariably require a collective regional and international
response, particularly where a peacekeeping role
is required. That necessarily involves a range of
partnerships.

The partnership of the African Union (AU) and
its regional organizations with the United Nations has
evolved rapidly over the past decade, from capacity-
building programmes to joint operations. In Mali, and
more recently in the Central African Republic, the
successful handover or transition of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) and
the African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic (MISCA) to the the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) are clear
illustrations of that increasingly effective partnership.
Today. Africa is the continent that contributes more
peacekeepers than any other to United Nations
operations. Nearly 50 per cent of the 100,000 United
Nations peacekeepers come from African countries.

Mr. Mangaral took the Chair.

The European Union has long-standing partnerships
with both the African Union and the United Nations.
In the field of security and peace support operations
those partnerships increasingly overlap, and it is very
timely to reflect on how that trilateral cooperation
works, and how it could work even better. As was
reaffirmed at the EU-Africa Summit in Brussels in
April, the European Union is committed to supporting
Africa's efforts to manage its own security. To help
build African solutions to African problems, we have
from the outset supported from the outset the African
Peace and Security Architecture (APSA), and we aim
to give practical help at all levels - national, regional
and continental - to enable its implementation, within
the limits of our resources and our treaty obligations,
which, for example, prevent the supply by the European
Union of military hardware. A number of additional
steps were identified in the road map for implementation
of the follow-up to the EU-Africa Summit, including,
first, intensified political dialogue on security,
defence and crisis management issues; secondly, the
operationalization of APSA, in particular by supporting
the African Standby Force; and thirdly, the pursuit of
sustainable funding for African deployment and crisis
management capacity.

The European Union has put its money where
its mouth is. In the 10 years since 2004, the EU has
provided €1.2 billion in support of AU-led peace
operations through the African Peace Facility. That
includes contributions to support both AFISMA
and MISCA, but the largest amount has been the EU
share of the costs of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). This is an excellent example
of the three-way cooperation whereby the African
Union coordinates the force contributors and assures
the command of the operation, the European Union
provides stipends for the AU's 22,000 troops, and the
United Nations and the United States provide logistics,
equipment and training. It is a genuine joint effort.

Such peace support operations, however, do not
come cheap, and even the European Union's resources
are finite. It is therefore important that others also
contribute to building African capacities, as some
colleagues around the table have already indicated
their countries are prepared to do, and help fund
such operations until such time as African countries
themselves can cover the full cost. We note that progress
in implementation of the African Standby Force has not
perhaps been as fast as anticipated, but we take note
that the efforts to introduce the African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crises and to make it more
rapidly deployable will be welcome and important.

This trilateral cooperation among the EU, the
United Nations and Africa is like the three legs of a
stool. They provide a stable basis for peace support
operations across the continent. In Mali, for example,
the EU is able to draw on one of its other instruments,
under our Common Security and Defence Policy, to
provide both civilian and military training missions for
the reconstruction and retraining of the Malian armed
forces. That is part of a coherent medium-term strategy
to build up Africa's national capacities, enabling it in
due course to replace the United Nations peace support
operation, MINUSMA.

All in all, 16 Common Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations have been deployed on the
African continent so far, usually in coordination with
the United Nations and the AU, bringing practical
support and concrete results in a number of fragile
and post-crisis countries. In the Central African
Republic, the European Union-led force, has been
working closely alongside both the AU mission MISCA
and now MINUSCA to provide vital protection for
the civil population in Bangui. In Somalia, the EU
Training Mission has been providing key support to
the Somali security forces, which in turn have worked
closely alongside AMISOM. to improve the security
situation and to push back the terrorist threat posed
by Al-Shabaab. Through Operation Atalanta offshore,
the EU has helped drive private piracy from the seas
around the Horn of Africa.

In recent years, as the EU has evolved with its
member States to become a global player, we have used
a range of our political, diplomatic, financial and crisis
management tools to restore or preserve peace. Clearly,
it is preferable to prevent conflict breaking out in the
first place, and conflict prevention, together with early
warning mechanisms, is an increasingly important part
of our approach to fragile regions throughout the world.
In Africa, we pursue such actions, again, in close
collaboration with the United Nations and the AU. The
Great Lakes is a good example of close cooperation in
helping to resolve the challenge to peace and security
that was posed by the Mouvement du 23 mars. The
remaining problem there posed by residual elements
of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR) also needs to be dealt with if genuine and
lasting peace is to be brought to that troubled region.
We look to the 2 January deadline, when, if the FDLR
has not responded, action will need to be taken.

On Somalia, the EU has firmly supported the
endeavours of AMISOM. and the cooperation of the AU
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to enhance the effectiveness of our action in
support of a more inclusive political process. In South
Sudan, we commend and support the efforts of IGAD
and the African Union, but we remain concerned about
the situation in Darfur and urge all three parties - the
United Nations, the AU and the Sudan - to find a way
to enable the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur to complete its mandate.

To prevent conflict, however, nothing works better
than good transparent and accountable Government, in
which citizens and groups in a country feel that they
are represented and protected and that their concerns
are heard. Hence, efforts by the AU and United Nations
to encourage good governance, respect for human
rights, the fight against corruption and the full respect
of constitutional rule are fundamental building blocks
to prevent crises. This was expressed clearly and well
in the communique following the 463rd meeting of the
Peace and Security Council of the AU on 27 October:

"[B]uilding strong, responsive and accountable
State institutions at the local and national levels
that deliver essential services, as well as ensure
inclusive political processes, rule of law and
public security, is key to preventing conflicts and
consolidating peace building gains."

The EU fully associates itself with those
conclusions. The EU is prepared to continue to commit
its instruments and experience to support African
countries that have decided to follow this guidance in
building effective, honest and loyal security sectors
to manage the security of their own countries. We
encourage other international partners to join the
efforts to help finance such capacity-building. Strong
cooperation between the African Union, the United
Nations and the European Union can have the greatest
effect in facing immediate challenges and in building
long-term capacities to address underlying causes
comprehensively.

In conclusion, as we often say with our United
Nations colleagues, peace and security cooperation
has become a way of life. The same should apply to
cooperation among all three of us.

