Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): I, too, would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and Special Representative Klein for his
encouraging briefing. Five years have passed since the
signing of the Dayton/Paris Accords, and during that
time much has been achieved in terms of stabilization
and reconstruction.

The international community has not let the call
for assistance go unheeded. It has contributed $5.1
billion to the reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Apart from financial assistance, we are
indebted to the indefatigable efforts of the men and
women serving in UNMIBH and the Stabilization
Force (SFOR).

As was noted by several participants in the 23
and 24 May session of the Peace Implementation
Council, Bosnia and Herzegovina today stands at a
crossroads. Now that reconstruction and stabilization
have been achieved, all efforts should be focused on a
new institutional infrastructure. The leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina must play a leading role here
and should finally begin to meet this challenge. In this
respect, much more could have been achieved over the
past few years. It is the hope of my delegation that the
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina will at last rise
to the occasion and devote all of its efforts to
comprehensive nation-building.

In this context, let me identify three areas which
require immediate attention and action. First, with
regard to the political domain, as we have stated many
times before, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
functioning and democratically accountable common
institutions. What we expect from the Bosnian
authorities is the political will and leadership to bring
this about.

Secondly, with regard to the field of economic
reform, we must admit that not much has been
achieved. Rather, we have witnessed a continuation of
the economic status quo, which seems to serve both
economic and political vested interests. We believe that
a breakthrough can be achieved through privatization.
We therefore call for a quick, equitable and transparent
privatization process.

Thirdly, with regard to the return of refugees and
displaced persons, the Secretary-General notes in
paragraph 24 of his report (S/2000/529), that,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, minority returns
quadrupled in the first quarter of this year, from 1,711
in 1999 to 7,300. In itself, this is a welcome
development. But the Secretary-General also notes in
paragraph 35 of his report that the rate of return is still
unsatisfactory and far below expectations, especially
with regard to areas where such returnees would now
constitute a minority.

In the View of my delegation, all the authorities
concerned, at all levels in particular, at the local
level should give the highest priority to the question
of the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. By the same token, the Netherlands pays
tribute to the Special Representative and to UNMIBH
for their commitment to this important matter.

Finally, we share Mr. Klein's enthusiasm about
the establishment of the State Border Service. But we
would like to take this opportunity to recall and I will
not try to conceal my delegation's growing impatience
in this respect that the Netherlands has offered to
contribute to the operational costs of the State Border
Service, on the condition that these costs appear in the
national budget. Up until now, this simple condition
has not been met. The question of the State Border
Service is just one instance of the sort of renewal of the
institutional infrastructure in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that the international community is eagerly waiting for.

