Mr. Brown (United Kingdom): I want to start by
thanking President Mbeki for convening this event and
for his important and pivotal role in the creation of the
African Union (AU) and the New Partnership for
Africa's Development, both of which are essential to
ensuring African solutions to the challenges that Africa
faces.
7

Six decades ago, the United Nations declared its
ambition to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war and recognized that peace and
prosperity are indivisible. Today's discussion is an
opportunity to forge a new consensus on the support
that is now needed to prevent conflict, to resolve
conflict and to rebuild from conflict afterwards. Work
by the African Union, which I applaud, has laid the
foundations for a political solution in Kenya in recent
weeks, and it has helped create the conditions for
recovery in Sierra Leone, Liberia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other areas of the continent.
But we recognize that the African Union needs more
support, which, as President Mbeki has said, must be
part of a wider endeavour.

Today there is still a gaping hole in our ability to
address the illegitimate threats and use of force against
innocent people. It is to our shame that the
international community did not act in Rwanda. Darfur
shows the urgent needs that yet have to be met. Today
there are 28,000 African peacekeepers. But if we are to
honour our responsibility to protect behind borders
where there are atrocities, we need to ensure more
systematic support for peacekeepers, and we need to
build the capacity of vulnerable nations to prevent
conflict. Therefore, in addition to training 12,000
African peacekeepers, Britain will step up its
contribution to the joint European Union-African
Union training exercises in support of the African
Union's Peace and Security Directorate. But I believe
we also need agreement on more predictable and
sustainable sources of funding, as has already been
mentioned around this table.

I welcome the Secretary-General's proposals for a
senior panel, which should, among other things,
examine the creation of an international trust fund with
United Nations oversight.

History tells us that fragile and conflict States
need not only humanitarian aid and peacekeeping, they
need to combine that with help for stabilization and
reconstruction. For countries where breakdown has
occurred, it is now right to agree major changes in the
way the international order responds, so that we can
systematically combine humanitarian aid and
peacekeeping with help for reconstruction and
development.
Therefore, during our presidency of the Security
Council next month in May, Britain will propose that

when Security Council resolutions authorize
peacekeeping missions, the whole United Nations
system also is able to authorize action on stabilization
and reconstruction. A single envoy is given authority
for coordinating international efforts on peacekeeping
and recovery in post-conflict zones, and a United
Nations fund is created to provide immediate support
for reconstruction, to which Britain will contribute. In
the same way that we have military forces ready to
respond to conflicts, we should agree to have civilian
experts ready on standby to deploy quickly to help
rebuild countries emerging from instability. For that
purpose, Britain will lead the way by making available
a thousand-strong United Kingdom standby civilian
force including police, emergency services,
professionals, judges and trainers.

I have alluded to the work done in Kenya, Darfur,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts
of Africa. Three weeks ago, the people of Zimbabwe
sent a strong message of their commitment to
democracy. In line with President Kikwete's comments
today, Britain supports those in the African Union and
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) who are working to ensure that the will of the
Zimbabwean people is upheld. We will do everything
to encourage those efforts. I am pleased that SADC is
to meet again this weekend.

We should also respond to the Secretary-
General's suggestion that the United Nations can do a
great deal to help in support of the African Union and
SADC. I welcome the Secretary-General's statement
today. Having seen the results at polling stations, no
one thinks that President Mugabe has won this
election. A stolen election would not be a democratic
election at all. As the Secretary-General has said, the
credibility of the democratic process depends on there
being a legitimate Government. Therefore, let a single
clear message go out from here in New York that we
are and will be vigilant for democratic rights, that we
stand solidly behind democracy and human rights for
Zimbabwe and that we stand ready to support
Zimbabweans in building a better future.

