Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
On your initiative, Mr. President, the Security Council
has come to Nairobi to discuss peace in the Sudan with
the principal participants in the Naivasha process. The
exceptional nature of this meeting attests to how
strongly the international community desires the return
of peace to the Sudan.
The signing of a final peace agreement for the
south is essential for stability throughout the region, as
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
mediators were well aware when they offered their
support to the parties. France salutes their efforts and
particularly those made over the past few years by
General Sumbeiywo on behalf of the Kenyan
Government.

The signing of a final peace agreement between
the Khartoum Government and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) is, in the view of all
those we heard yesterday and today, within our grasp.
We have come here to say to Vice-President Taha and
to Mr. Garang that it is now up to them to move swiftly
towards the conclusion of their negotiations.

The Sudanese have been waiting eagerly for this
peace for the two years and more since the Machakos
ceasefire agreement was signed. We cannot forget, and
cannot repeat too often, that it is the ordinary people
who have paid the heavy price of war and that what
happened in the south of Sudan is a real humanitarian
tragedy. We should not prolong the suffering of the
people by letting the situation of uncertainty drag on:
everyone agrees that that is what makes for a fragile
state of affairs.

The negotiators are responsible to their
compatriots to conclude a peace agreement without
further delay. It goes beyond this concern, to the
stability of the entire country. Further procrastination
on south Sudan could have negative consequences
elsewhere.

We are bound to welcome the solemn
commitment just made by Vice-President Taha and
Mr. Garang, to settle those issues which still stand in
the way of a comprehensive agreement by the end of
the year. In that regard, we will not fail to monitor very
closely the establishment of the new institutions.

Everyone agrees that peace in Sudan will not be
complete without a political settlement for Darfur. The
fact that the Security Council has come to Nairobi is a
clear sign of our urgent concern - because of the
appalling humanitarian tragedy that the conflict has
caused, and also because of the threat it poses to
international peace and security. The presence of
230,000 Sudanese refugees in Chad creates a serious
humanitarian problem. Given the climate of violence
and impunity which continues to reign in Darfur, this is
another worrying factor contributing to instability.

The Government and the Darfur rebels must fulfil
all of their obligations. The information we are
receiving, which indicates that violence by all parties
continues against civilians, is extremely worrying. The
violence must cease immediately and fully. Impunity
for the perpetrators must not be tolerated. The
Government must, as it has committed itself to do,
prosecute those responsible with no further delay.

The resolution we have just unanimously adopted
shows that the Security Council, for its part, is ready to
shoulder its responsibilities. The advance mission set
up by the Secretary-General means that when the time
comes we will be ready to implement a comprehensive
peace agreement.

The Council renews its support for the
remarkable efforts of the African Union to foster peace
in Darfur, both by sending observers and troops into
the field and through political mediation in Abuja. The
Council would like to encourage the donor community
to mobilize in order to support those efforts and to
offer the aid necessary for the implementation of a
comprehensive peace agreement.

But the Security Council also expects the parties,
in their turn, to shoulder their responsibilities. They
must be aware that they will be held to account with
regard to compliance with their commitments and
implementation of Council resolutions.

The Security Council today offers encouragement
to all parties who are sincere in their desire to
contribute to peace in the Sudan. Each of them,
however, must be aware that the Council will not fail
to be extremely exacting when it comes to making sure
that they comply fully with their commitments.

