The President (spoke in Arabic): Before turning
to the item on our agenda, I should like to acknowledge
and welcome the presence at the Council table of the
new Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Wang Guangya, and the
new Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Ibrahima Sow. On
behalf of the Council, I should like to extend a warm
welcome to Ambassador Wang and Ambassador Sow
and to wish them every success. We look forward to
cooperating with them in the Council's work.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Letter dated 15 October 2002 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/1146 and Add.1)

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/1l46 and addendum 1, which
contains the text of a letter dated 15 October 2002 from
the Secretary-General.
Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2003/803, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1499 (2003).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.

