I would like to thank you, Madam President, and South Africa for your continued efforts in implementing resolution 2151 (2014) and in prioritizing security sector reform. This debate is a clear example of that commitment. I also thank the various speakers for their valuable insights and recommendations. United Nations support for security sector reform has quickly advanced, and the conversation is now based on broader peacebuilding and development perspectives and is moving towards a more comprehensive and sustainable approach to peace. In recent years, the Security Council has made progress in strengthening institutions and governance, not only to end violence and conflict but also to support citizen security and justice, including through the adoption of more resolutions with security sector reform and management provisions. However, major challenges remain for the full implementation of resolution 2151 (2014). This debate is critical to focusing on the context of peacebuilding, so we must identify opportunities to better include initiatives related to security sector reform in transition contexts. When security sectors do not function well, society loses confidence in institutions. Therefore, the management and professionalization of the security sector must be at the heart of the mandates and activities of peace operations. Beyond the Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council are critical to implementing security sector reform. In order to be workable for countries and their peoples, national security structures must be effective, accountable and adhere to the rule of law. It must be borne in mind that, to ensure national ownership of security-sector reform processes, the national authorities must be the ones to lead and promote such efforts. Likewise, States must ensure that institutions are accessible and receptive to all and that efforts in the areas of security and protection have the broadest possible scope. To that end, inclusive consultations must be carried out with all sectors of society, particularly civil society, women and youth. Integrating a gender perspective in security-sector reform must be a daily undertaking on the part of the armed forces, the police and law-enforcement institutions. Security-sector reform is without a doubt an instrument for peacebuilding. Lasting stability, conflict prevention and development require that we move from a strict security perspective to one that is centred on people and governance. We see opportunities for the Council to focus on human security and governance and to more comprehensively address the root causes of conflict. In societies emerging from conflict, security-sector reform is a determining factor in moving from a peacekeeping context to one of peacebuilding. The central objective of security-sector reform continues to be the creation of national institutions that contribute to international peace and security, sustainable development and the full exercise of human rights. We would therefore like to see more updates on such initiatives in mission reports based on the links between security-sector reform and governance, peacebuilding and peacekeeping and their integration into the three pillars of the United Nations system. The long-term perspective necessary for peacebuilding and the maintenance of peace is where the potential for security-sector reform efforts lies. That will lead us to a transformative commitment that will allow for a sustainable reform of security institutions.
