Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the Permanent Representative of
the United States on her country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
I wish her every success. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom for her efforts at
the helm of the Council in November.

I am grateful to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) for her briefing on the situation in Iraq for the
period from July to October. I welcome the briefing by
Mr. Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations. I
am also grateful for the presence of Archbishop Warda
and for his briefing, with a few reservations on some of
its paragraphs.

Following the casualties incurred in the course ofthe
peaceful protests that occurred in my country, I extend
my condolences to the families of the martyrs - may
they rest in peace - and wish those who were injured
a speedy recovery.

It has been more than a month since popular
demonstrations began in Baghdad and cities in
the southern part of the country. The Iraqi people
eloquently expressed their opinion of the political and
electoral system in the country, the performance of the
Government and the needed reforms in the political,
legal and public sectors. Those brilliant demonstrations
were marred by the presence of illegal groups that
attacked demonstrators and security forces, leading to a
number of casualties. Those groups have nothing to do
with the protests. They have used the demonstrations as
cover and the demonstrators as human shields to block
roads, commit acts of looting and arson and attack
security forces with Molotov cocktails, hand grenades,
firearms and knives. They have also disrupted the
operation of schools and ports. In that regard, I take
this opportunity to clarify some substantive points.

The Iraqi Government fully recognizes the right to
demonstrate as a right guaranteed by the Constitution
of Iraq, as set out in the statement made by the
Prime Minister on 4 November. The Government is
committed to providing the Iraqi people with the
opportunity to express themselves and their demands
without undermining public order or destroying public
or private property.

We will spare no effort to meet all the legitimate
demands of the demonstrators, especially those calling
for vital economic and political reforms through the
relevant constitutional mechanisms. In that connection,
the Government of Iraq is conducting investigations,
with follow up at the highest levels, to identify the
illegal groups that infiltrated the protests. Those groups
are rioting against both demonstrators and security
forces. They have also attacked public facilities,
the Central Bank, publishing and press houses, and
recently set ablaze a number of stores on Al-Rasheed
Street, Al-Khulani Square and the vicinity, claiming
300 martyrs and injuring more than 1,500 individuals
among the demonstrators and security forces.

In that connection, the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in Iraq (S/2019/903) addresses
the recent developments and demonstrations in Iraq,
referring to a number of violations related to the use
of violence against demonstrators. We stress that the
Iraqi Government has dealt with those demonstrators
in accordance with the Constitution by protecting
them and deterring any attack against them. Strict
instructions against the use of live ammunition and
lethal weapons remain in place. The security forces
are not engaging with the demonstrators or attacking
them. They have instead adopted a defensive posture
even though the illegal groups that have infiltrated
the demonstrators have stormed the checkpoints on
Al-Sinak and Al-Jumhuriya bridges and attacked the
public and Government facilities.

The Prime Minister has ordered the establishment
of special committees to conduct duly transparent
investigations, bring persons at fault to account and
refer these cases to competent judicial authorities to
carry out the investigations in those violations and
identify those who have targeted the demonstrators.
The Government has also decided to cover the expenses
of the treatment of all injured people, both among the
security forces and the peaceful demonstrators.

I would like to quote a statement made by Prime
Minister Adil Abdul Mahdi regarding the temporary
ban of Internet services,

"The digital world is a contemporary reality and
a right for all. However, when defending the rights
of the public, the authorities are obliged to restrict
that right when they see it being used to promote
hatred and violence and disrupt public life."

Internet services have now been restored. The Iraqi
Government has also rejected all attempts to put the
security of Iraq at risk or harm the Iraqi people, including
kidnappings and attacks against demonstrators carried
out by illegal groups. The Government will take the
necessary measures to place all weapons under the
authority of the State, in line with previous relevant
efforts. In response to demonstrators' demands
and the call by the Supreme Religious Authority in
Najaf - which has issued a number of statements
in support of the demands of the demonstrators and
the Government in fulfilling its responsibility to
protect the demonstrators' lives, and has called on the
Government and the Parliament to take the necessary
measures to fast-track the reform process while
condemning external interference that seeks to derail
the demonstrations and achieve goals that do not serve
the interests of Iraq and its people - the Government
of Iraq has launched wide-ranging reform packages in
consultation with relevant parties, including the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Those
actions are in keeping with the relevant Government
decisions, namely, those numbered 340,341, 363 and
364, which include enacting laws that promote social
justice and support the anti-corruption efforts of the
Supreme Judicial Council.

For example, the Government has adopted a law
to eliminate the financial privileges granted to Iraqi
officials, as well as a new retirement law that would
provide 300,000 job opportunities. The Government
has also presented a new electoral draft law, in addition
to a draft law on the establishment of the Independent
High Electoral Commission to the Parliament. The
first reading of those two draft laws took place in
Parliament on 19 November. The Iraqi Parliament has
also established the Constitutional Review Committee
that in turn has called on all relevant parties in Iraq,
including academia, journalists, activists and civil
society, to contribute to constitutional amendments
in order to meet society's needs and the demands of
the demonstrators. That was done in cooperation with
United Nations experts.

In that context, I stress the guiding role played
by UNAMI, in line with its mandate, by holding and
strengthening dialogues with the President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament to discuss the
necessary measures to be taken to meet the demands
of the protesters. We urge UNAMI to comply with
the mechanisms of its mandate, in line with
resolution 2470 (2019).

In accordance with the sermon ofthe High Religious
Authority in Najaf on Friday, 29 November, and in line
with the demands of the protesters, Prime Minister Adil
Abdul Mahdi submitted his resignation to Parliament on
the same day in order to give it the opportunity to form
a new Cabinet. Parliament accepted the resignation on
1 December and we are waiting for the President of the
Republic to choose a new candidate from the largest
parliamentary bloc to form a new Cabinet.

The Iraqi Government has responded to the
demonstrators in a number of ways. In addition to
the aforementioned laws, a number of decisions have
been taken to support employment by providing grants
to implement small projects, hiring post-graduates in
Iraqi Ministries and accepting volunteers to join the
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of the Interior,
as well as facilitating the distribution of land and the
allocation of loans to build new houses in the most
impoverished governorates.

We have also implemented a new social protection
system, a new social security system and a health
insurance system. At the administrative level, the
Cabinet has established the new Federal Service
Council, which will ensure transparency in the hiring
of all Iraqi public servants.

The Government continues to implement its
reforms to kick-start the economy by increasing non-oil
revenues, encouraging domestic investment and
drafting the new law on the reconstruction Council,
while reviewing and facilitating the current investment
laws and removing obstacles to attract foreign
investment, in cooperation with all friendly States such
as the United States, Russia and China, the European
Union and others.

Most recently, the Government has been able
to achieve the successful repatriation of nearly
80 per cent ofinternally displaced persons, thanks to its
tremendous efforts to ensure that the requirements of
voluntary return are in place at three important levels:
the provision of services; security, judicial and criminal
scrutiny; and meeting community peace requirements,
concerning which the Government has signed an
agreement with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) to implement projects valued at
$33 million to restore stability in the affected areas.

My government is keen to accelerate the submission
of the draft budget for 2020 by giving priority to
increasing non-oil revenues in order to enhance the
proportion of the investment budget to provide a
suitable economic environment for job creation and
to support the new reform packages in response to the
demands of the demonstrators.

My government is also keen to strengthen and
intensify efforts to address the legacy of Islamic State
terrorist gangs and to create an action plan to deal with
children recruited by the terrorist organization, foreign
terrorist fighters, the wives and widows of terrorists
and their children, and the survivors and rape victims
of terrorists, as well as to strengthen efforts to stabilize
the liberated areas and address security concerns
related to human rights upon the return of terrorist
elements and their families to Iraq. We commend the
efforts of States that have taken responsibility for their
nationals and their transfer to their countries, and urge
others to receive their nationals, women and children
who have served their sentences, and children under the
legal age of criminal liability.

The Government of Iraq affirms that the stability
and prosperity of Iraq are a common regional interest.
Based on this vision, we affirm Iraq's commitment to
the important principle of its foreign policy, stipulated
in the Iraqi Constitution, that its territory should not
be the starting point for any threat to the security and
safety of neighbouring countries. Iraq is keen not to
engage in any form in conflicts or ongoing conflicts in
the region, given the magnitude ofits responsibility and
its beliefin the importance offormulating a policy based
on creating a state of balance that contributes to the
maintenance of regional security and prevents conflicts
from developing into direct military confrontations.

To that end, and in order to maintain international
peace and security, Iraq affirms the need for concerted
efforts and enhanced consultation to avoid escalation
and tensions in the region, and we call on all States to
spare Iraq regional tensions and their adverse effects
on the security of the region. The Government of my
country is also keen to develop Iraq's relations with
its neighbours, underscoring the democratic Iraq's
adoption of firm positions in its foreign policy that seek
to build regional peace.

Cooperation with our sister State of Kuwait
occupies a privileged position among Iraq's priorities
and through cooperation with the United Nations,
where we affirm the readiness of my Government to
abide by the relevant Security Council resolutions
and to make the utmost efforts to meet them. In this
regard, I am pleased to brief members of the Security
Council on recent developments related to this file,
particularly with regard to the content of paragraph 4
of the resolution 2107 (2013), including extradition of
the remains of 47 missing Kuwaitis who were found in
mass graves that date back to the time of the previous
political system; Iraqi finalization of return of all
Kuwaiti property, the last batch of which was returned
to the Kuwaiti authorities on 27 October 2019; and the
continuation of outstanding payments owed by Iraq
to Kuwait through the United Nations Compensation
Commission, which amount to $3.5 billion. It is hoped
that it will be fully paid in 2020.

Bilateral relations between the two brotherly
countries have also witnessed positive milestones,
including the regular convening of the Joint
Commission - most recently in May - which has
contributed to significant progress on topics of joint
cooperation. In that context, we extend our sincere
appreciation for the efforts of the sisterly State of Kuwait
and its Permanent Representative and Permanent
Delegation in advocating Arab questions wisely and
responsibly through its membership of the Security
Council, which clearly benefited the consolidation of
international peace and security.

The current political dynamics on the Iraqi street
are an expression of the evolution in the nature of a
collective and individual political culture that respects
the peaceful transfer of power through constitutional
mechanisms. Iraq is still at the beginning of its
democratic journey, which will mature over time
and through broad popular participation in political
life, with the consolidation of the role of institutions
and rule of law. The current demonstrations highlight
the positive, enabling atmosphere that motivates the
political system to review and reform the laws and
public regulations in the country, and the Government
to complete its efforts, in cooperation with Parliament,
to find better solutions to speed up reforms.

The recent political developments in my country,
Iraq, are evidence of an increasing political maturity
encouraged by the Government by respecting the
rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution,
including the freedom of demonstration and the
expression of opinion. The young people participating
in the demonstrations have grown up in a democratic
environment encouraging these rights, in contrast
to the situation under the former regime, which was
dominated by fear resulting from the brutal suppression
of freedoms. The future of the political process will
therefore witness positive developments that will
complement the efforts that have laid the foundations
of a new, democratic, stable and secure Iraq that
respects international law and enshrines cooperation
and openness as the two guiding principles for its
external relations.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country's
commitment to building a prosperous Iraq, in
coordination and cooperation with the international
community, with a View to eliminating the ravages of
terrorism, expediting the reconstruction processes and
meeting the legitimate demands of the protesters so
as to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and
implement the Government programme decisions, in
accordance with national laws in effect.

