Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O'Brien for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank
Ms. Elizabeth Hoff, World Health Organization (WHO)
Representative in Syria, for accepting Japan's proposal
to make a briefing to the Security Council at such short
notice, and through her I thank the dedicated personnel
of the WHO, who have been working hard in such a
difficult environment.

The humanitarian situation in Syria is devastating.
Over the course of the weekend, we continued to hear
news of the terrible attacks and casualties in Aleppo
and elsewhere. Frustration is building over the inability
to address the humanitarian crisis, but we must not
abandon our efforts. We appreciate that some members
of the Security Council have taken the initiative to
advance discussions on the humanitarian situation.
We are also aware of efforts by the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) co-Chairs and regional
stakeholders after the Lausanne meeting in October.
However, what we need now are actual improvements
on the ground. We need an agreement either from the
Security Council or the ISSG that will truly change the
situation in Syria.

Mr. O'Brien's briefing presented us with a picture of
the desperate situation in Syria. Even during the pause
in aerial attacks by the Syrian Government and Russia,
the United Nations could not deliver any assistance
to the people of eastern Aleppo. As Mr. O'Brien
explained, even single attempts at humanitarian access
face countless obstacles on the ground. Today is not the
first time that we have heard that discouraging story.
However, the situation is now so severe that not a single
convoy has achieved access to Aleppo.

I have one simple question: If those States that
have influence, especially ISSG members, exert the
utmost influence on the parties on the ground, might
we be able to overcome some of the impediments to
humanitarian access? Ifnot, what can be done to ensure
that the necessary actions are achieved on the ground?
That is a question that needs to be answered.

I am sure I speak for all ofmy colleagues when I say
that the Security Council was grateful to receive such
an extensive briefing from Ms. Hoff, who is following
the situation in Damascus closely. We highly commend
WHO efforts in delivering lifesaving treatments to
the Syrian people and strengthening health services,
including measures to counter children's diseases.
Today's briefing described a truly devastating situation
and made it absolutely clear that Syria's medical sector
is in huge and imminent need of major rehabilitation.

We are shocked by the sheer number of medical
facilities that have been attacked in 2016. Japan reiterates
its position that the parties to the armed conflict have
the obligation to respect international humanitarian
law in all circumstances, and violators of international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. The
Permanent representative of the United States has just
mentioned specific names. If the lack of clarity on
the attackers is making it difficult to take measures
to effectively protect medical facilities, the Security
Council should request a Secretariat investigation and
other necessary measures.

This monthly meeting on the humanitarian situation
in Syria must not simply be a venue for us to express
our deep concern about civilians and medical personnel
who are facing devastating situations. We need to take

action and achieve concrete results. There is no time to
spare. I look forward to a constructive discussion in the
informal consultations that are to follow.

