Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, for his detailed briefing
on the political process in the Syrian Arab Republic.

Cote d'Ivoire, which is deeply committed to
dialogue as the best way ofresolving conflict, is willing
to support any initiative aimed at bringing the parties to
the conflict together so as to restore peace and stability
and create conditions conducive to shared prosperity.

My country therefore welcomes the holding on
25 and 26 April in Nur- Sultan, the capital ofKazakhstan,
ofpeace talks on the political process aimed at emerging
from the crisis. That twelfth round of negotiations, the
Astana process and all the other peace initiatives will
be conducive to the establishment of a framework for
consultations in which all the parties to the Syrian crisis
can agree on issues related to relaunching the political
process, combating terrorism, returning refugees and
beginning post-crisis national reconstruction.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomed the joint communique
issued after the talks, which stressed the importance of
accelerating the operationalization of the constitutional
committee and affirmed the participants' willingness
to support the Special Envoy's efforts. My delegation
also believes that the initiatives to advance the political
process for ending the crisis must be supported by
confidence-building measures among the parties to
the conflict. We therefore welcome the steps taken to
release detainees in November 2018 and subsequently
in February and April. In that regard, we urge the
Working Group and the Syrian parties to continue their
cooperation with a view to consolidating the developing
atmosphere of trust.

While the Astana process and the United Nations-
led peace initiatives have enabled us to hope for lasting
peace in Syria, my delegation nevertheless remains
concerned about the negative impact of the resumption
of hostilities in the de-escalation zones in northern
Syria, particularly in Hama, Idlib, Aleppo and Latakia
governorates. We are particularly concerned about the
serious repercussions of the resumption of fighting in the
midst of an already worrisome humanitarian situation
in the region, where the escalation of hostilities since
February has reportedly left more than 200 people
dead and another 120,000 displaced, according to the
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and the Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We want to take this opportunity to reiterate our call
to the actors in the Syrian crisis to cease hostilities
immediately and work to create the conditions
necessary for providing humanitarian assistance to the
populations affected by the conflict.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire affirms its continued
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and encourages him to continue his mediation efforts
among the Syrian parties. We also urge the warring
parties to prioritize a path of dialogue and comply with
resolution 2254 (2015), which outlines a road map for
the political process in Syria.

Lastly, Mr. President, I would like to join others
in commending you for the quality of Germany's
presidency of the Council during the month of April.

