Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative of the
United States in holding today's meeting. I would also
like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui, Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous and the representatives of
UNICEF and UNESCO for their briefings. China also
listened carefully to the statement made by the victim
of armed conflict.

Providing a safe environment for children to grow
up in requires joint efforts on the part of national
Governments and the international community. In
recent years the international community has made
tremendous strides in working to protect children
and safeguard their basic rights, with positive results.
However, in too many areas of conflict, children, as
the most vulnerable group of all, are still the first to
suffer the effects of war and conflict. China opposes
and condemns violations of children's rights in armed
conflict, and supports the initiatives in the United
Nations and the Security Council aimed at protecting
children in such conflicts. In that regard, I would like
to emphasize the following points.

First, the key to protecting children in armed
conflict is preventing and resolving such conflicts.
Since it bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should focus serious attention on
preventing, curbing and resolving armed conflicts,
thus eliminating the basic source of harm to children.
Other United Nations agencies should leverage their
own comparative advantages and work in synergy so
as to provide comprehensive protection to children in
armed conflict. We welcome the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, jointly launched by the Secretary-General
and UNICEF, and are happy to see the positive results it
has achieved. We hope that the countries concerned will
take action in terms of formulating and implementing
action plans so as to achieve the goal of completely
eliminating the phenomenon of child soldiers.

Secondly, national Governments bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of children. Therefore,
the international community should provide space to
national Governments to play a leading role, value
and support their efforts and help them in their
capacity-building. At the same time, it is important to
mobilize donors to address the financing difficulties
in implementing the programmes for the protection of
children. The Council's Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict should strengthen its dialogue and

communication with the Governments concerned and
be willing to listen to their views so as to win their trust
and cooperation.

Thirdly, all parties to the conflict must cease their
acts of violence against children, effectively respect
relevant international law and obligations and protect
and respect children's rights in accordance with
the relevant Council resolutions. The international
community and regional organizations, in their
endeavour to protect children, must not overlook the
acts of violence against children perpetrated by armed
groups and non-State actors. In particular, the harm
done to children and the attacks against schools carried
out by extremist terrorists must receive the highest
attention from the parties concerned, and efforts must
be undertaken to resolutely fight that phenomenon.

Fourthly, protecting children in armed conflict
requires that the international community adopt an
integrated strategy and create enabling security and
social environments for children. In their efforts
to promote post-conflict reconstruction and design
peacebuilding strategies, the international community
should place priority on children's return to their
families, society and school and help those children
affected by conflict resume a normal life.

We encourage UNICEF and the World Bank to each
play their respective role and work jointly to enhance
the capacity of national Governments in protecting
children. At the same time, it is important to support
national Governments in their efforts to eliminate
poverty, make education available to all and promote
sustainable development.

Addressing the issue of children and armed conflict
requires not only efforts by the Council, but also that
United Nations agencies and regional organizations
strengthen their coordination and cooperation and play
an even greater role in preventing children from being
sucked into conflict. China is ready to work with the
parties concerned in order to comprehensively improve
the situation of children in armed conflict and to ensure
that children be spared the pain and suffering brought
about by war and conflict.

