The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

I thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Ms. Agnes Marcaillou
and Mr. Khaled Khiari for their briefings.

South Africa voices its deep concern about
the dire humanitarian situation in Syria. While the
previous briefing by the then Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Lowcock, in September (see S/PV.8619) focused on the upsurge in violence in north-
west Syria, the new front in Syria's complex war is
exacerbating an already fragile humanitarian situation.

According to the most recent Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/820), more than 1,000 civilians have
been killed since late April, with 209 killed between
1 August and 22 September. Since the beginning of
May this year, more than 630,000 people have been
displaced, some not for the first time, with many
seeking shelter in the open.
In north-east Syria, more than 180,000 civilians,
including 80,000 children, have now been displaced due
to the increased military operations since 9 October.
With regard to the damaged Allouk water system, we
welcome and applaud the United Nations efforts in
repairing that infrastructure, which supports 400,000
people in the region, and call on all parties to ensure
that the additional necessary repairs to return the water
system to full operation can be completed without delay.

The humanitarian situation has worsened further
following the withdrawal of some international
humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations from north-east Syria. Their withdrawal
and suspensions of operations have added further
challenges and complications for those civilians in the
area requiring assistance to meet their basic needs.

These combined events have exacerbated a
humanitarian crisis that has already been declared one
of the world's worst. Last month the Security Council
failed to adopt a resolution that addressed the dire
humanitarian situation in Idlib. Such lack of Council
unity is not the message that we want to convey to the
Syrian men, women and children who have lost their
lives, sustained severe injuries and endured multiple
displacements due to the dismal conditions in which
they live. We are the international body that has been
entrusted with peace and security. Yet, because of
our internal rivalries, we are failing to discharge our
responsibility. At the very least, we should be able to
agree on humanitarian assistance.

Let us be clear: Syria is at a delicate stage. There is
a glimmer of hope and prospects on the political front
given the positive developments with regard to the
official launch of the Constitutional Committee by the
end of this month. The Council should be galvanizing
all its energies towards that political process and invest
everything possible for a fully inclusive Syrian-led
political process.

However, the developments in north-east Syria in
recent days have also aggravated the fragile situation
we are talking about. The Council must endeavour to
rally around a common position to assist the process
and implement its mandate to maintain international
peace and security. The brief elements of presidential
statement S/ PRST/2019/ 12, which we adopted last week,
are a start. It may not say much but at least it shows that
we can agree on some common ground. South Africa
would be willing to work with the penholders and
interested delegations on this matter to seek consensus.
In conclusion, it must be emphasized that it is
crucial that there be utmost restraint and a de-escalation
of hostilities, as well as the recognition of Syria's
territorial integrity and sovereignty, and that all parties
comply with international law.

South Africa wishes to reiterate that the situation
in Syria must be resolved through negotiations and
dialogue and calls on all parties to make every effort
towards the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). South Africa has noted the memorandum of
understanding signed between Turkey and the Russian
Federation on 22 October. My delegation hopes that
the memorandum together with the previously agreed
ceasefire between Turkey and the United States of
America on 17 October, along with the continuous and
steadfast efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen, all work
together towards achieving long-term peace, stability
and prosperity for Syria and its people.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

