Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, allow me to
congratulate you and your team, Mr. President, on the
effective leadership with which your delegation has
conducted the work of the Security Council throughout
this month. You have done excellent work.

We appreciate the convening of these wrap-up
sessions on the work carried out by this organ. We
believe that the Council's work should be conducted in
a broad and transparent way. In the spirit and purpose
of Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations, we
encourage the strengthening of relations between the
Council and the rest of the United Nations membership,
recognizing that issues related to international peace
and security concern all Member States.

It has certainly been a busy month. We would like
to highlight some aspects of particular importance to
my delegation.

In regard to Yemen, of particular importance and
urgency was the Council's emergency meeting held on
the situation in that country (see S/PV.7411). Yemen
has plunged into violence as the result of ongoing
political instability in the form of armed clashes
between various factions. We are alarmed to observe
that the deterioration of the conflict is being exploited
by Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), among others, to promote their criminal
agenda, inspired by hatred and violence, with a View to
promoting chaos and the fragmentation of the country.
We call for the maintenance of the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen.

Venezuela reiterates its full support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal
Benomar. At the same time, we believe that the solution
to the crisis in Yemen must come from the Yemenis
themselves and not be imposed from outside. No
military solution is possible. It is necessary to insist on
a peaceful political settlement of the conflict. We urge
the parties and Member States to refrain from adopting
measures that could undermine the achievement of
peace and stability in Yemen, consistent with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

The meeting on 4 March on the situation in Libya
(see S/PV.7398) gave us an opportunity to reflect on the
gravity of the political, institutional and humanitarian
crisis in that country. Its two parallel Governments,
extremist armed groups and a growing terrorist network
point to a country profoundly affected by sectarian
Violence. The Libyan people and other peoples of the
Middle East are today victims of the breakdown of
the State and its institutions, which are the result of
unilateral actions that have triggered a severe process of
political instability in the region. We are concerned by
and warn against the increased illicit arms trafficking
that has provided tremendous military capacity to
the terrorist groups in that region today. We reiterate
our strongest condemnation of the killing in Libya of
21 Coptic Christians from Egypt, as well as of other
atrocities committed by terrorists in the region.

The meeting on 24 March (see S/PV.7412) on the
topic of Iran gave us the opportunity to express our
satisfaction with the progress achieved regarding the
joint action plan and the talks under way in Switzerland
between the P5+1 and Iran to peacefully resolve
the issue of its nuclear programme. The process of
negotiations under way is extremely important and
should lead to the final lifting of the sanctions regime
imposed by the Security Council on that brother
country. Sustained cooperation between that nation
and the International Atomic Energy Agency is a very
positive aspect of the process. We also reaffirm the
sovereign right of all developing countries, including
the Islamic Republic of Iran, to use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes, pursuant to article IV of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We hope that the non-proliferation talks will culminate
successfully and that the countries involved will not
yield to the blackmail of war and hatred.

Venezuela attaches particular importance to
discussions on the Palestinian issue. The Security
Council has an historic debt to the Palestinian people,
dating back more than 50 years. We hope that the
international community will express its position
through this organ as soon as possible with a View to
ensuring the right of the Palestinian people to fully
exercise its right to self-determination, including its
admission as a Member State of the United Nations.

The Security Council must retake the initiative and
fully assume its Charter responsibility for international
peace and security by adopting as soon as possible a
decision demanding an end to the Israeli occupation
of the territories of the State of Palestine, which has
continued illegally for more than 40 years. Israel's
occupation of those territories and settlement-building
exercise are significant causes of gross Violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. We
support an end to impunity; those responsible for war
crimes must be brought to justice. Finally, we express
our hope for the renewal of negotiations between the
parties within the framework of a solution involving
two States, Israel and Palestine.

No less important is the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, where war and the activities of terrorist
groups have fed an increasingly violent situation with
severe humanitarian implications. Venezuela calls for
a ceasefire and supports a political solution, with the
active participation of the Syrian people without foreign
intervention. We are concerned about the dismal human
rights situation. It is a true tragedy that should be the
focus of our attention in the future. We are in favour
of a political solution to the conflict that includes all
parties, respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria, and puts an end to the supply of arms and
equipment and the training of terrorist organizations,
such as ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front.

The Security Council's visit to Africa between
10 and 13 March was an excellent opportunity to
support the efforts of the authorities of the Central
African Republic and to better understand the situation
in that country. It was also an opportunity to monitor
and evaluate the work carried out by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic in fulfilling its mandate,
including the protection of civilians.

We also welcome the holding of the annual
consultation between the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and the United Nations Security
Council, as well as the joint communique that was
issued. We would like to make particular mention of the
visit to Burundi in support of the process of presidential
and legislative elections of May and June 2014.

Regarding Darfur, we regret that the situation
on the ground has not improved, as we had hoped it
would. We call on the parties to renew dialogue and
request those countries that have maintained unilateral
sanctions against the Sudanese Government to lift
them, including debt relief to Sudan. We stated as much
at the meeting held on 17 March (see S/PV.7405).

On the issue of open debates, we believe that the
debate on children in armed conflict (see S/PV.7414)
was of particular importance. The high number of
participants in that debate Clearly reflects the importance
of the issue and the need to step up international
cooperation efforts to ensure the protection of this
vulnerable group, which is the target of the most terrible
atrocities. It is important that a growing number of
countries consider it essential to adopt a comprehensive
approach to the issue through dealing with the deep-
rooted causes of conflict, without disregarding short-
or medium-term efforts. We firmly reject all practices
such as the abduction of children, their enslavement
and the violation of their human rights. Such offences
should be considered crimes against humanity, and
those responsible should be brought before international
criminal justice.

We also demand the release of 300 Palestinian
children who continue to be detained in Israeli jails. We
express our support for Malaysia's efforts as Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We welcome the fact that the issue of children will
be one of the most important issues during the month
of June, when it will be presiding over the Security
Council.

The open debate held on 27 March (see S/PV.7419)
on the victims of attacks and abuses on religious and
ethnic grounds in the Middle East, presided over by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Laurent
Fabius, was an opportunity to firmly reject all acts
of intolerance, intimidation, aggression or violence
committed against any religious or ethnic community by
extremist organizations, particularly those committed
by terrorist groups, which have proliferated in recent
years in the Middle East.

How is it possible that a region that has been the
cradle of civilization, a region where for thousands
of years diverse ethnic and religious groups have
coexisted peacefully, could have fallen prey to barbaric
terrorism? It is imperative to increase efforts aimed at
strengthening agreed measures to prevent and cut off
external support to such groups, in particular their
funding and their sources of modern weapons.

By the same token, we reiterate that it is essential
to condemn, along with such atrocities, the dismantling
of the institutional capacity of States. We also stress
the need to strengthen the bans on sources of funding
and logistical and military equipment for such terrorist
organizations.

Finally, we welcome the briefing today (see S/PV.7421) on the terrorist threat to international peace
and security posed by Boko Haram in the countries of
the Lake Chad Basin and in the rest of the region. We
reiterate our condemnation of the criminal actions of
that terrorist organization, which that has sown death
and destruction in that area through the kidnapping
and murder of children and women, who are the main
Victims of attacks.

Venezuela is ready to support a resolution of the
Security Council that provides political support to
the countries of the region that bear the main military
burden in dealing with this threat. Such a resolution
should be based on agreement among all the countries
affected, in particular Nigeria.

Finally, we congratulate Nigeria for holding
elections as a key factor for security and stability in
the country. We are certain that during the month of
April, the Security Council will maintain its dynamic
pace of work and continue to debate vital issues under
the presidency of Jordan, which can count on our full
support.
