The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Colombia for the kind words he
addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of the Lao
People's Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic)
(interpretation from French): Like other speakers, I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. Aware as I am of your skills and broad experience in
international affairs, I believe that the Council's work will
be fruitful. I also wish to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Egypt for his outstanding work in guiding
the Council's business last month. The Lao delegation also
wishes to thank most sincerely all the members of the
Council for granting our request to participate in this
important discussion of the question before the Council.

In the note from its Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 26
February 1996, the Government of Cuba informed the
world that on 24 February 1996, between 3.21 pm. and
3.28 p.m., two Cessna aircraft which had taken off in
Florida had been shot down by aircraft of the Cuban Air
Force when they were again violating the airspace above
Cuban territorial waters at a distance of 8 to 12 kilometres
to the north of the beach of Baracoa, west of Havana. In
the same note the Government of Cuba also stated that
earlier, between 10.15 am. and 11.27 a.m., three aircraft of
the same type had violated Cuban airspace and territorial
waters. A Cuban Air Force plane then flew towards them,
forcing them by its presence to leave the area. The planes
in question then flew north. Again according to Cuba, at
1.21 pm. one of the planes again headed towards Cuba,
despite the fact that it had been warned by Havana air
traffic control that it was exposing itself to great risk
should it decide to intrude into this zone. In addition to
the violations of airspace and territorial waters, Cuba
referred to the introduction, by groups of people of Cuban
origin based in Florida, of weapons and explosives into its
territory, and to the dispatch of commandos to spread
violence in various regions of the country. In short, these
violations were committed on numerous occasions, even
though those responsible had been repeatedly warned that
Cuban patience had its limits and that those incursions
would no longer be tolerated.

According to Cuban authorities, all means of
persuasion to prevent acts of this kind had thus been
exhausted. That is why the Government of Cuba decided
to put an end to the flights, which jeopardized Cuban
sovereignty and endangered the lives of Cuban citizens.

My country, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
has followed this unfortunate incident very closely. We
listened very attentively to the explanations offered by the
Cuban Government to the international community. We
profoundly regret the loss of life that resulted from this
incident, and it is our sincere wish that this should never
recur.

The world knows that the question now before the
Council is not an easy one. On the contrary, it is delicate
and particularly complex. Nevertheless, we are of the firm
opinion that in all circumstances every country or
sovereign State has the right and the sacred duty to
defend its independence and territorial integrity if it
considers that these are threatened or violated. This is the
simplest and most elementary exercise of international
law. However, given that at this stage a multitude - I
stress, a multitude - of technical questions have not yet
been clarified, we do not believe that there are yet
grounds to resolve the substance of the question: knowing
who is responsible for this incident, how it took place,
and why.

In the View of our delegation, this unfortunate
incident is but a sad reflection of the difficult relations
that have existed for more than three decades between the
Republic of Cuba and the United States of America. It
seems that the two countries have not yet exhausted all
 

available means to try to resolve their problems. Lack of
mutual trust generally predominates in their relations. The
international community can only be alarmed by this
situation which benefits neither party, but, on the contrary,
jeopardizes the legitimate interests of both peoples.

It is true that, as we said earlier, the question before
us is extremely complicated, but we also know that it is not
insoluble. Provided that there is true political will on the
part of the parties to the conflict, the desired end can surely
be attained. Against this background, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, faithful to its policy of peace,
independence, friendship and cooperation with all countries
of the world, appeals to both parties - the Republic of
Cuba and the United States of America - to demonstrate
great wisdom and endeavour to improve their bilateral
relations and resolve their disputes peacefully, which would
contribute to the maintenance of peace and the promotion
of cooperation in this region and in the rest of the world.

That is the opinion which my delegation wishes to
present to the Council on the subject of this unfortunate
incident.

The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the Lao People's Democratic Republic
for the kind words he addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.


