Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Let me join others in
expressing my appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his most recent report (S/2018/465), to Sweden
for holding today's open debate, to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her dedication and efforts and
to the briefers for their insightful perspectives.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Children are key to our future. They are the
catalysts for peace, development, prosperity and
progress and must be protected so that their potential to
engage and contribute to an inclusive and just society
can be ensured. Our efforts to address grave violations
against children in and after conflict must therefore
be a vital component of the prevention agenda. In
addressing the issue as part of that agenda, we must
take a comprehensive and rights-based approach and
continue to raise awareness and promote capacity-
building and technical cooperation.

With regard to recruitment, it is essential that
civil society, the media, academia and Governments
work together to address the evolving tactics used to
recruit children, including through online and social
media platforms. In addition to law enforcement, strong
advocacy and education at the family and community
levels can provide the best defence for children falling
prey to recruitment.

The peacekeeping community must also ensure that
building capacity on child protection becomes a key
component of training peacekeepers. We are pleased to
inform the Security Council that the Royal Thai Armed
Forces and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
recently held a workshop on child protection for Thai
peacekeepers preparing for deployment to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. We can do more and
explore how regional and subregional organizations can
be involved.

Thailand welcomes the release of more than
10,000 children from armed groups in 2017 and sees
the reintegration of recently released children as a
vital process. Reintegration should be incorporated in
relevant national plans and efforts to provide inclusive
basic social services, as it is a long-term sustainable
solution to prevention and protection.

The annual report of the Secretary-General
plays an important role in guiding Member States in
strengthening child protection. For that reason, we
welcome the enhanced engagement between Member
States and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict
in preparing the report. We also welcome possible
further regional engagement on the issue.

The international community must continue its
work in all possible ways to put an end to the suffering
of children in conflict. Thailand endeavours to do
its part and looks forward to working with others to
amplify our efforts.

