Mr. Kobler: First, I would like to congratulate
Ukraine on presiding over the Council this month.

More than a year has passed since the signing ofthe
Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat. That year, 2016,
was spent seeking to implement the Agreement and to
begin to re-establish State authority all across Libya.
While there was not nearly enough progress, some
important gains were made. The Presidency Council
and Libyan economic institutions continue to work
together on disbursing the funds of the 2017 budget. The
budget will enable State institutions to deliver much-
needed basic services. Oil production has increased to
over 700,000 barrels per day. This provides the Libyan
State with much-needed revenue.

On the security front, the Islamic State, which one
year ago was expanding its territory in Libya, now
controls none. It still poses a threat, however. I once
again pay respect to those who lost their lives fighting
terrorism on the battlefields in Sirte, Benghazi and
elsewhere.

Despite these gains, Libyans are not yet in a position
to address the root causes of division. This year must
be a year of decisions - decisions on possible limited
amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement that
would enable the House of Representatives to endorse
the Government of National Accord; decisions on how
to form a strong, united army and police force, only after
which armed groups can be effectively demobilized;
and decisions on how best to utilize the revenues from

oil and gas exports for the benefit of all Libyans and
end the dire humanitarian situation in the country.

I would like to update the Council on the items I
put before members at my last briefing (see S/PV.7827).

First, on current political issues, the past two
months have brought visible progress and converging
visions from the east, south and west on possible
amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement. Most
agree on the following principles. First, the Libyan
Political Agreement must remain the framework of
the political process. Secondly, solutions must be
found through inclusive dialogue, and not resolved
through violence. Thirdly, possible amendments to
the Political Agreement should be endorsed by the
House of Representatives as a package, followed by
a constitutional amendment and the endorsement
of the Government of National Accord. Lastly, the
discussions should take place under the umbrella of the
United Nations. However, the political process must be
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. Only Libyans can take
decisions on the future of Libya.

In many meetings both inside and outside the
country, possible amendments were discussed, in
particular the question of the supreme commandership
of the Libyan army; the chain of command of the army
and in particular the role of General Haftar; and the
future composition and role of the Presidency Council.
I am confident that a format will be found in the next
weeks within which these questions can be decided upon
and recommendations can be put forth for approval to
the relevant institutions.

In January, informal consultations of members
of the Libyan political dialogue in Tunisia, and the
13 December Cairo communique, were important
milestones in identifying contentious issues. However,
no individual or group can decide the way forward alone.
It must be a collective effort. A11 Libyan institutions
need to uphold their responsibilities and obligations to
implement the Agreement. Together, they can advance
the process to endorse a Government. Only by doing
this can they address the needs of Libyan citizens. In
this regard, I urge the House of Representatives to
conclude its deliberations and nominate its delegation
for further discussions.

I would like to take this opportunity to recognize
the efforts of the neighbouring States and regional
organizations, which continue to contribute towards
fostering consensus. I attended the neighbouring States
conference in Cairo on 21 January and the meeting of
the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya
in Brazzaville, under President Sassou Nguesso, on
27 January. I am impressed by the coherence of the
approach of both the neighbouring States and the
African Union. The Troika formed between the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the United
Nations has contributed to improving coordination
and building trust. We agreed in a meeting in Cairo on
21 January to associate the European Union with this
important forum. These past weeks have seen a truly
best-practice effort on how to converge the Views of
Libyans, on the one side, and the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the European Union and the
neighbouring countries, on the other.

Secondly, no political process can continue
without addressing the issue of armed groups and the
proliferation of weapons. While some of these groups
are nominally controlled by State institutions, too many
are driven by narrow interests. The ongoing formation
of the Presidential Guard is a step in the right direction.
However, the Presidential Guard is no substitute for a
unified Libyan army; it is a transitional measure. The
Presidential Guard must be integrated once a consensus
on the command structure of a future united Libyan army
is reached. National security institutions, including
the police, must be empowered and developed. There
are no alternatives. Without a strong army and police,
armed groups cannot be demobilized. The citizens of
Libya deserve security and an end to the rampant crime
and lawlessness.

Thirdly, while the Islamic State no longer controls
territory, the fight against terrorism is far from finished.
The country's borders remain porous. Terrorists, human
and weapons traffickers and criminal gangs continue
to exploit the security vacuum. Libya's neighbours are
rightly concerned that this will affect their own security.
I also welcome efforts of regional organizations,
including the African Union and the European Union,
to assist regional States in improving their capacities
and coordination. Regional solutions are required to
effectively and comprehensively address the security
threats. Now is the time to consolidate the hard-won
victories in the fight against terrorism. I am pleased by
the efforts to create and deliver post-liberation plans
in Sirte and Benghazi. I will continue to work with the
Presidency Council and the international community
to meet the humanitarian, stabilization, reconstruction
and recovery needs.

Fourthly, recent months have seen positive
developments in Libya's economic performance. Libya
is a wealthy country with abundant natural resources.
However, despite its wealth, living conditions and public
services have deteriorated in recent years. Institutional
frailty, poor financial management and corruption,
among other factors, are taking their toll. Now, Libya
has a unified budget. The Presidency Council and the
Central Bank agreed on a 2017 budget framework of
37.5 billion Libyan dinars.

This is an opportunity to address much-needed
service delivery. Some sectors must be prioritized.
Health services are inadequate. Visiting a children's
hospital in Tripoli, I saw first-hand the implications of
poor management and insufficient financing. With the
hospital lacking basic supplies and medicines, people
were left to find their own means to relieve the suffering
of their loved ones. The Presidency Council and the
Government must quickly improve the poor service
delivery and tackle outstanding economic challenges.

Fifthly, human rights, the rule of law and
irregular migration must be addressed seriously and
comprehensively. The rule of law continues to be
undermined by armed groups that abduct, mistreat
and commit other human rights abuses with impunity.
This must end. I would like to make a special note on
the plight of migrants. Libya's wealth has long made it
attractive to economic migrants. Their labour continues
to contribute to the development of the country.
However, migrants are extremely vulnerable. Those
held in detention have no legal recourse and suffer
appalling conditions. Many have died.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights published a report on 13 December detailing
the disastrous situation and ill-treatment in detention
centres. We have submitted concrete recommendations
to the Libyan authorities and the international
community. While fully understanding the concerns
of neighbouring States and the region, all actions
must respect international humanitarian law and the
dignity of the migrants. I am working together with the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to address these problems. These efforts include saving
lives at sea, combatting human trafficking, and training
the Libyan Coast Guard.
I would also like to reiterate my continued support
to the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. Human trafficking may constitute a crime
against humanity, and it could be prosecuted by the
International Criminal Court.

Beyond institutional and political agreements,
a national reconciliation process is long overdue. A
process is needed to heal the wounds ofyears of conflict
and oppression. In January, we held a workshop in
Malta with Libyan experts and activists to establish a
road map for national reconciliation for Libya. We need
to find ways to support community reconciliation and
make it resonate at the national level. We will establish
more channels of communication between traditional
leaders, elders and youth, and also with women, who
too often remain at the margins of these processes.

I am encouraged by the renewed Libyan efforts
and regional activity, in particular among Libya's
neighbours, to overcome the political deadlock. We are
beginning to see an emerging consensus among parties.
The year 2017 must be a year of decisions and political
breakthrough.

I would like to thank the Security Council for its
cohesive support. There is no alternative to a sustainable
Libyan-owned political solution. The Libyan Political
Agreement still provides a viable framework for
resolving differences and restoring the democratic
transition. I am hopeful that, with bold decisions and
actions, we will witness a political breakthrough that
can place Libya back on the path of peace, prosperity
and stability. The people of Libya deserve it.

