We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. South Africa supports the Special Envoy's efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen amid the calamitous circumstances of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Mr. Rajasingham gave a worrisome briefing, in particular about the imminent closure of much-needed health services, especially those provided by the World Health Organization and numerous non-governmental organizations. We hope that donor countries will respond generously to the 2 June meeting Ramesh reported on. We welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to our deliberations this morning. My delegation would like to reiterate that Yemen's ongoing dire humanitarian situation is linked to the political impasse. As such our intervention will focus on two elements. On the humanitarian situation, South Africa notes that there is a growing number of confirmed cases of COVID-19. With only half of the health facilities across the country fully functional due to the previous heavy bombing and attacks, Yemen is simply not equipped to handle a full-scale COVID-19 outbreak. The virus is now reaching the north of Yemen, home to some of the most vulnerable children and families in this humanitarian catastrophe. If the crisis is not addressed, an entire generation will suffer long-term physical and psychological consequences. In line with and in support of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in the context of this deadly pandemic and in order to allow unhindered humanitarian access, South Africa welcomes the ongoing measures taken by both the National Government of Accord and the Houthis to curb the spread of COVID-19 - closing airports, schools, cafes and wedding halls to varying degrees, as well as conducting temperature tests at several entry points to the country. Those actions highlight the ability of both sides to work together towards a common goal. However, the violence must stop so that the Yemeni people, health workers and aid organizations can focus on slowing the spread of the virus and mitigating its social and economic impact. In view of that, South Africa urges the parties to the conflict to allow expert staff to travel to all affected parts of Yemen to provide much needed support and other humanitarian relief. We furthermore impress upon all parties the need to refrain from actions that would deprive civilians of their right to food and health care. We remind the parties to the conflict that all necessary measures should be taken to respect their obligations under the Geneva Conventions. On the political impasse, it is important that all parties avoid compounding the current humanitarian disaster and commit to resuming the political negotiation process. The key to a peaceful resolution lies in the political willingness of all parties to the conflict to meaningfully engage in discussions and be amenable to conceding some of their demands. Only then can there be lasting peace in Yemen and social and economic rebuilding of the country. The implementation of the Riyadh agreement has stalled. South Africa wishes to reiterate its call for the implementation of this vital agreement between the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council, as well as the full implementation of the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement. The Stockholm Agreement and process are key to the lasting peace, stability and ultimate prosperity of Yemen. South Africa encourages the parties to the conflict to pursue new confidence- building measures, such as the release of detainees and prisoners, an agreement on a set of nationwide measures to combat COVID-19, the release of all vessels held by either party in the seas off the coast of Yemen and any other measures that the parties believe could foster trust. South A frica reiterates its call that all parties to the conflict adhere to their obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law. South Africa remains concerned about the threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the lack of progress in allowing technical experts to undertake an assessment and initial repair in order to avoid an environmental and economic catastrophe for Yemen and its neighbours. The threat must be dealt with on a purely technical basis, without politicization. In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only sustainable solution to this conflict is a fair and inclusive Yemeni-led and -owned negotiated political settlement that puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of Yemen first. In that context, we also call for the full and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of an inclusive political process, and thank the women of Yemen for being in the forefront in calling for a ceasefire and the release of prisoners. Let the Yemeni parties return to the inclusive Stockholm Agreement and national dialogue. The parties must be bold, courageous and decisive. These uncertain times have demonstrated that they cannot delay any further once an agreement is reached. They must act immediately for the sake of all.
