Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): Italy thanks
France for organizing this open debate, which, together
with the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/447),
leads us to reflect on the role of peacekeeping
operations from the perspective of the protection of
civilians. I thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the Central African Republic and the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their presentations.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and that
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. I
would like to make the following additional comments
in my national capacity.

(spoke in English)

Significant progress has already been achieved,
including the Safe School Declaration, endorsed by Italy;
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/23,
reaffirming the Council's commitment to this cause; the
commitments agreed at the recent World Humanitarian
Summit in Istanbul; and the unanimous adoption with
a large number of co-sponsors, including Italy, of
resolution 2286 (2016) on health care in armed conflict
and the protection of medical personnel and facilities.
But more, of course, can be done, while recognizing
the importance of traditional principles: the primary
responsibility of the State, impartiality, consent and the
non-use of force.

Italy is among the inaugural subscribers ofthe Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, establishing
that effective protection of civilians requires properly
trained troops, adequate equipment and strong political
commitment. We are confident that a greater number
of troop- and police-contributing countries will
subscribe to these principles and, especially, implement
them. Their mention in the final report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations is a significant
first step. Italy also supports the ACT code of conduct
and the French/Mexican initiative on veto restraint.

As the top troop-contributing country of the Group
of Western European and Other States, Italy believes
that the effective protection of civilians requires clear,
sequenced and prioritized mandates, properly trained
troops, adequate equipment and a reinforced role of
regional organizations. I would like to underline six
concrete points of action.

The first is that appropriate training is key and
Italy will continue to do its part, redoubling efforts in
training and capacity-building for peace and justice
operators. Since 2005, through the Centre of Excellence
for the Stability of Police Units in Vicenza, we have
trained more than 9,000 units for police personnel,
many of whom are deployed in operations in Africa.
The protection of civilian lies at the very heart of
our training.

Secondly, our training includes courses on
the protection and promotion of human rights and
international humanitarian law and on sexual and
gender-based violence and includes individual
programmes on appropriate conduct and local customs,
while ensuring the firmest stance against abuses. We
believe that the zero-tolerance policy must be met with
tailored training to reach a zero-case reality and protect
the credibility and trust of the missions. In this area,
accountability should be strengthened, appropriate
domestic prosecution must take place and the United
Nations should encourage States to cooperate.

Thirdly, due consideration must be given to the need
to properly equip missions, also by adopting available
technological solutions, such as the use of unmanned
aerial vehicles, which have proved on many occasions
to be key in saving civilian lives.

Fourthly, strengthening the gender perspective
of peace operations is key to effective protection and
can be achieved both by increasing the overall number
of women serving in peace operations and * during
the mission - by reaching out to women and girls in
local communities, engaging them as actors of peace
and prevention.

Fifthly, in line with our overall View that regional
and subregional organizations are ideally placed to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security, we will continue to work to strengthen
the relation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, especially the African Union, to
reinforce their capability in dealing with crises.

My sixth and final point is on prevention. It is the
right choice and the smart choice and the best way to
guarantee an effective protection of civilians. I stress
the importance of early warning mechanisms, such as
the framework of analyses for atrocity crimes and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative.
(spoke in French)

In conclusion, in the corridors ofthe United Nations,
we often hear about the "Italian path to peace". This
path brings together tradition, innovation and training,
and above all, always places people and communities at
the centre of the mission's action. This is the path we
are committed to supporting.

