Mr. Benitez Verson (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba associates itself fully with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

The situation in the Middle East, particularly in
the occupied Palestinian territory, remains alarming.

The tremendous physical, economic and social
devastation caused by the illegal and destructive
colonization practices carried out in the occupied
Palestinian territories represents the main obstacle to
the achievement of a peace agreement.

The settlement policy is preventing the creation
of a Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders
and, consequently, the possibility of a just solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Cuba is deeply concerned about the serious
situation in the Gaza Strip. The Government of Israel
must lift, immediately, unconditionally and completely,
the cruel and illegal blockade on Gaza and allow for
the free circulation of supplies from and to the Gaza
Strip, as well as permanent humanitarian access.

The creation of two States living peacefully side
by side, with recognized borders, is not merely wishful
thinking. Palestinians have long been owed a solution
enabling the creation of their State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Similarly, the question of its
refugees must be resolved in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 181 (II).

However, the Government of Israel continues to
hinder the resolution of the conflict, while the country
that is supposed to guarantee the peace process has not
showed the required political will to give that process
the necessary impetus.

Cuba supports all legitimate efforts aimed at
reaching a just solution to this conflict and at the
creation and recognition of a Palestinian State.

The Security Council cannot remain passive on
the question of Palestine. There is no other conflict
more threatening to international peace and security.
Yet the Council continues to fail to take action. The
United States veto of every draft resolution introduced
on this issue has made the Security Council into a
hostage of the domestic policy of one of its members.
The threat of veto remains a sword of Damocles over
the most powerful, and yet the most antidemocratic,
international body of the multilateral system. This
situation is unacceptable and must change, failing
which the impunity with which the Government of
Israel acts in the occupied Palestinian territory will
increase.

Cuba believes that it is possible to find a short-
term peaceful solution. The Palestinian Authority has
been working hard in the past few months, and many
States have responded positively to the call to
recognize the Palestinian State. Cuba urges those States
that have not yet done so to recognize, as soon as
possible, the Palestinian State on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Cuba reaffirms that all of the measures and
actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel aimed at altering
the legal, physical or demographic condition and the
institutional structure of the occupied Syrian Golan are
null, void and without legal effect. We reiterate that all
of these unilateral measures and actions, including the
illegal construction and expansion of Israeli
settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967, constitute
violations of international law, international
agreements, the relevant resolutions and the Charter of
the United Nations, and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Cuba calls on Israel to fully withdraw
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967.

In conclusion, Cuba is confident that the growing
recognition by many countries of the Palestinian State
on the basis of the 1967 borders will generate a fresh
impetus and pave the way for a lasting solution to the
conflict.

Cuba reiterates its position in favour of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace for all the peoples of
the Middle East region that would put an end to the
occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 and guarantee the exercise of self-
determination by the Palestinian people through the
establishment of an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

