Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to start by
thanking the Indonesian presidency for convening this
meeting.

The year 2019 marks the seventieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions on international humanitarian
law. It also marks the commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999).
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has long
been one of the core issues in the Security Council, and
a number of related resolutions have been adopted.

Resolution 2286 (2016), adopted in May 2016,
on which Japan was a co-penholder, expresses the
strong and unanimous commitment of the Council to
protect health care in armed conflict. However, it is
regrettable to learn, according to the World Health
Organization, that the number of the attacks on health
care has been increasing, even after the resolution was
adopted. Noting that most of those attacks have been
perpetrated in Syria, Japan must once again insist that
all parties to the conflict, State and non-State actors
alike, especially those in Syria, fully observe the
resolution and international humanitarian law. The
Council needs to take further action in order to see
tangible improvements.

Let me refer to women and peace and security,
another priority of Japan's linked to today's debate. The
Council has made great effort to address the issue by
adopting a series of resolutions since resolution 1325
(2000), including resolution 2467 (2019), which was
adopted in April and which Japan co-sponsored. All
Member States, including Security Council members,
need to act on those resolutions. As a leading donor,
Japan has contributed to their implementation, in
cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, UN-
Women and the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), in the following three areas.

First, with regard to accountability, since 2014,
Japan has supported the work of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict - in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, Somalia and Iraq - in order to improve their
capabilities in the areas of legislation, investigation
and prosecution. Through those efforts, cases of sexual
violence have been brought into domestic judicial
bodies, resulting in judgments and sentences.

Secondly, with regard to survivors, following the
human security approach, Japan has supported projects
of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict to care for children born of rape and their
mothers in Iraq and improve access to justice for
survivors of sexual violence in Jordan.

Thirdly, with regard to prevention, in cooperation
with UN-Women and the ICRC, Japan has supported
women's empowerment at the community level through
training and cash-for-work programmes in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Nigeria,
Palestine, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen.

The Secretary-General has stressed the importance
of assisting national-level initiatives to ensure
compliance and accountability. Japan continues to
provide such assistance, in cooperation with the United
Nations system and civil society. Japan will also
continue to actively engage in future discussions on
this issue at the United Nations.

