Mr. Boureima (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow

me at the outset to congratulate you most warmly, Sir,

on your assumption of the presidency of the Security

Council for January. I also wish to thank you for

having organized today's briefing on the long-awaited

report of the assessment mission on the impact of the
Libyan crisis on the Sahel region (S/2012/42).

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for having yet again demonstrated the special
interest he takes in Africa as a whole, and the Sahel
region in particular. Furthermore, we thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe for his excellent briefing.

We believe that the assessment team is to be truly
commended. Indeed, its report clearly identifies not
only the problems that have been caused or
exacerbated in the Sahel region by the Libyan crisis,
but also the appropriate measures for addressing them.
The mission has also made some relevant
recommendations to the national authorities of the
region and to the international community as a whole.
The mission, while noting national and regional efforts,
nevertheless stresses the need for significant
international support in order to achieve positive
results in mitigating the effects of the Libyan crisis on
the region and in combating the rampant scourges
there.

It has been recognized since the 2005 World
Summit that there is a link between development and
security, and we therefore need a comprehensive and
integrated approach to meeting these challenges, in
particular in the Sahel region, which suffers problems
of such scope and origins that the international
community is compelled to dedicate the resources - in
particular, the financial resources - necessary to
resolving them. At the same time, while recognizing
the efforts of many of our partners, we truly hope for
more solidarity and commitment on the part of all.

Niger is doing its utmost at the international and
regional levels. For instance, on 22 and 23 January we
held an international forum on security and
development in the Sahelo-Saharan region of Niger in
order to raise awareness of our security and
development strategy there. The strategy is
accompanied by a budget, with which we call on the
international community to assist.

