Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

The situation in the Middle East continues to be
of serious concern to the international community.
Furthermore, it is particularly worrisome that the
Security Council continues to hold open debates on
the Middle East, in which there is overwhelming
support for the Palestinian cause, but has not adopted
a resolution demanding that Israel put an immediate
end to the military occupation of Palestine and other
Arab territories, the blockade on the Gaza Strip and the
construction and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
and the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and be accountable for the war crimes and
collective punishment committed by Israel against the
Palestinian people.

Why is this organ not assuming its responsibilities?
What is it waiting for? Who is it trying to protect by
failing to act? Why is it that, even in the face ofa clear
breach to international peace and security, no tangible
measures have been taken but yet, there is an increasing
number of debates being held in the Council daily on
issues that do not fall within its purview? Regrettably,
persistent opposition from the United States, through
the anachronistic use of the veto, has prevented a
decision from being taken on the question of Palestine
in the Council.

The Council should take steps to ensure an end
to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and
guarantee the peaceful coexistence of two States, based
on the establishment of an independent, sovereign
and viable Palestinian State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem and in line with the pre-l967 borders, and a
fair solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
We are convinced that resolving this long-standing
conflict would help to greatly reduce current tensions
in the Middle East.

Once again, my delegation reiterates its strong
condemnation of the Israeli colonization campaign
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and all measures, policies and practices
associated with the campaign, which include, in addition
to the construction and expansion of illegal settlements
and the wall, the destruction and confiscation of
Palestinian land and property, the forced displacement
of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian families and
the transfer of settlers into the occupied Palestinian
territory, among other Violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and United Nations
resolutions. Such actions jeopardize the viability of a
Palestinian State and the ability to resolve the conflict
in a fair and balanced manner.

We also condemn, and demand a definitive end
to, violence, provocation and incitement to hatred and
terror by Israeli settlers and mass arbitrary arrests and
imprisonments.

Cuba reaffirms its full support for the admission
of Palestine as a full Member of the Organization and
calls on the Security Council to decide and accept
without delay Palestine's application in 2011 to be
recognized as a State Member of the United Nations, as
clearly desired by the vast majority of the Members of
the Organization. The historical debt to the Palestinian
people is enormous and must be repaid. The Council
must assume it responsibility and take action to end to
such a long period of injustice.

The situation in Syria continues to be of concern
to the international community. It will be possible to
achieve peace in that country only by respecting the
right of the Syrian people to decide their own destiny. A
political solution through dialogue and negotiation is the
only option for ending the conflict in Syria. We demand
that an end be put to interference in Syria's domestic
affairs. Those who fuel the conflict from the outside,
with the stated goal of regime change, are responsible
for the thousands of civilian casualties recorded in the
four years of fighting. Once again, we reiterate our
concern about the loss of innocent lives as a result of
the Syrian conflict and condemn all acts of violence
being perpetrated against the civilian population in that
country. The putative protection of human life and the
fight against extremist elements cannot be a pretext
for foreign intervention. That is why we demand the
cessation of the foreign presence in Syria, as it does not
have the approval of its Government and is not working
in coordination with its authorities.

The role of the Security Council is crucial in
achieving the aspirations of well-being, peace and
development that all peoples in the Middle East deserve.
Its member States should be advocates of peaceful
solutions, without foreign interference, that safeguard
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
contribute decisively to the preservation of the lives of
the people affected by conflict in the region.

