I thank both Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Michele Coninsx for their comprehensive briefings. I would like to take this opportunity to express Tunisia's support for and solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their families all over the world on the occasion of the third International Day of Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism, held on 21 August. As the report of the Secretary General (S/2020/774) indicates, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) and Al-Qaida continue to constitute a threat to international peace and security. Despite its previous military defeat in Syria and Iraq and the continued efforts to combat its affiliates around the world, ISIL is attempting to reconstitute and rebuild its network and readjust its continued ambition for a territorial existence, particularly in conflict zones. The increase in the number of terrorist attacks in Syria and Iraq compared to the same period last year is very concerning in this regard, despite the restrictions imposed by the pandemic. Furthermore, ISIL still maintains ownership of important financial resources amounting to $100 million. It continues to engage in illegal activities, including organized criminal enterprise, and reap profits from donations and fundraisings, especially through social media campaigns. The accelerated decentralization between the central command in Da'esh and Al-Qaida and their remote affiliates has been increasingly visible, with local groups acquiring their own distinct regional characteristics and objectives. This may constitute both an opportunity and a threat. On the one hand, the lack of command, with the recent deaths of several terrorist leaders, creates a power vacuum that the international community needs to use to good advantage to further mangle the strategic direction of ISIL and Al-Qaida and the effectiveness and outreach of their propaganda. On the other hand, however, affiliates are increasingly adapting themselves to regional contexts and exploiting local grievances by building financial, operational and family ties with other terrorist and organized-crime groups and by exacerbating tensions among different ethnic groups in some contexts to fuel conflicts and insecurity. Tunisia expresses grave concern with regard to the growth of terrorism and violent extremism in Africa, particularly in Libya and the West Africa and Sahel regions, where terrorist groups are systematically undermining poor socioeconomic conditions, marginalization, porous borders and the lack of security and political and social instability. We express particular concern about the recent reports of thousands of mercenaries from north-western Syria travelling towards Tripoli. This relocation constitutes a major terrorist threat not only to Libya but to the entire region. The terrorist travel towards Libya can only prolong the conflict and renders it bloodier and more difficult than ever to resolve peacefully. Tunisia calls upon the international community to uphold its obligation to disrupt terrorist travel and support. To a certain extent, the pandemic has reduced terrorist threats in the world, given the difficulty of terrorist movement, and terrorists' access to financial resources and regular means has minimized the opportunities for terrorist attacks against civilians and soft targets to take place. Nonetheless, we should not ignore the possible medium- and long-term effects of the pandemic on the terrorist threat, as explained in the Secretary-General's report and in the analytical paper submitted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The unprecedented social, economic and political challenges resulting from the pandemic have been quickly integrated into the strategies and propaganda of terrorist groups, in order to escalate their attacks and spread hateful and extremist ideas to a captive audience that is more than ever exposed to their online platforms. The dire economic and social consequences of the pandemic on countries and populations have also increased the fragility of societies while pressuring Member States to dedicate resources to countering terrorism and violent extremism measures. Such vulnerabilities can be exploited in future to radicalize those most affected and marginalized. For the foregoing reasons, the response to the terrorist threat should be comprehensive and multi-dimensional. First, States Members of the United Nations need to maintain the necessary resources and focus on their counter-terrorism priorities, while keeping and enhancing means of international coordination and cooperation despite the current pandemic, in a manner consistent with international law, particularly international human rights law, international humanitarian law and international refugee law. Secondly, it is crucial to address the deep causes of terrorism and establish the necessary safeguards to build resilience against terrorism and radicalization through the promotion of human rights, gender equality, youth participation, sustainable economic development and social cohesion. Tunisia also reiterates its call for the international community to disrupt all safe havens of terrorism through the peaceful settlement of conflicts, particularly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In this regard, the report of the Secretary-General highlights resolution 2532 (2020), in which the Security Council, considering the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, demanded a general and immediate cessation of hostilities and a durable humanitarian pause. However, the Council affirmed that these requirements do not apply to military operations against ISIL and other designated terrorist groups. Thirdly, the international community must address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs) ina manner consistent with the realities, needs and capacities of different Member States. The Security Council has recognized in several of its resolutions that FTFs pose a serious threat to their States of origin and that these fighters have, upon their return, attempted, organized, planned and participated in terrorist attacks, including against soft targets. Tunisia reaffirms that Member States need to ensure that all perpetrators of terrorist crimes are held accountable for their acts, including through judicial and law-enforcement cooperation. Finally, during the pandemic, the United Nations needs to remain vigilant and unified in its response to terrorism. It is crucial that we adapt to the new and unprecedented challenges before us and that we ensure the continuity and efficiency of our response, particularly through the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies. The postponement of the review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy should not make us lose focus on the priority given to counter-terrorism efforts nor hinder respect for our international obligations and commitments, including international human rights law, international humanitarian law and international refugee law. We remain committed to multilateral and multi-stakeholder cooperation in striving to reach our common objective of a world free of terrorism.
