Mr. Razali (Malaysia): The Malaysian delegation is
very happy, Sir, to see you presiding over the Security
Council, especially at this particular time, when the
Council is taking very important decisions on the issue of
the former Yugoslavia. My appreciation and respects are
extended also to your predecessor, the representative of
Nigeria.

The Malaysian delegation joins in the universal relief
at the initialling of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All the parties and
participants who worked indefatigably during the 21-day
proximity peace talks deserve appreciation for their
perseverance and for making the fateful choice for a
chance for peace instead of sending soldiers back to the
front lines.

The role of the United States has been pivotal to the
outcome. Others too, including the Russian Federation,
have made contributions. Malaysia has consistently
maintained that a clear application of political and
military resolve would force even aggressors to the
negotiating table.

 

My delegation wishes to single out the courageous
decision of President Alija Izetbegovic, who represents the
aggrieved party and the victim of aggression, which
experienced brutalization and devastation, the horrors of
which remain a blot on our conscience. It takes
monumental conviction and abiding faith to be able
dispassionately to choose priorities and invest in a chance
for peace instead of demanding redress and retribution. We
pray that events of the months ahead will prove that that
faith was justifiably placed, that the Dayton Agreement will
be fully honoured and that the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be able to embark on the long road to
healing and reconciliation.

Important lessons have also been learned. Containment
and ambivalence of policies, as well as uncertainties in the
mandate coming out of a dominated Security Council,
leading to a blurring of commitment to universal values,
have resulted in untold tragedies. In the long term, the
Framework Agreement provides opportunities to rectify and
redress; to rededicate, to re-establish a commitment to
values and to take steps to re-establish faith in the United
Nations.

On paper, the Framework Agreement and all its
Annexes provide a formula for the peaceful return to
normalcy of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
note that the Annexes to the Agreement address important
issues such as agreement on military aspects of the
settlement, stabilization, boundaries, elections, the
Constitution, human rights, and refugees and displaced
persons, to name only some. At the same time, we note that
certain critical issues have not been clarified. These include
the arming and training of Bosnian Government forces so
as to equalize force strength. Further, there is no provision
to ensure safe and secure elections.

Neither the international implementation force (IFOR)
nor the international police task force has been entrusted
with this task, which therefore becomes the responsibility
of the respective police forces of the entities. This vacuum
in the enforcement of security leading up to, during and just
after the first elections is highly unsatisfactory since it
provides the opportunity for intimidation, duress and fear.
Finally, the Dayton documents have sidestepped the
obligation to arrest suspects and hand them over to the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to be tried
for the atrocities they have committed.

These concerns raise the question of whether the
outcome of Dayton has served the cause of lasting peace
and a just settlement. One can also ask whether "ethnic
cleansing" has been legitimized and whether aggression
has been rewarded, and whether the issue of crimes
against humanity has been put aside. The full and timely
implementation of the Agreement and its Annexes will
help dispel these serious concerns.

The Council today has debated two relevant
resolutions, one dealing with the arms embargo and the
other with economic sanctions. The arms embargo must
be lifted immediately to ensure that the Bosnians are
adequately prepared to defend themselves, an inherent
right recognized in Article 51 of the Charter. Malaysia
continues to oppose the lifting of economic sanctions
without verifiable actions showing that the Serbs are
honouring their part of the Agreement. These two
resolutions are important steps in the implementation of
the Agreement.

The Council would also have to be involved in the
implementation of the international force to be led by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The Council
has also to decide formally on the future of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR). In the
consideration of the relationship between IFOR and the
Security Council, it will be necessary to clarify all aspects
of the issue, both military and non-military, political and
humanitarian alike. Malaysia has conveyed to NATO its
intention to participate in the international force. We
expect specific details pertaining to the involvement of
non-NATO forces to be resolved expeditiously. We
cannot but emphasize the importance of the involvement
of non-NATO forces, including those from countries of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), in
securing the full and balanced implementation of the
Dayton Agreement.

For those not part of NATO, we especially look to
the United Nations to define its role as an overall
authority for overseeing the full implementation of the
Framework Agreement.

Of all the challenges confronting Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the most immediate and fundamental is
reconstruction - reconstruction of its economy and its
infrastructure, as well as its society. The people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina must find reason to believe once again
in the region in which they live and in a multilateral
system and vehicle that will not let them down. We must
help to ensure that it remains pluralistic and enjoys
economic growth and social development. The Muslim
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina must enjoy the

 

right to development and to an environment free of
coercion and threat.

It is equally important that the entity of the Republic
of Srpska adhere to the spirit and substance of the
Agreement and not attempt to undermine the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international
guarantees so necessary to ensure fulfilment of the Dayton
Agreement must ensure that Srpska remains part of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Security Council cannot ignore the issue of
succession. It is a complex issue with implications not just
for the Balkan parties at Dayton but also for the parties that
were not there. The issue of succession can be resolved
only through negotiations, and not by any one party seeking
to unilaterally assume the position of successor.

Finally, I want to reiterate that the international
community must stand behind President Izetbegovic and the
Bosnians as we try to give peace, however imperfect or
fragile, a chance to take root.

