Ms. DiCarlo: Resolution 2231 (2015) endorsed the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which
came into effect on 16 January 2016. The Secretary-
General welcomed the Plan as a demonstration of
successful multilateralism and a major achievement of
nuclear non-proliferation, dialogue and diplomacy. Last
month, as it has done since implementation day, the
International Atomic Energy Agency reported to the
Council that Iran continues to implement its nuclear-
related commitments.

The Secretary-General welcomes the reaffirmation
by JCPOA participants of their commitments to its full
and effective implementation. It is essential that the
Plan continue to work for all participants, including by
delivering tangible economic benefits for the Iranian
people. The Secretary-General regrets the reimposition
by the United States of its sanctions lifted pursuant to
the Plan, after its withdrawal from the JCPOA. The
Secretary-General believes that issues not directly
related to the Plan should be addressed without prejudice
to preserving the agreement and its accomplishments.
At the same time, he calls on Iran to carefully consider
and address the concerns expressed by Member States
about its activities in relation to the restrictive measures
contained in annex B to the resolution. The Secretary-
General notes that the Plan remains in effect and that
the Security Council has called upon all Member States
and regional and international organizations to support
implementation of the Plan and to refrain from actions
that undermine it.

I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089). As guided by the Security
Council, and consistent with our previous reports, the
report before the Council today is focused on annex B
to the resolution.

First, on the implementation of the nuclear-related
provisions, the Secretariat has received additional
information on two dual-use items destined for Iran,
which were seized by the United Arab Emirates.
The States that manufactured those items informed
the Secretariat that, in their assessment, they did not
require prior approval by the Security Council through
the procurement channel process. In addition, the
Secretariat continues to examine information related to
the possible transfer of other items, undertaken contrary
to the resolution, which were brought to its attention by
the United Arab Emirates and the United States.

It is our assessment that the procurement channel
remains a vital transparency and confidence-building
mechanism. It ensures that the transfers of certain
goods, technology and/or related services to the Islamic
Republic of Iran are consistent with resolution 2231
(2015) and the Plan. Forty-two proposals have been
submitted to the procurement channel since January
2016, of which 28 have been approved. The Secretary-
General encourages all States and the private sector to
fully utilize and support the channel.

Secondly, on the ballistic-missile-related
provisions, the report reflects information provided to
the Secretary-General and to the Security Council by
France, Germany, Iran, Israel, the Russian Federation
and the United Kingdom on additional ballistic-missile
flight tests reportedly conducted by Iran since January
2018, as well as on the launch of several ballistic
missiles at targets in Syria on l October 2018. The
Security Council met on 4 December to consider the
reported test firing of a further medium-range ballistic
missile by Iran on 1 December.

Since our previous report (8/2018/602), the
Secretariat has examined the debris from three more
ballistic missiles launched at Riyadh by the Houthis in
March and April. That debris was consistent with that
from the five missiles examined previously, which the
Secretariat assessed shared key design features with the
Iranian Qiam-l ballistic missile and had components
parts manufactured in Iran. However, the Secretariat
has not been able to determine whether such missiles,
or parts thereof, or related technology, had been
transferred from Iran after 16 January 2016, the date
when annex B provisions came into effect.

Thirdly, in terms of the arms-related provisions,
during the reporting period the Secretariat examined
two container launch units for anti-tank guided missiles
recovered in Yemen. The Secretariat found that they had
characteristics of Iranian manufacture and that their
markings showed production dates in 2016 and 2017.
The Secretariat also examined a partly disassembled
surface-to-air missile seized by the Saudi-led coalition
and observed that its features appeared to be consistent
with those of an Iranian Sayyad-2C missile. The
Secretariat is still analysing available information
on additional unmanned aerial vehicles recovered in
Yemen, including some that appear to have the same
design features as the Iranian-made Ababeel-2.
The report also reflects the fact that the Secretariat
examined a shipment of about 2,500 assault rifles seized
by the United States in the Gulf of Aden in August.
The Secretariat observed that those weapons did not
have the characteristics of Iranian production. The
Secretariat will further analyse that seizure and report
back accordingly should new information become
available. In addition, the report includes information
received from Israel and Iran regarding the alleged
transfer of an Iranian-produced Khordad air defence
system to the T-4 airbase in Syria in April.

The report also highlights the continued participation
of Iranian entities in another foreign arms exhibition,
held in Baku in September. In relation to the travel-ban
provisions, the report provides additional information
on previous travel by Major General Qasem Soleimani
to Iraq in May.

In conclusion, I would like to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom of the Netherlands
for his tenure as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium, who will assume
the functions of Facilitator on 1 January 2019. I assure
him of the Secretariat's full support. I would also like
to thank the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission for our continued
cooperation.

