Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): I
would like to welcome to the Security Council Ambassador
Bull of Liberia, who is here under circumstances that are
much more positive than those that existed in the past.

After much tragedy in its terrible history of the past
seven years this is a time of hope for Liberia. The peace
process is entering its final stage with the beginning of the
electoral process. As we have been told by the Secretary-
General, certain very positive factors are currently emerging
in Liberia that were unimaginable only months ago, which
gives us serious hope that Liberia can embark on a peaceful
electoral process in an acceptable security situation.

I wish to mention some of those factors. In the past
we have described in great detail the problems that Liberia
has confronted. I therefore really do not want to miss this
opportunity to highlight the good things that are happening.
Relative peace has continued to prevail throughout the
country. There have been noteworthy achievements in the
disarmament process. The personnel of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) will soon be deployed in the two
counties in which they are not yet deployed. The civilian
population is gradually gaining confidence. A
revitalization of civil society and of the political parties is
taking place. The human rights community continues to
gain strength and to make its presence felt in the
country's political and social spheres. The humanitarian
community continues to broaden its operations in the
interior of Liberia and is increasing its access to the
population in those regions.

These facts are quite indicative of the fact that the
Liberian crisis is beginning to be resolved in a positive
way. In other words, the prevailing conditions in Liberia
could provide a reasonable basis for organizing and
holding the elections which are planned for 30 May. This,
as we were told by the representative of Liberia in his
statement, is a possible basis for the rebirth of the
Liberian nation.

In spite of all this, there are a few matters which
concern us and of which the international community will
have to be watchful. First, one third of the combatants
have yet to be disarmed. This is a disquieting factor and
one which we hope will not have a negative impact on
the process.

Secondly, the time remaining before the elections is
undoubtedly extremely short. Moreover, there is a delay
in the formation of the new independent Election
Commission and the re-established Supreme Court. It is
legitimate to wonder whether there will be sufficient time
for the elections to be held on the scheduled date.
Nonetheless, it is extraordinarily important that those
elections be held as scheduled.

We have recently received more good news. The
Force Commander of ECOMOG has reported that the
territory of Liberia has been cleansed of landmines. This
will make it possible for people to move about the
country without the fear of mines in their path. This
should facilitate the return of refugees who want to
participate in the electoral process. However, I also
believe that from the perspective of the international
community - which has attached so much importance to
reducing the impact of anti-personnel mines - this is an
example of how problems of this nature can be resolved
when the resources to do so exist.

Lastly, I would like to thank and congratulate the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, and the
personnel of UNOMIL, ECOWAS and ECOMOG for the
role they have played and continue to play in Liberia. A
 

few months ago, in 1996, we were witnessing a situation in
that country which seemed impossible to resolve. However,
we now see that the Liberians have gotten down to serious
work for their future. We wish them every success, and
congratulate them on what they are doing.

In this framework, we must therefore begin the
transition towards the point when Liberia can stabilize the
political and security situation with a Government that
enjoys internal and external legitimacy. This means that the
United Nations system, the Bretton Woods institutions and
the donor countries must give high priority to Liberia in
order to promote the economic and social development of
the country.

As for the Security Council, we must ensure a fluid
link between the responsibilities of the Council - which,
if everything continues as we are now seeing in Liberia,
will come to an end in the near future - and the transition
towards support for cooperation for development, which, in
the final analysis, is the only stable source of peace, as it
reduces poverty, generates employment and brings about
reconciliation after such a terrible conflict. It is our
responsibility to ensure that link between the peace and
security stage and the stage of furthering development.

For all the reasons we have described, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before the
Council, which will extend the mandate of UNOMIL to 30
June 1997.

We would once again like to congratulate all those
who have made this process possible, in particular the
leaders and the people of Liberia, on the present state of
affairs.

