Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): As an observer
member ofthe African Union, we commend the Angolan
presidency for convening this open debate, which
focuses on the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in the Great Lakes region. The visits to this region by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon last month and by
the Presidents of the Security Council in March 2015
and January 2016 - Ambassador Francois Delattre
of France, and Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins of
Angola, respectively - demonstrate the determination
and commitment of the United Nations system to
achieve durable peace, reconciliation and development
there. We also acknowledge with appreciation the
untiring dedication of Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, and Mr. Modibo Toure, Special Adviser to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.

To ensure further progress, my delegation
recommends a more comprehensive regional strategy
on the part of the United Nations system together with
the African Union, the European Union and other
African subregional organizations, such as the East
African Community, the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, the Southern African Development
Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, with financial outlays by the International
Monetary Fund, World Bank, African Development
Bank and donor countries.

I am pleased to inform those present that during
the seventieth session of the General Assembly,
Kazakhstan and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) signed a cost-sharing agreement
for a new project, entitled "Africa-Kazakhstan
Partnership for the Sustainable Development Goals".
This agreement focuses on providing technical support
to the ministries of foreign affairs and other relevant
institutions in 45 African countries, including in
the Great Lakes region. The project will promote
the sharing of institutional experiences and best
practices as Governments prepare to take forward the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). UNDP is working directly
with ministries of African countries to implement this
project. Our overall objective is to build on the efforts of
these countries to achieve greater State-building, rule
of law, good governance, inclusive political processes,
and security and justice sector reform, together with
the protection of civilians, and the disarmament and
reintegration of combatants.

Peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
missions should therefore have well-conceived
mandates with achievable objectives, adequate
qualified personnel, modern equipment and resources.
The efforts of all key actors need to be redoubled
to build stability and security, conflict mediation,
post-conflict reconstruction, and address the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. To that end, we have to
envision greater military, diplomatic and development
partnerships that go beyond North-South cooperation to
South-South and triangular cooperation. My delegation
therefore supports the actions of the United Nations, in
particular various Council resolutions that concern the
region as a whole and its individual countries.

Kazakhstan willjoin other Member States in taking
measures to strengthen political and legal institutions,
the holding of elections, State-building, improved
land ownership, inter-ethnic reconciliation, refugee
resettlement, humanitarian assistance and poverty
eradication. Governmental policies must go together
with the grass-roots participation of local actors
and civil society to bring about a transformational
approach that is both structural and relational, the
latter for healing, bridge-building and reconciliation.
Capacity-building for African organizations must
include long- and short-term technical assistance
in conducting timely assessments, programming,
and monitoring and reporting. This will be possible
with enhanced information technology assistance,
knowledge management and timely information sharing
region-wide, all with a view to combating the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the rise of illegal
armed groups, ending gender-based violence and
ending all impunity and transboundary crime.

We need to work towards ensuring the region's
stability, progressive development and achieving
human security for all. We therefore stand for the full
implementation of the recommendations of the reviews
of United Nations peace operations, the peacebuilding
architecture (S/2015/490), and resolution 1325 (2000),
and, most importantly, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) in
the region. This calls for broadening the concept of
peace and stability from State-centered security to
people-oriented security and from purely military
to non-military security, which includes food, water
and energy security, which represent important
priorities on our path to a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council.

President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, in
his statement to the General Assembly in September
(see A/70/PV.13), called for transferring 1 per cent of
the defence budgets of Member States to the special
Sustainable Development Goals Fund, and proposed
the adoption of a global strategic initiative plan to end
all conflicts on our planet by 2045, the centenary of
the United Nations. As terrorist, radical and violent
extremist military groups are on the rise in the
region and beyond, President Nazarbayev proposed
strengthening the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the establishment of a global
anti-terrorist network by bringing together existing
measures operating under the aegis of the United
Nations. We call on all delegations to support these
bold and forward-looking approaches.

Development and peace go together, and so we
must support the countries of the Great Lakes region
in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. Kazakhstan is therefore reaching out to
countries in Africa through technical assistance with
United Nations Development Programme projects.
Humanitarian aid is not a solution; we have to invest
more in sustainable development. The upcoming World
Humanitarian Summit, to be held in Istanbul this May,
will provide new insights and a plan of action.

Kazakhstan is committed to supporting progress
in the Great Lakes region and throughout the critically
important African continent.

