Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Smai'l Chergui, African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, for their
briefings, which provided a detailed and informative
assessment of the situation and the challenges that
we currently face in Libya. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his briefing as the
German Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

I would like to begin by expressing, on behalf of
France, ourparticular gratitude to Special Representative
Ghassan Salame for his presence here among us today
and for his commitment and to reiterate to him France's
full support in the execution of his mandate as he
bravely works with his team in a particularly difficult
context and a very fragile political environment.

At the outset, I would particularly like to echo
Ghassan Salame's call for a ceasefire. Given the
deadlock in the situation and the risk of escalation, it is
imperative to establish a ceasefire without preconditions
based on an international monitoring mechanism.

The new developments in the Libyan crisis are
particular concerning, as has been said. The fighting
has already had worrying humanitarian consequences
since the beginning of April, with more than 500
dead and 75,000 displaced, clashes moving to densely
populated areas and 3,200 migrants and refugees
detained in centres near the fighting. All parties must
comply with their obligations towards civilians and
civilian infrastructure, as well as humanitarian and
health personnel.

The ongoing fighting also jeopardizes the political
and diplomatic efforts to implement the United Nations
road map. Let us not be mistaken - it is criminal,
radical and terrorist groups that are benefiting from
the situation, as evidenced by the infiltration, under the
guise of defending the Government of National Accord,
of radical elements in Tripoli, including individuals
under Security Council sanctions, and the recent
attacks claimed by Da'esh in the south and centre of
the country.

That critical situation threatens to further
deteriorate if nothing is done to overcome the current
impasse in a context where it is clear that neither side
can prevail by force. The continuation of hostilities,
or even their spreading to other fronts in Libya, the
rearmament of both sides and the increase in terrorist
activities pose a major risk to the civilian population
and the sustainability of the political process.

Under such conditions, I reiterate that our priority
must be the rapid implementation ofa lasting ceasefire,
without preconditions, which in order to be credible
must be supported by an international monitoring
mechanism. We must also ensure that humanitarian
channels are effectively established so as to facilitate
the delivery of aid to all populations in need, including
migrants and refugees.

It is also vital that the Libyan stakeholders
disassociate themselves fully and unambiguously from
terrorist groups both in their public statements and
on the ground. Finally, as the Special Representative
emphasized, the arms embargo established by the
Council must be fully respected and implemented by
all the parties.

Without an immediate ceasefire, the conflict
could only further threaten international and regional
peace and security. The resolution of the conflict
and the stabilization of Libya are imperative for the
Libyan people, who yearn for peace and stability,
and for all of us because Libya is a priority security
issue in the fight against terrorism, trafficking and
migration management.

In that context, the other imperative is the resumption
of political discussions as part of the United Nations-
led process. The unconditional ceasefire is only a first
step that must be supported by a revival of the political
process on the basis of the principles established at the
Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi meetings. That is the
only way to create a new momentum for the holding of
general elections as soon as possible to allow Libyans
to decide their own destiny in a sovereign manner.

The Abu Dhabi agreement remains a valid basis
because it establishes the principles for the reunification
of the country and its institutions, paves the way for
the formation of a unified Government to prepare
for elections, and provides for political control of the
military until the elections.
That is why France calls on the Libyan parties
to resume talks on that basis, with the assistance of
the Special Representative. The United Nations must
continue to play a key role in resolving the conflict in
Libya through the mediation of Special Representative
Ghassan Salame' and with the Council's full support.
Within the Council we share significant points of
convergence, in particular the observation that the
priority is to relaunch the political process, that there is
no military solution in Libya and that it is imperative to
silence the weapons. Let us build on that convergence
in support of the Special Representative.

It is also absolutely essential that the United Nations
and its Panel of Experts on Libya be able to carry out
their work independently and in appropriate conditions.
With regard to the situation of Mr. Moncef Kartas,
which the German Chairmanship of the sanctions
committee mentioned just now, we are encouraged
by the recent developments in Tunis. We thank the
United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel Ferreira
de Serpa Soares, and his teams for their efforts and
Tunisia's commitment.

France will resolutely continue its efforts in support
of Special Representative Ghassan Salame to bring
the Libyan stakeholders together around an inclusive
political solution, leading as soon as possible to the
elections demanded by the Libyan people, and to help
build a lasting peace in Libya. That is the aim of the
efforts being made by President Macron and Minister
Le Drian, together with the Libyan parties.

