Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this important meeting. We welcome the crucial input from the briefers, including the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. Transitional justice exposes the human dimension of a conflict by putting the rights of victims first. In societies emerging from conflict, inclusive and effective responses are an investment in peace, stability, justice and democracy. Transitional justice consists of a broad set of measures, from ensuring accountability for international crimes, honouring victims' right to truth and acknowledging their suffering to providing reparation for damage done. Effective and inclusive institutions at all levels have a vital role. The whole of society must come to terms with the past and work towards reconciliation. Yet this is not easy. Transitional justice measures are set up in complex and sensitive political circumstances. We have experienced in peace negotiations that one of the most difficult questions is impunity. Those with the most power to end conflicts are often the least likely to submit to justice for their crimes. As we have heard this morning, the Colombian peace agreement showed that the goals of peace and justice for victims could be mutually reinforcing. Today, three years into the agreement's implementation, the Truth Commission, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Search Unit for Missing Persons are fully operational. Support from the Security Council played a crucial role. While not without challenges and controversies, Colombia's experience with transitional justice, though crucial in its own regard, also provides us with important lessons for other peace processes. Civil society, in particular women, should be included, from the design to the implementation of transitional justice mechanisms. Women must be seen as peacebuilders rather than victims. By integrating a gender equality perspective, conditions are improved for inclusive and democratic societies where human rights are respected. One Nordic example is the specialized police teams to the United Nations mission in South Sudan. They support the national police inpreventing, investigating and prosecuting sexual and gender-based violence. Let me mention four measures that the United Nations can take to strengthen our work. First, the mandate of United Nations peace operations should include support for nationally owned transitional justice initiatives. Here we can draw lessons from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Secondly, United Nations envoys and special representatives should be encouraged to promote transitional justice initiatives and inclusion at all levels of peace processes. Thirdly, the Council must strengthen its partnership with regional organizations, including the African Union, which last year adopted a transitional justice policy to support reconciliation. Finally, the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission to the Council could be better utilized. There are valuable lessons learned from countries that have gone through transitional justice processes. When done right, transitional justice is transformative, providing local institutions with legitimacy for the challenging path towards lasting peace. When war-torn societies take decisive steps towards peace, we, the international community, should support those efforts in every possible way. The victims of conflict deserve nothing less.
