Mr. Mladenov: As we meet today, tensions between
Syria and Israel continue to rise, and last Saturday
we were minutes away from another devastating
confrontation between Israel and Hamas in Gaza. It
has taken an intense effort at preventive diplomacy by
the United Nations and Egypt to make sure that both
sides in the Gaza conflict step back from the brink
of the fourth military confrontation in Gaza over the
past decade.

In September 2014, shortly after the conflict,
my predecessor delivered the following remarks to
the Council:

"[w]e must change fundamentally the dynamics
in Gaza. If we do not, Gaza could implode or, yet
again, explode - possibly with a new and even more
devastating round of violence." (S/PV. 7266, p. 3)

For four long years, that fragile ceasefire has been
taken for granted. For four years, the United Nations has
urged concerted action to address the root causes of this
man-made catastrophe - the intractable conflict, more
than 50 years of occupation and more than a decade of
Hamas control of the Gaza Strip, Palestinian division
and a crippling Israeli closure regime. And for four long
years, the underlying dynamics have not improved.
The humanitarian crisis has deepened, the political
stalemate between Hamas and Fatah has worsened,
and the prospect of another deadly round of violence
is growing by the day. Only through the repeated,
collective efforts of all sides has another catastrophic
escalation been averted over the past weeks.

On 15 July and earlier today, I travelled to Gaza
in an urgent effort to de-escalate tensions. I appealed
to Palestinian factions not to provoke incidents at the
fence, to immediately stop the firing of rockets and
mortars, and to stop the incendiary kites and balloons.
And I appealed to Israel to reopen the crossings, stop
shelling, particularly in populated areas, and to exercise
restraint towards Gaza. Over the past two weeks,
however, the situation quickly spiralled out of control,
nearly to the point of no return. Today, I reiterate my
call on all in Gaza to step back from the brink. Those
who seek to provoke Israelis and Palestinians to war
must not succeed.

The past month has witnessed one of the largest
escalations since the 2014 conflict. Nineteen
Palestinians, including seven children, were killed by
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in Gaza during protests,
clashes, and air strikes, and more than 1,000 were
injured. One IDF soldier was killed by gunfire from
Gaza, while four Israeli civilians and an IDF soldier
were moderately injured. In the occupied West
Bank, a Palestinian teenager was killed by the IDF
during a search and arrest operation, while some 25
Palestinians and three Israeli soldiers were injured in
various incidents.

Hamas and other militants fired 283 rockets and
mortars from Gaza towards Israel. The Israeli Air Force
fired some 189 missiles and artillery shells against
targets in Gaza, including two tunnels between Gaza
and Israel. Meanwhile, Egyptian security forces also
destroyed a tunnel between Gaza and the Sinai. Over
a 24-hour period from 14 to 15 July alone, militants
fired some 220 rockets and mortars from Gaza. One
rocket directly hit a house and injured four people.
Other rockets landed in the grounds ofa synagogue and
near a children's playground in Sderot. The IDF fired
90 missiles and artillery shells towards what it said
were military sites, injuring at least 25 Palestinians and
killing two teenagers in the highly populated centre of
Gaza City.
On 19 July, an Israeli drone shot towards a group
launching incendiary balloons, killing a Hamas militant.
The next day, an IDF soldier was killed by sniper fire
from Gaza, the first such fatality since 2014. Israel
retaliated against dozens of military targets across the
Strip, killing three militants claimed by the military
wing of Hamas. In response, Palestinians in Gaza
launched three rockets towards Israel, without injury or
damage. In the early hours of 21 July, a spokesperson
for Hamas announced that Hamas had agreed to restore
calm. That was followed by Israeli authorities later
that morning informing Israeli civilians living near the
Gaza border to return to their normal routine.

Incendiary kites and balloons continued to be
launched from the Gaza Strip towards Israel, triggering
over 1,000 fires in surrounding communities, although
since the evening of 20 July, that number has decreased
significantly. Over 8,500 acres of land have been
burned, including fields, forests and agricultural land
since the launching of incendiary kites began.

In other violence related to the continuing protests
at the Gaza fence, on 13 July a 15-year-old Palestinian
was shot and killed by the IDF while climbing the
Gaza perimeter fence, and an IDF soldier was injured
by a hand grenade thrown by a Palestinian protestor.
A 20-year-old Palestinian also later succumbed to
injuries incurred at the fence on that day. On 6 July, a
Palestinian was killed, reportedly due to the detonation
of an explosive device he was carrying. On 2 July,
four Palestinians breached the fence into Israel and
reportedly attempted to set fire to an abandoned
military post. The IDF shot and killed one, and injured
at least one other.

In reaction to the continuing launching of
incendiary kites and balloons from Gaza, on 10 July
Israel closed the Kerem Shalom crossing, allowing
only humanitarian supplies, food, fuel, medicines,
animal fodder and livestock, and reduced the fishing
zone for the Gaza Strip from nine to six nautical miles.
As tension continued to escalate, on 17 July the entry
of fuel and gas through the crossing was also halted,
and the fishing zone was further reduced to three
nautical miles.

After intense efforts by the United Nations and
Egypt, I can now report that the situation is calming
down, although tensions remain. I returned to
Jerusalem from Gaza just an hour ago and am hopeful
that, through the collective efforts of all sides, we can
avoid another confrontation, allow Palestinians in Gaza
and Israelis in communities across the border to sleep
in peace and begin addressing all humanitarian issues.
Today, the first 100,000 litres of much-needed fuel
were allowed through the Kerem Shalom crossing to be
distributed by the United Nations, prioritizing hospitals
and emergency services.

The recent sharp escalation in violence and
heightened tensions in Gaza must not divert us from
our broader efforts to address the crisis. I continue my
engagement with Israeli and Palestinian counterparts,
as well as with regional and international partners, to
reduce tensions, to address humanitarian challenges
in Gaza and, critically, to support the Egyptian-led
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process.

Advancing urgent infrastructure projects to
improve the water, electricity and health systems, and
to create employment that would have a quick impact
on the ground remains a key element of de-escalation.
So is improving access and movement for the people
of Gaza through Israel and Egypt. To that end, the
United Nations is enhancing its presence on the ground
to work with donors and international partners to
facilitate the smooth implementation of such projects,
in full coordination with the Palestinian Authority and
regional and international stakeholders.

Those efforts are already gaining momentum. On
17 July, the United Nations Development Programme
announced the implementation of various economic
initiatives that will create more than 2,500 immediate
and short-term job opportunities in Gaza, particularly
benefitting youth and women, over a 12-month period.
But let me reiterate what I said on 15 July. There is no
point in asking donors to continue funding initiatives
without a political horizon for the future. This cannot
be another futile exercise in conflict management and
recurring humanitarian support.

Our work is focused on restoring unity between
Gaza and the West Bank under one democratic
Government and one legal system where all weapons are
under the control of one legitimate national authority.
To achieve that, we must avoid an escalation, alleviate
the suffering of people, and work to lift movement and
access restrictions in line with resolution 1860 (2009).

To move these efforts forward, I have engaged with
the Government of Israel, the Palestinian Authority
(PA) and all stakeholders. Last week, Norway convened
a meeting of the United Nations, the European Union,
the World Bank and the PA to discuss coordination
mechanisms to fast-track interventions aimed at
bolstering the water, electricity and health networks,
as well as temporary job creation on the ground.
Yesterday, the Palestinian Prime Minister's Office
convened donors to reinforce these priorities ahead
of the discussions of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, scheduled for September.

These developments are taking place while the
financial crisis of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) remains a very serious concern. UNRWA
has communicated to staff that every effort will be
made to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable
refugees of reductions in emergency assistance. Of
particular concern is the possibility of a delay to the
start of the school year for some 526,000 students in
UNRWA schools throughout its areas of operation. At
present, UNRWA needs some $217 million to sustain
its work for this year. I urge the swift mobilization of
support to enable the continuity of assistance and the
maintenance of stability on the ground in the region.

In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
Israeli authorities have continued the demolition and
confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures. In Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu, located on the outskirts of
Jerusalem and populated by some 200 people, Israeli
authorities requisitioned land, levelled access routes
to the community and declared the area a closed
military zone. These actions were taken in advance
of the planned demolition and displacement of the
entire community. The relocation site offered by the
Israeli authorities 4 Jabal West 4 has been rejected
by the community itself. The fate of these Bedouins
will be decided by the Israeli High Court no later than
15 August. On 5 July, in Abu Nuwar, the authorities
demolished 19 structures.

Both Khan Al-Ahmar and Abu Nuwar are among
the 18 communities located in or adjacent to the
controversial E-l area, where plans for new settlement
construction would create a continuous built-up area
between the Ma'ale Adumim settlement and East
Jerusalem, undermining the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State. The United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator, along with the European Union, Norway,
France, the United Kingdom, Germany, the League
of Arab States and others, have condemned these
measures. I reiterate the call on Government of Israel to
cease demolitions and other measures that run contrary
to its obligations under international law.
On 12 and 17 June, in compliance with Israeli
Supreme Court rulings against settlement construction
on privately-owned Palestinian land, the authorities
demolished 28 structures in the two illegal Israeli
outposts of Netiv Ha'avot and Tapuach West. The
United Nations believes that settlement construction
remains illegal under international law, and I take this
opportunity to once again call on the authorities to
cease such actions.

On 2 July, the Knesset passed a new law requiring
the withholding of a portion of clearance revenues that
Israel collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority
and transfers to Ramallah, in line with its commitments
under the Paris Protocol. Funds withheld would be
equal to the amount paid by Palestinian authorities
to prisoners and detainees convicted or accused of
security offenses against Israelis, to their families, as
well as to families of Palestinians killed or injured in
attacks against Israelis. The implementation of the law
is expected to have a significant negative impact on the
Palestinian Authority's fiscal sustainability. I reiterate
the Secretary-General's call on all parties to refrain
from unilateral actions and respect their obligations
under previous agreements, United Nations resolutions
and international law.

Turning to Syria, recent developments on the
Golan have heightened tensions. On 6 July, the IDF
fired across the ceasefire line towards a location
from which it said a shell had been launched that
landed in the area of separation. On the same day,
Syrian authorities informed the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) that the
IDF had fired tank rounds across the ceasefire line at
targets in the area of separation. Following the Syrian
Government's offensive to recapture the south, which
began on 19 June, an agreement was reached on 11 July
between the non-State armed groups in Dara'a and the
Syrian Government with Russian mediation to bring
the entire Dara'a governorate under the control of the
Syrian Government. By 20 July, the Government was
taking control of several areas in Quneitra province,
particularly near the ceasefire line.

As at 19 July, UNDOF had observed approximately
2,205 tents set up for internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in its area of operation. As 0f23 July, the number
of tents observed by UNDOF in its area of operation

had decreased to 765. As of 20 July, almost to 203,000
Syrians remained internally displaced across south-
western Syria. Close to 70 per cent of the displaced
population are located in the western part of Quneitra
governate. While the Government of Israel has made
it clear that no IDPs would be permitted to enter into
its territory, in the past month alone Israeli authorities
have reported delivering over 100 tons of food, 370
tents and supplies of fuel, medicine and clothing, and
provided medical assistance to injured Syrian civilians.

The living conditions of the IDPs are dire, and
the United Nations currently has no cross-border or
cross-line access to Quneitra. Gaining unimpeded
humanitarian access to provide assistance and
protection to all affected populations is critical.

On 11 July, Israel informed the United Nations that
it had intercepted an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
that had been launched from Syria into Israel and that
Israel would not tolerate breaches ofthe 1974 Separation
of Forces Agreement. That same day, UNDOF reported
that three rockets had landed in locations in the area
of separation. Subsequently, UNDOF observed three
missiles explode in the same area. The IDF announced
that it had targeted three military posts in Syria in
response to the infiltration of the Syrian UAV earlier
in the day. On 13 July, Israel said it had fired a missile
at another UAV that had approached from Syria.
Following each of these incidents, UNDOF liaised
with both parties to de-escalate the situation. Between
15 and 23 July, airstrikes were reported in Aleppo,
Hama, and the interception of two Syrian missiles by
Israel in another sign of heighted regional tensions.

Just a few hours ago, the IDF reported that it had
fired two missiles, which shot down a Syrian fighter
jet that it claimed had infiltrated nearly two kilometres
into Israeli airspace. We are closely monitoring the
situation. These hostilities demonstrate a disturbing
trajectory of increasingly frequent and dangerous
confrontations. I call on all parties to abide by all the
provisions of the 1974 Agreement and to support the
role of UNDOF in that regard.

Turning to Lebanon, Acting Special Coordinator
for Lebanon and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
briefed the Council yesterday. Consultations continue,
as does United Nations advocacy, including through
the International Support Group for Lebanon, to form
a new Government that will be able to deliver upon
Lebanon's international obligations under resolution
1701 (2006) and its national priorities, in line with recent
international conferences in support of the country. The
situation in southern Lebanon and along the Blue Line
remained calm overall. Ground violations of the Blue
Line continued, primarily due to agricultural activity.
In closing, I would like to underline the importance
of expediting our collective efforts to address the
perilous situation in Gaza. Unless we begin in earnest
the crucial work required to change the current
deteriorating dynamics, another explosion is almost
a certainty. Progress will require de-escalation and
calm in Gaza, strengthened coordination with the
Palestinian Authority, Israel - which has special
obligations - Egypt and the United Nations, in addition
to financial support.

The human dimension must be at the forefront of all
our efforts. Gazans deserve to live their lives in freedom
and dignity. That is their right. It is not a privilege that
can be taken hostage or that can be granted or withheld
by others who have no regard for their suffering.
Israelis living near Gaza also deserve to finally be free
of indiscriminate attacks, be it by rockets, mortars or
incendiary devices, which have plagued their lives for
so many years.

We cannot lose sight of the broader context.
Another missed opportunity could have disastrous
consequences, including for reaching a broader
Israeli-Palestinian peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, in which Gaza is an integral part of the future
Palestinian State.

