Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.

As highlighted in the recent New Horizon
non-paper, the global demand for peacekeeping
activities requires a new strategic approach.
Developing close and effective partnerships between
key actors should be the centrepiece of such an
approach. We agree with the assessment of the
Secretary-General in his report on support to African
Union-led peacekeeping operations (S/2009/470) that
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations have become a critical factor of modern
peacekeeping.

The strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, including the regional
economic communities, should continue to be
developed. Efforts should be made to increase the
efficiency of relations between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council, as well as between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission. The European Union takes note of the
measures proposed by the Secretary-General on how to
move forward with this partnership.

In peacekeeping, a triangular dynamic is evolving
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union. The current support to Somalia is a
case in point. The United Nations and the European
Union both give substantial support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia. The European Union has
also deployed a naval operation to protect vessels of
the World Food Program from pirates.

The European Union continues to support the
institutional capacity-building of the African Union. A
road map to operationalize the African Peace and
Security Architecture is about to be finalized by the
African Union, the regional economic communities and
the European Union. The United Nations is engaged
through a 10-year capacity-building programme.

The Secretary-General has now proposed a
number of new initiatives. One useful idea is to
develop a broad road map for capacity-building.
African ownership has to be ensured, and it should be
part of the wider strategic plan of the African Union.
Lessons learned from, inter alia, the African Peace
Facility should be taken into consideration in any new
initiative for capacity-building.
We recognize the need to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
for African Union-led operations under a United
Nations mandate, while not ruling out any option
currently being studied. We are committed to seeking
pragmatic and effective ways by which bilateral and
other international partners of the African Union could
further support the development of the African Peace
and Security Architecture.

The European Union recognizes the authority of
the Security Council and the General Assembly to
decide on United Nations modalities of support on a
case by case basis for African Union-led peacekeeping
operations under a United Nations mandate. Any
proposal must be accompanied by appropriate
accountability mechanisms. At the same time, long-
term capacity-building should be pursued.

The European Union remains strongly engaged
with the United Nations and the African Union in
peacekeeping. The United Nations and the European
Union are increasingly developing joint strategic
responses. The members of the European Union bear
roughly 40 per cent of the costs of United Nations-led
peacekeeping operations. Peace and security is a
central part in the strategic relationship between the
African Union and the European Union. The African
Peace Facility has become an important tool for the
funding of African Union-led peacekeeping operations.
Today, the European Union bears about 40 per cent of
the costs of African-led peacekeeping operations.

The United Nations and the European Union
share the ambition to support the African Union in
general and, not least, in peacekeeping. The
information exchange and coordination of our
respective support should be further strengthened to
ensure coherence and additional synergies.

The European Union is strongly committed to
further developing its respective partnerships with the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as to
supporting similar endeavours between the United
Nations and the African Union. We are determined to
continue to assist the African Union in developing its
own capacity to deliver peace and stability on the
continent. The European Union would also welcome
increased support for the peacekeeping efforts of the
African Union from non-traditional donors.

