Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): It is a source of great satisfaction to the
delegation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea to have
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), with
us today.

In congratulating and thanking Mr. Chambas for
the comprehensive and detailed semi-annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/1104), which he has just
introduced to us, I should like in particular to express
our appreciation for and recognition of the excellent
work being carried out by the Special Representative
in the region of West Africa and the Sahel, in spite of
the numerous challenges and threats that continue to
be posed in that region by terrorists groups and violent
extremists, as well as by transnational organized
crime, especially human and drug trafficking, and
the persistence of asymmetrical attacks perpetrated
by armed groups in the northern and central parts of
Mali. The report of the Secretary-General also points
to the humanitarian crisis caused by the resurgence of
Boko Haram attacks as of last June, causing more than
2.5 million people to be displaced in the Lake Chad
basin area, as well as the severe food crisis suffered by
some 500,000 people in that region.

Given these situations, as the briefing we have
just heard has illustrated, it is very urgent that the
international community decisively support the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, established
by Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali Mauritania and the Niger.
This support must also be extended to the Multinational
Joint Task Force, made up of Cameroon, Chad, the Niger
and Nigeria. They should be provided with the means
necessary to effectively combat these terrorist groups.

The negative and destabilizing impact of the
phenomenon of climate change in several parts of
the region, especially for animal husbandry and
agricultural production, is also worth mentioning. It is
raising serious tensions in some countries of the region
as a consequence of the desertification that leads to the
emigration and migration of ranchers, which is a source
of tension and insecurity within these countries.

Despite the alarming picture we have just painted,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea greatly values the
quality work that UNOWAS has been doing in the
midst of these challenges. Its stellar work has led to
successive renewals of its mandate, trust in its capacity
for analysis, early warning, and the mobilization of
State and non-State agents in the region in an effort
to consolidate democratic processes and ward off
threats to national peace and stability. In that regard,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes and
encourages the spirit of the Praia Declaration on
Elections and Stability in West Africa, which is the
cornerstone of the UNOWAS mandate.

We express our satisfaction with the positive
developments taking place in the region, despite the
ongoing threats and challenges, such as economic
growth throughout the region; progress in the reform
processes under way, especially in the security sectors
in The Gambia and Burkina Faso; and the fortunate
development and unfolding of presidential elections
that we have just seen in Liberia. In line with these
positive developments, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea calls on the international community in general
and on UNOWAS in particular to take an interest in and
support Guinea Bissau so that the current prevailing
political situation in that beautiful country, which has
considerable resources, can be successfully overcome
and a definitive resolution can be reached through
inclusive dialogue with the country's political actors.

I conclude by once again pointing out the terrorist
threats being faced not only by countries of West
Africa and the Sahel, but also in Central Africa, other
regions of Africa and the rest of the world. Such is the
case of mercenary terrorist groups made up of people
and uncontrolled elements from several countries of the
subregion who infiltrated the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea during the last week of December with the aim
of carrying out terrorist attacks and destabilizing the
sitting Government. This situation demands vigilance
and control of groups that sow insecurity and instability
in several countries, on the part of the international
community and the United Nations.

