Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in Russian): As the
first Council member to speak at today's meeting, let
me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I wish you every
success, and wish your wonderful country and your
great people all the best as well as peace. I would like
to assure you that my delegation stands ready to
cooperate with you in all sincerity to ensure the full
success of your presidency.

(spoke in French)

I would also like to reiterate here my admiration
of Ambassador Motoc of Romania for the skill with
which he guided the work of the Security Council in
July 2004.

We are honoured by the presence among us of the
Minister of Public Administration and Local Self-
Government of Serbia.

Let me also thank Mr. Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
excellent introduction of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/613) on developments in Kosovo
since the violent events of March 2004. As we read this
highly instructive report, we sense that things are
gradually returning to normal and that there is every
reason to be optimistic about the prospects for
normalization of the situation.

In this respect, the joint declaration signed by
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb leaders on 14 July
is a positive development. We fully support the
priorities set out therein with respect to managing the
situation resulting from the riots of March 2004. It also
represents a renewed commitment with respect to the
pooling the efforts of the two communities with a view
to overcoming the painful legacy of the past and
working together to achieve the primary goal: a multi-
ethnic and democratic Kosovo.

My delegation welcomed the Standards
Implementation Plan when it was launched, as well as
its revision in the light of the events of March. The
adoption of a matrix setting forth tasks and
responsibilities for each of the ministries and
municipalities is a further step in the right direction.
However, this arrangement must be supplemented
through the establishment of rules of procedure
governing the functioning of the Government and the
central ministries and their overall coordination. The
lack of such a procedure is rightly regretted in the
report.

In the same spirit, we full endorse the principle of
holding the majority community responsible for the
welfare of the minority communities, and we support
specific measures taken to ensure the protection of the
vital interests of the Serb community in Kosovo. The
participation of the Serbs in local government bodies in
Kosovo is a key factor in that respect, as is their
representation in the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, which continues to be very low, as the
report indicates.

We pay tribute to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and its
military force, KFOR, for the crucial role they are
playing in consolidating peace in Kosovo by
supporting the normalization process based on the
allocation of responsibilities pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999). We call on the Provisional Institutions
scrupulously to respect that division of responsibility
and to work to carry out the tasks that fall within their
purview. We would like here to highlight our support
for the early warning arrangements put in place by the
joint Kosovo Security Advisory Group with a view to
anticipating crises and acting quickly to prevent them.

The low rate of return of displaced persons
continues to be a cause for concern, especially in the
context of the legislative elections planned for October
2004. Over and above the need to increase the pace of
the rebuilding of destroyed homes, there is a sense of
insecurity among displaced persons, and due attention
must be paid to that. We believe that all of those
involved in the normalization process in Kosovo must
step up their efforts to build trust among the minority
communities so as to encourage their members to
return home. To that end, we must renew the inter-
community dialogue within the framework of the
working groups, both at the local level and with Serbia
and Montenegro and neighbouring countries. We must
ensure that property rights are protected and strengthen
the credibility of the judicial system in Kosovo through
ongoing efforts to give it a multi-ethnic composition
and make it effective. Dealing with the shortcomings
highlighted in the report is essential if the rule oflaw is
to be strengthened and corruption and impunity
combated.

In the final analysis, we encourage the
Provisional Institutions to strengthen their efforts,
undertaken together with UNMIK, to establish a legal
framework that provides incentives to promote
sustained economic growth in Kosovo to as to create
better prospects for the well-being of all the
communities in the province.

Finally, we fully share the Secretary-General's
positive assessment of the work of his former Special
Representative for Kosovo and of the qualities of his
successor, Mr. Jessen-Petersen. We wish him every
success as he discharges his important task of
promoting peace and harmonious inter-community
relations in Kosovo.

