Mr. Kishi (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for organizing and
personally presiding over this open debate with a very
timely subject. I would also like to welcome Secretary-
General Guterres to the Security Council.

We thank the Secretary-General for sharing with
us his determination today. We are very happy to have
him as Secretary-General of the United Nations. He has
our full support.

During the past two years, various review processes
have brought to our attention the importance of conflict
prevention. Conflicts in Syria, Yemen and many parts
of Africa demonstrate the cost of insufficient efforts
in conflict prevention. The Security Council has a key
responsibility in dealing with immediate conflicts.
However, it should also demonstrate results in conflict
prevention - a far less costly endeavour - by making
the best use of such tools as Security Council missions
to the field. We would like to see a Security Council
that is a leader not only in resolving conflicts, but
also in preventing them. We must weave the concept
of sustaining peace into every aspect of United
Nations activities.

Japan fully embraces this challenge. We believe that
peace is a long-term process and our emphasis has always
been on the comprehensiveness and seamlessness of
our assistance. Human security is an important pillar of
Japan's foreign policy. Based on this concept, Japan has
consistently provided human-centred, comprehensive
and preventive assistance through harmonized efforts
with various aid bodies. In Mindanao, the Philippines,
we have provided assistance to track-two dialogues,
as well as track-one peace negotiations, based on this
principle. Our official development assistance provided
peace dividends by addressing poverty, high youth
unemployment and social injustice on a preventive
basis. We have also contributed $410 million to the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security since
its establishment in 1999.

Japan has been consistently committed to
peacebuilding and in particular to capacity- and
institution-building. In Timor-Leste, Japan has
supported State-building efforts through development
assistance, as well as the dispatch of our self-defence
forces and civilian police personnel. We have also exerted
leadership as the Chair ofthe Working Group on Lessons
Learned of the Peacebuilding Commission. Japan will
continue to be a leader in institution-building - the
backbone of sustainable peacebuilding.
We listened to the statement of the Secretary-
General carefully. We welcome his serious plan of action
and look forward to discussing his initiatives further.
We will provide our utmost support. We hope he will
actively employ his good offices to address conflicts
and disputes, including those in the Middle East region.
We look forward to working closely with him in the
Security Council. We also encourage his proactive use
of situational awareness and horizon-scanning briefings
as means to reinforce conflict prevention. We ask that
he please make full use of his power to bring matters
to the attention of the Security Council, pursuant to
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations. We
look forward to his frequent presence at the Council's
informal consultations.

Japan would like to underline that United
Nations reform is needed to sustain peace effectively.
Institutional silos must be removed and coordination
must be reinforced for a seamless and holistic approach
to sustaining peace. This will involve not only increased
efficiency and cohesion between the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
but far greater coordination among actors across all
three pillars of United Nations engagement. We are
encouraged by his track record of reform at the Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and his promotion of the humanitarian-development
nexus. We welcome his initiative to reform the
Secretariat, so that he can better perform his functions
particularly in conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

Japanese diplomacy centres on being a proactive
contributor to peace. As a member of the Security
Council, we will work closely with the Secretary-
General and Council members through a proactive
and results-oriented approach. Japan pledges to serve
as a responsible Council member and a dependable
partner to the new Secretary-General in promoting
international peace and stability.

