Mr. Christian (Ghana): My delegation
recognizes the presence here of His Excellency
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq. We thank the Secretary-General for his report,
and we also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi,
for his briefing.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
ongoing political, sectarian and crime-related problems
in Iraq should engage the continued attention of the
international community. We therefore endorse his call
for strong political support for the people and the
Government of Iraq as they strive to achieve peace and
security. That is why my delegation welcomes this
debate, which demonstrates our collective solidarity
with the people of Iraq, especially women and children
as well as refugees and displaced persons, who are
bearing the brunt of this conflict.

My delegation is encouraged by the approval by
the Council of Representatives of the candidatures of
nine commissioners to serve on the permanent
Independent High Electoral Commission, in
accordance with the Commission's law promulgated in
January 2007, as well as by the selection by the new
Board of Commissioners of new officers, including the
Chairman, Chief Electoral Officer and Rapporteur.
These incremental steps are essential in building the
vital institutions necessary to ensure good governance
and respect of the political and constitutional
reconstruction endeavours in Iraq.

The assistance provided by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in this regard,
coupled with other technical support given by UNAMI
towards the constitutional reconstruction process in
Iraq, is highly commendable.

The conference on the Iraq Compact, together
with the expanded ministerial conference of the
neighbouring countries of Iraq which followed it,
demonstrate the increasing role Iraq's neighbours wish
to play in bringing the crisis to an end. It is hoped that
the commitment made at these meetings will be
followed through and go to reinforce the resources
already being provided by the donor countries, which
contribute to the International Reconstruction Fund
Facility for Iraq with a View to ensuring the sustainable
reconstruction of Iraq. It is our hope that the
momentum generated by the conference on the
Compact for Iraq will be maintained in order to yield
the peace dividend and make a positive impact on Iraq.

We commend the various humanitarian
interventions undertaken by United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes to provide emergency relief to
Iraqi families in dire need of water, food and medicine.
We welcome the idea of opening an Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) office
in Iraq in order to reinforce and ensure the effective
coordination of the humanitarian work of the United
Nations in Iraq.

Given the experience of the United Nations in
Iraq and the concerns expressed, the Secretary-General
supports the mitigating measures aimed at enhancing
the safety and security of UNAMI personnel, including
the fact that the reinforcement of the overhead security
cover for UNAMI in the International Zone in Baghdad
should be sustained. The Secretary-General's proposal
to make arrangements for the construction of a new
United Nations building in Baghdad which would be
designed to withstand the prevailing security
challenges in Iraq requires special attention. These
measures will not only answer the safety needs of
United Nations staff, but, equally important, they will
facilitate the multifaceted task of the United Nations
and UNAMI of reaching out to all segments of the
population who are in need of assistance every day.

The report on the human rights situation in Iraq is
disturbing. My delegation therefore endorses the
outcome of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) conference held
in Geneva in April 2007 and calls on the Iraqi
Government and all relevant parties to choose the path
of national reconciliation and to adhere to the
principles of human rights and international law.

We call also on those responsible to release the
Iraqi United Nations employees and others who have
been kidnapped or gone missing during this reporting
period. My delegation also welcomes the decision of
the Government of Iraq to grant UNAMI access to
Iraqi detention centres and welcomes UNAMI's
intention to carry out the first of such Visits later this
month.
We are not sure of the reasons for the Iraqi
Government's inability to ratify the status-of-mission
agreement signed with the United Nations in June
2005. We have, however, urged the competent
authorities in Iraq to proceed with the necessary
ratification procedures to ensure that UNAMI's
presence in Iraq is put on a firmer legal footing.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to the Deputy Representation for Iraq, Mr.
Jean-Marie Fakhouri, who is leaving the United
Nations Mission in Iraq at the end of this month, for
his invaluable services.

