Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): As today
is the Security Council's first meeting of the month, I
congratulate France on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I believe that under your leadership, Sir,
the Council will be able to complete its work for this
month smoothly.

I should also like to thank the members of the
Council for their support and cooperation during the
Chinese presidency in February.

Both parties to the conflict in South Sudan are
holding political negotiations in Ethiopia, under
the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). China supports the constructive
role played by the Council in assisting the mediation
efforts of IGAD. The Council has adopted resolution
2206 (2015), which sends a unanimous message to the
parties aimed at helping IGAD in its push for a speedy
breakthrough in the political negotiations. China
appreciates the consultations being conducted by the
two negotiating parties of South Sudan on the basis
of the proposal put forward by IGAD, on which some
progress has been made. China sincerely hopes that
the two negotiating parties will reach a compromise as
soon as possible on the pending issues in order to take
a crucial step towards restoring peace and stability to
South Sudan, which is in the fundamental and long-
term interests of that country and its people.

While attending the special consultations in
support of the IGAD-led South Sudan peace process
in January, Foreign Minister Wang Yi put forward
a four-point proposal for a settlement of the issue of
South Sudan. We urge the parties to the conflict to end
the fighting and violence forthwith and to establish a
transitional Government as soon as possible. We firmly
support IGAD in playing its mediation role in order to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in South Sudan.
We hope that resolution 2206 (2015) will truly help to
achieve that goal.

We call on the international community to maintain
its vigorous support for the good offices of IGAD and
to support the countries of the region as they play their
important role in addressing the issue of South Sudan.
China is ready to join the interested parties within the
international community in a tireless effort to promote
peace, stability and development in South Sudan.

