Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Let me begin by congratulating Mr. Alexander
Zouev on his excellent briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/623), which is of critical
importance, and by wishing him every success in his
work as Head of the United Nations Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions. We would also like to
congratulate the members of the Council, united in
our strong commitment to contributing actively and
positively to the results and contributions that today's
meeting hopes to achieve.

My brief statement on mine action focuses on the
following reflections and observations.

First, landmines were created before the twentieth
century, but their use did not become widespread among
the many groups and armed forces until the Second
World War. They were widely used in international and
internal conflicts alike. Mines remain an ongoing threat
to civilian populations even long after the cessation of
hostilities. Similarly, unexploded ordnance - bombs,
howitzers or grenades - and other ammunition that did
not explode when it was employed continue to wreak
havoc in post-conflict communities around the world
and are likely to be even more numerous.

Secondly, the threat of the mines goes far beyond
killing, maiming and injuring thousands of people
every year, whether or not there is a conflict.

Thirdly, such weapons continue to have social,
prolonged and, in many cases, serious economic and
environmental consequences.

Fourthly, from 2002 to June 2003, thousands of
landmine casualties were recorded in 65 countries, the
majority of which - 41 - were at peace, not at war.

Fifthly, during a civil war in 1864, General William
T. Sherman used words that subsequently became
famous to describe the use of mines. Due to the brutality
of their effects, he stated that their use was "not an act
of war, but a homicide".
The international community must take into
account the fact that in 1995 the United Nations
declared that mines were "one of the most widespread,
lethal and long-lasting forms of pollution we have
yet encountered". In a conflict, it is impossible to
accurately estimate the number of unexploded mines
and ammunition. The threat posed by unexploded
ordnance is therefore now a serious concern for the
international community because of the humanitarian
consequences, in particular of anti-personnel mines,
and such consequences must be properly assessed.

Given that bleak backdrop, we would like to
express our deepest gratitude and appreciation to our
Bolivian colleagues for their valuable contribution
in this field. Just a year ago, on its own initiative,
the Council adopted resolution 2365 (2017), which,
to our surprise, was the first international legal text
dedicated to condemning and demanding collective
and coordinated action against the indiscriminate use
of such cowardly weapons.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges States,
by mandate of the Security Council, to adopt the
necessary regulatory mechanisms governing the use,
possession and illegal trafficking of mines and other
improvised explosive devices. It is essential to adopt
joint strategies to ensure greater control and security
at airports, ports, border posts and crossing points,
roads and in communications among States. The goal
is to better detect and confiscate improvised explosive
devices and related materials in an effort to build a
world that is safer, fairer, more peaceful, prosperous
and, above all, respectful of societies so as to continue
to ensure peaceful coexistence among peoples.

In conclusion, I would like to welcome and support
the recommendations contained in a recent report of
the Secretary-General, in which he requests a formal
follow-up to the issue, with periodic reports on the
status of the implementation of relevant resolutions. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea will seek to ensure that
the issue is included on the Security Council's agenda.

