Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate in this
open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. My
delegation expresses its appreciation for this morning's
briefing by Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz, Chairman of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We also thank the
representative of the World Bank for his statement.

Brazil welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (S/2009/304). It provides valuable insights
on how to improve United Nations effectiveness in
post-conflict situations. I would like, in particular, to
comment on six aspects mentioned in the report.

First, we appreciate the strong emphasis the
report places on country ownership. This principle
should be the sine qua non for any strategy for
peacebuilding. However, country ownership brings
enormous challenges. Governments often lack the
human and material resources needed to undertake the
most elementary of tasks. But there are no shortcuts.
We should spare no effort to strengthen local capacity
so that the country concerned can tread its own path
towards peace and development.

Secondly, the report correctly acknowledges the
importance of regional actors in peacebuilding.
Countries from the region usually share linguistic and
cultural values and, very often, similar political and
economic contexts. They are therefore very well placed
to provide assistance. Also, the contribution from the
global South should not be underestimated. South-
South cooperation in post-conflict peacebuilding offers
very promising avenues that have yet to be fully
explored.

It is in the light of this perception that we should
consider the Secretary-General's proposals for ensuring
adequate and timely leadership on the ground. Standby
civilian capacity mechanisms could benefit from the
contribution of regional actors and developing
countries. Their mandate should include, first and
foremost, support to domestic institutions. Also, as the
report indicates, they should not replace ongoing
efforts to improve regular recruitment processes and
human resources management.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General noticed that there
are recurrent priorities to be taken into consideration in
peacebuilding. They encompass a broad range of areas,
from the restoration of key State functions to the
promotion of economic recovery. Setting priorities
among priorities is indeed necessary. However,
peacebuilding is a multidimensional enterprise.
Priorities will necessarily contemplate different areas,
especially in the fields of security and development, in
which coordinated and simultaneous actions are
indispensable. It is true that lack of security hampers
economic development. But it is also true that peace
cannot be sustainable in the midst of misery and
despair.

Fourthly, we totally agree that funding is the
backbone of peacebuilding. Any strategy, no matter
how sophisticated or creative it might be, will have a
short life in the absence of adequate financing. That is
why we endorse the appeal by the Secretary-General
for innovative and more flexible financing schemes,
tailored to the specificities of peacebuilding. The
Peacebuilding Fund has been extremely useful and will
continue to be so under its new guidelines. But it was
envisioned as a catalytic tool that needs
complementary funding from other sources, on a
reliable and continuous basis.

Fifthly, we praise the focus of the report on the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Peace dividends
should become visible to the population as soon as
possible. Early recovery prevents the spiral of
instability that could make the situation even more
difficult and lead to the resumption of conflicts. Brazil
believes the Peacebuilding Commission can also play
an important role in countries in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, should their Governments so
request.

However, it should be borne in mind that many
countries where conflict subsided years ago either
suffer from donor fatigue or, worse still, have never
been able to attain sustained international assistance.
That is the case of Guinea-Bissau and the other
countries currently on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The contribution of the Commission in
these cases has been quite valuable, most notably with
regard to the galvanization of international attention
and the mobilization of resources.

We hope - and this is my sixth and final
point i that the Secretary-General's recommendations
to the Peacebuilding Commission can serve as a good
basis for a comprehensive dialogue on how to enhance
the Commission's work even further. Particular
attention should be devoted to ways to streamline the
Commission in the United Nations system and
strengthen its coordination with United Nations bodies
and other stakeholders, including regional

organizations, the international financial institutions,
civil society and the private sector. The 2010 review
process will be a golden opportunity to address this and
other issues.

