Mr. Lucas (Angola): My delegation would like at
the outset to thank the Permanent Representatives of
the United Kingdom and of the United States for their
briefings on the situation in Iraq, as provided for in
resolution 1483 (2003). The assessment presented to
the Council on the work done in Iraq is impressive,
particularly if we take into account the immensity of
the tasks that remain to be accomplished.

This open briefing to the Security Council by the
representatives of the coalition is taking place at a time
of profound sadness and mourning for the entire United
Nations family and for the international community.
We convey our heartfelt condolences to the families of
the victims and to the United Nations. The death of
Sergio Vieira de Mello was a huge loss, not only for his
relatives and for the United Nations, but also for the
countless people to whom he gave the best of his
abilities in order to better their lot.

The United Nations is living through the most
tragic hours of its existence, and the aftermath of a
tragedy is always the occasion for reflection and
reassessment and for the adoption of new courses of
action. Many questions arise after the events of 19
August, of which I will mention a few.

Why the attack against the United Nations, whose
presence in Iraq is strictly peaceful? What went wrong
with United Nations security in Baghdad? Which
measures are needed in order to prevent similar events?
Who were the perpetrators of that vicious attack? What
can be done to defuse the Iraqi resistance and recourse
to terrorist acts? Did international terrorists infiltrate
Iraq, and are they conducting operations in the
country? What measures are needed to conquer the
hearts and minds of the Iraqis? What course of action
should the United Nations and the coalition exercising
power in Iraq adopt following the tragic events that
took place in Baghdad?

Those are some of the questions which the
Security Council and the coalition Powers must answer
in the coming days and weeks in order to move
forward, with renewed confidence, the process of the
pacification and national reconstruction of Iraq,
bearing in mind one basic assumption: the coalition
Powers have no option left but to carry on with their
task, no matter the price they will be obliged to pay and
the difficulties they will encounter on that hard, rocky
and treacherous road.

It is imperative that, on the day the coalition
Powers decide to leave the country, Iraq have an
internationally recognized Government, State
institutions and a process of economic recovery in
place and, above all, that it be a country at peace.

The United Nations is also left with very narrow
options. The Security Council, by reaffirming its
determination to assist the Iraqi people to build peace
and justice in their country and to determine their own
political future, and by declaring that the United
Nations will continue with its operations in Iraq and
not be intimidated by such attacks, took a clear stand
by pledging its commitment to continuing to provide
assistance to the Iraqi people.

In our view, it is absolutely necessary, at this
juncture, that the Authority, the United Nations and the
Governing Council of Iraq close ranks at this critical
hour, step up the fight against terrorism and devise the
proper strategies - political, economic, security-
related and psychological - to counter it.

The Security Council has already begun, and will
continue in the coming days and weeks, a thorough
debate relating to the questions that the terrorist attack
against the United Nations in Baghdad brought back to
the agenda. It is our expectation that the Council will
find the most appropriate ways to ensure security for
the United Nations mission in Iraq and for its
personnel, measures to strengthen the relationship
between the United Nations and the Iraqi people, and
how best to assist the Iraqi people in rebuilding its
country, in reinstating its national sovereignty and in
overcoming the very difficult moments it is currently
going through.

