Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open meeting on Angola,
giving Japan an opportunity to present its views on this
important subject. I wish to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General, as well as to his Special Adviser
on Africa, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, for their
comprehensive reports on the situation and for their
tireless efforts to find a peaceful settlement to the
conflict.

The chief obstacle to ending the conflict in
Angola is the continued guerrilla activity of UNITA's
rebel forces under Jonas Savimbi. We are particularly
concerned over reports of guerrilla activity near the
Namibian and Zambian borders, which is destabilizing
the situation in those countries. It is therefore
incumbent upon the international community to closely
follow the situation, lest Angola's civil war develop
into a regional conflict. In this regard, we appreciate
the efforts that Special Adviser Gambari made to
strengthen the relations of trust between the United
Nations and the Government of Angola during his visit
in May.

Since 1993 the Security Council has imposed
economic sanctions against Angola, and specifically
UNITA. These include the prohibition of trade in arms,
petroleum products, and diamonds; travel restrictions
on persons associated with UNITA; and the freezing of
UNITA's assets. Regrettably, however, as described in
the report of the Angolan sanctions Committee, these
sanctions have been blatantly violated by various
countries and individuals, and thus rendered largely
ineffective. Unless the sanctions regime is
strengthened, an early settlement of the Angolan
conflict cannot be expected. It is Japan's view,
therefore, that rather than focusing on those countries
or individuals that violate the sanctions, the Security
Council should explore ways of preventing violations.
From this viewpoint, Japan supports the establishment
of a mechanism to monitor sanctions violations, or to
improve or establish various technical systems to
prevent such violations, as recommended by the
sanctions Committee in its report.

In today's discussion we cannot overlook the dire
facts and figures that reveal the magnitude of human
suffering in Angola. Over the past 20 years, 3.7 million
people, or more than one third of the population, have
had to flee their homes. Among them are 1.5 million
internally displaced persons. It is estimated that, just
since January of this year, as many as 250,000 persons
have been displaced.

In view of this deteriorating situation, we
appreciate the efforts of the Government of Angola to
address these problems, as seen in its launching of a
national emergency assistance plan in 1999; we hope
that the plan will be carried through. However, without
international efforts to halt this grave crisis, the
situation will surely get worse. Japan therefore
welcomes the special appeal for emergency assistance
to internally displaced persons in Angola issued by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) based on a request by the
Government of Angola. In response to that appeal,
Japan is now examining positively the way to make a
concrete contribution to address this increasingly
serious situation. We hope that the positive response of
the international community to the appeal will
contribute to ensuring the human security of those who
have been displaced, and eventually to promoting
capacity-building, a process which, in the long run,
will contribute to the prevention of conflict in Angola.

