Mr. Arias (spoke in Spanish): I will be brief in
my response, but I will try to provide a few
clarifications.

First of all, I would like sincerely to thank all
those who have spoken today for their support for the
report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), and
all those who expressed kind words to me.

I will go over a few of the points that were made.
First, the ultimate reason for the reform effort is that it
is an absolute necessity. That is the opinion of the
members of the Committee; it was also the opinion of
the previous Chairman, Ambassador Greenstock, who
was very familiar with this issue; and it is my opinion,
after 10 months as Chairman of the Committee. We
have listened to the Member States. We must pay
attention to the concerns of the Secretariat. We must be
respect the Charter. But I repeat my firm conviction
that without serious revitalization, the Committee and
the United Nations run the risk, in the medium term, of
becoming ineffective. We must not allow that to
happen.

Secondly, the reform effort - and the necessary
draft resolution - will in no way modify the
philosophy or the substance of resolution 1373 (2001).
I repeat: it will in no way do so.

Thirdly, in my opinion, the reform or
revitalization effort has two goals. On the one hand it
must result in increased and enhanced technical
assistance. We know that that is a very important issue;
many States react slowly to our requests because of a
lack of resources, and we must try to resolve that
problem. On the other, it must increase the
effectiveness and visibility of the Committee. We
believe that both of those goals can be achieved
through the revitalization exercise.

Fourthly, the new unit that we intend to create
will be temporary. Fifthly, revitalization will clearly
help us to avoid duplication of effort. Sixthly, the
revitalization exercise is not an attempt to establish a
precedent and will certainly not - I repeat, will not -
impose a financial burden of any importance on the
Organization. The increase in cost will be truly
minimal, as compared with what has been spent to
date.

Lastly, the revitalization exercise that is being
proposed, which is in conformity with the spirit and
letter of resolution 1373 (2001) and fully respects the
Charter, will strengthen, without great cost, the
effectiveness of the Council and of the United Nations
in the fight against the very serious threat of terrorism.
When the Committee points out that revitalization is
crucial, it does not do so lightly. We are convinced of
its necessity.

