Mr. Lowcock: In complement to but without
repeating what Mr. Griffiths has just said, I will first
update the Security Council on the overall humanitarian
situation. Secondly, I will summarize the current
challenges we face in the response. Thirdly, I will
briefly review what the world's largest humanitarian
operation - which is what we have in Yemen - has
achieved and is achieving. And fourthly, I will set out
what help we are seeking from the Council at this stage.

First, on the current humanitarian situation, the
spectre of famine still looms. Ten million Yemenis are
still reliant on emergency food assistance to survive.
A resurgent cholera outbreak has already affected
300,000 people this year, compared to 370,000 cases in
the whole of2018. Fortunately, the number ofnew cases
seems in recent days to be on a declining trend; but it is
too soon to know if that will continue.

Secondly, with regard to current challenges,
violence rages still, as Mr. Griffiths has just said. In
the first quarter of the year, more than 900 civilian
casualties were reported, and it is a sobering fact
of the war in Yemen that civilians are more likely
to die in their own homes than anywhere else as a
result of the war. The fighting also affects the aid
operation. Because many main routes are not usable,
travellers, humanitarian agencies and traders now rely
on a patchwork of back roads and mountain passes,
often going through insecure areas with numerous
checkpoints. Heavier trucks, including those carrying
food aid, now take more than 60 hours to travel
between Sana'a and Aden - about four times longer
than used to be the case. Recently, one of the major
Aden-Sana'a routes effectively closed, and without it
humanitarian operations will become even slower and
more expensive.

Severe access restrictions imposed by the parties
continue to be a major problem. In February and March,
more than 900,000 people were affected by delays or
interruptions in assistance. Restrictions on movement of
goods or staffare by far the biggest cause ofdelay. A large
majority of those incidents occurred in areas controlled
by Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities, but there are too
many problems arising from decisions by others as
well. Over the past few weeks, we have had intensive
discussions with Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities on
the steps required to ensure that all assistance in Yemen
is delivered in line with humanitarian principles. Those
discussions are progressing, and I hope that previously
agreed measures - including biometric registration of
beneficiaries ~ will soon be fully implemented.

We are making progress on some issues. On 5 May,
a joint United Nations mission reached the Red Sea
Mills again, for only the second time since September
2018. I want to acknowledge the support we received
for that mission, including security assurances from
all parties. The assessment team travelled from Aden
to Al-Hudaydah through Government-controlled
areas, and the coalition was especially helpful in
facilitating those movements. That is an example of
how deconfliction with the coalition continues to be a
key enabler of the response across Yemen. Technicians
are working now at the Red Sea Mills to assess damage,
repair equipment and process whatever grain can be
salvaged. That will probably take several weeks.

Last month, I flagged our concerns over the FSO
SAFER oil tanker (see S/PV.8512). The tanker, which
the Council will recall is moored off the coast of
Al-Hudaydah, has had no maintenance since 2015 and
is at risk of rupturing or exploding, potentially spilling
1.1 million barrels of oil into the Red Sea. Just to give
a sense of the scale of the problem, that is four times
as much as was spilled in the Exxon Valdez disaster
30 years ago. All parties have now assured us that a
technical assessment can proceed for the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. A United Nations assessment team plans to
deploy to the site very soon so that we can work out the
best way forward to minimize the risks.

Thirdly, I want to address what, despite all the
problems, we are able to deliver in what, as I have said,
remains the world's largest humanitarian operation. In
January and February, 130 agencies worked together
to provide 9.8 million people with food, water, health
care and other assistance. In March, the World Food
Programme fed 10.6 million people; that is more than
in any previous month. In April, a cholera vaccination
campaign reached 1.1 million people in Sana'a.

We now have additional, independent confirmation
that help is reaching people. With funding from
our largest donors, my Office has commissioned an
independent third-party monitoring exercise covering
the entire response. Data was collected from 108
districts across the country, using a mix of beneficiary
surveys and key informant interviews. Thousands of
people were contacted and asked what humanitarian
assistance they had received. The results tell a clear
story. Some 94 per cent of randomly selected intended
beneficiaries of food aid confirmed that they had
received food baskets, and 96 per cent of them said they
were satisfied with the distribution process. Health
services that humanitarian agencies said they had
delivered were confirmed at 95 per cent of facilities.
Beneficiaries confirmed that water systems supported
by agencies were functional 84 per cent of the time.

One ofthe questions I am often asked is whether we
are seeing a reduction in suffering and famine risk as a
result of the huge relief operation. Our first goal, to be
clear, has been simply to keep people alive and I hope
it is obvious that we have been reasonably successful
at that. There has been no widespread famine, at least
up to now. But we are also now starting to see the
beginning of more positive, sustained outcomes. A year
ago, agencies estimated that 107 districts were at risk
of famine. Based on the new data available to us today,
the food and nutrition situation has improved in more
than half of those districts and one-fifth of them are, as
of today, no longer at risk of famine Again, one-fifth
of districts that were at risk of famine last year are not
currently at risk. That has been possible only because
last year our operation was relatively well funded.

That brings me to my fourth and final point, which is
the help we seek from the Council. The most immediate
issue is funding. The slight improvements I have just
described will not be sustained unless donors continue
to fund the relief operation. Last month, the Council
will recall that I said that the 2019 United Nations
humanitarian response plan had received only 6 per
cent of the required resources and that major cuts to
core relief activities were imminent. As oftoday, 20 per
cent of the required resources have now been provided.
I want to thank in particular the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates for their funding
since last month, which, as I understand it, came from
the pledge that they announced last November.

But there is still a long way to go. We again call on
all our donors to fully disburse the pledges they made in
Geneva in February. I am looking forward to travelling
to Riyadh again in the next several days to meet Saudi
and Emirati officials and finalize the arrangements for
the new joint pledge of $1 billion they made in Geneva.
Those two donors' block grant to the United Nations
last year was absolutely instrumental in scaling up the
aid operation, and I continue to view the approach they
took as a global best practice in humanitarian support
and donorship.
