Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I, too, wish to express my
deep appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, for her
briefing, which gave us a broad perspective of the
challenges we face in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the Director-General for
the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for their
contributions.

Italy fully endorses the statement to be made by
the European Union (EU) delegation and wishes to
make some additional observations.

Italy is committed to combating impunity for
international crimes and believes that that fight is
inextricably linked to the principle of accountability.
The Council has a crucial role to play in that regard. It
must be ready to take prompt action against those who
continuously undermine the credibility of that
commitment.

Non-compliance with international humanitarian
laws inevitably leads to the injury or death of what is
becoming a growing number of civilians every year.
Every measure should be taken to prevent violence,
starting with the implementation of national laws.

I would add that, in situations where civilian
populations are the target of attacks, the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court is an essential
instrument that provides the legal basis for holding
perpetrators accountable for attacks, when a State is
unwilling or unable to do so.

We share concerns over the severity and
prevalence of constraints on humanitarian access, as
well as the frequency and gravity of attacks on
humanitarian personnel. Consistent improvements in
humanitarian access will only be made if States
promote a culture of protection, taking into account the
particular needs of women, children, the elderly, and
persons with disabilities. Active hostilities,
bureaucratic constraints and economically motivated
attacks on humanitarian supplies are major obstacles
on the path to protecting those in need.

This is why the acceptance of independent,
neutral and impartial humanitarian action must be
broadened. Under international law, primary
responsibility for the security and protection of
humanitarian personnel lies with the Government
hosting a United Nations operation. Effective measures
to enable relief activities during active fighting,
including calling on parties to allow safe passage for
civilians trying to escape from conflict zones, could
represent a concrete and tangible set of actions that
could be implemented.

We welcome the encouraging developments in
the protection of civilians by peacekeeping missions as
mentioned in the Council's latest report (S/2010/579).
The protection of civilians, I wish to reiterate, is first
and foremost the responsibility of the State, which may
require assistance in the fulfilment of its duties in that
area.

When a Government lacks the resources to ensure
compliance with its obligations, the protection of
civilians is a moral obligation inherent to peacekeeping,
although peacekeepers are not the only actors involved.
Greater efforts should thus be made to ensure that
peacekeeping mandates include explicit reference to
civilian protection, clear strategies for pursuing it and
careful monitoring of the implementation and impact
of these mandates.

The security of civilians in post-conflict
environments is also critical to the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
the peace agreements they are deployed to implement
and the United Nations itself.

These are difficult tasks that require a consistent
approach, including advanced planning to ensure that
future and current missions have the authority and
capacity to protect. At the earliest stages of planning,
threats to civilians must be taken into consideration,
and peacekeeping missions must be properly tasked
with clear, credible and achievable mandates to be
implemented by military and police personnel who
have received the appropriate training before
deployment.

Training is crucial. It should be made standard on
the basis of clear operational guidelines regarding the
implementation of protection mandates by
peacekeeping missions. Such guidelines should be
drafted in close cooperation among the United Nations
and other organizations involved, such as the African
Union and the European Union.

Italy, in cooperation with the Secretariat, makes a
key contribution to that sector through its Center of
Excellence for Stability Police Units (CoESPU). In five
years, the Center has already trained 3,630 trainers to
prepare national contingents for deployment as formed
police units.

The protection of civilians is greatly enhanced
when the police and civilian components of
peacekeeping missions are also involved. Hence, there
is the need to strengthen the police component and
integrate civilian capacities, particularly in the rule of
law sector. That is indispensable to helping a country
to fully resume national ownership and responsibility
in the crucial area of protecting civilians.

Today, there is greater attention to understanding
and advancing the protection of civilians. Thanks to
remarkable efforts, there have been improvements in
United Nations peacekeeping operations' ability to
protect, but more needs to be done to transform our
ambition into realities on the ground and to establish
precise benchmarks to monitor implementation.

Resolution 1674 (2006) reaffirms the principle of
the responsibility to protect. As we have stressed on
previous occasions, that principle should not be
perceived in an adversarial manner but rather as an
instrument available to the international community for
settling conflicts, provided that the conditions referred
to in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 Outcome
Document are met.

The informal interactive dialogue of the General
Assembly on early warning, assessment and the
responsibility to protect was an important step towards
understanding and implementing the concept. We look
forward to new opportunities to continue that dialogue.

