Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit for their
briefings. We also thank Kuwait for its initiative in
convening important meeting.

China welcomes the draft presidential statement
to be adopted by the Security Council, concerning
cooperation between the United Nations, its Security
Council and the League of Arab States (LAS).

China supports the continued deepening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, as envisioned in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, and
efforts to consolidate and strengthen collective security
mechanisms to jointly maintain international peace and
security. The LAS has long worked to promote peace,
stability and development in the Middle East and
actively advocated political solutions to hotspot issues.
It has made unremitting efforts for a united and strong
Arab world. Recent years have seen close cooperation
between the United Nations and the LAS in easing
regional tensions and resolving hotspot issues. We
appreciate the efforts of Secretary-General Guterres
and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit in that regard.
Indeed, the LAS has become an important bridge for
cooperation and exchange between the United Nations
and the Arab world.

With regard to methods to promote cooperation
between the Council and the LAS, I would like to make
the following proposals.

First, we should pursue dialogue and consultation
and advocate inclusive reconciliation in improving
the regional security situation. As many problems in
the Middle East are intertwined, all parties need to
treat each other as equals, consult extensively, seek
common ground and build a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security architecture. They
should solve problems through dialogue, good offices,
mediation and other peaceful means and continuously
enhance mutual understanding and trust.

Secondly, we should strengthen coordination in
our joint efforts to resolve hotspot issues. With its
experience and geographic, historical, cultural and other
advantages, the LAS can play a greater role in solving
problems, such as the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and
those in Libya and the Sudan. The United Nations
should assist the LAS in enhancing its capability in
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and provide support to it in personnel
training, institution-building and logistical assistance
in order to forge synergies.

Thirdly, we must advance the fight against terrorism
and prevent violent extremism. The Middle East has
been plagued by terrorism and violent extremism. The
League of Arab States is an important partner in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. The two bodies can cooperate in
countering terrorism through joint projects and by
strengthening information-sharing, capacity-building
and coordinated actions in our joint response to the
challenges we face in combating terrorism in the
Middle East.

The eighth Ministerial Conference of the China-
Arab States Cooperation Forum was held in Beijing
last June. At its opening ceremony, President Xi
Jinping announced the building of a future-oriented
strategic partnership of comprehensive collaboration
and common development between China and the Arab
States designed to usher in a new era of cooperation
between the two sides. China will firmly support
and help Arab countries in achieving stability and
development and in uniting and strengthening their
cooperation in order to jointly maintain peace and
stability in the Middle East. China is also ready to work
with others to promote greater cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the League of Arab States,
support multilateralism and work together to build a
community of a shared future for humankind.

