Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, as always, thank our briefers Under-Secretary- General Voronkov, Executive Director Coninsx and Ms. Freij - for their briefings today. I would also like to thank the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities forits very strong contribution to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/95). Let me say that we agree with the assessments set out in the report. Al-Qaida remains a destabilizing influence, and while Da'esh has lost territory, it remains a considerable threat, both militarily and politically. With the appointment of the successor to Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi and the emergence of strong affiliates and supporters from West Africa to South-East Asia, their core narrative or brand continues. The United Kingdom will continue to work with coalition partners to bring an end to Da'esh once and for all. The United Kingdom has been clear that individuals who have fought for or supported Da'esh must face justice and accountability in the most appropriate jurisdiction, which is often in the region where crimes took place. We continue to pursue all available avenues with international partners and reaffirm the need to implement resolution 2396 (2017). In that regard, we welcome the unanimous renewal in September of the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) and very much support its work on supporting victims and collecting critical evidence to hold Da'esh accountable for its horrific crimes. On the subject of repatriations, the United Kingdom works with all concerned to facilitate the return of unaccompanied or orphaned children, where feasible. Each case is considered on an individual basis, subject to national security concerns. As we adopt our tools, so do the terrorists. We were therefore pleased that recent resolutions reflect new methods of terrorist financing and links of criminality, and welcome the increased focus on the protection of principled humanitarian action. We encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the United Nations Office of Counter- Terrorism to continue developing their work on that aspect. The Secretary-General's report illustrates the complex and multiple roles of women and the need to ensure gendered analyses and responses. We heard today the brave testimony of Ms. Freij and the invaluable contributions of women on the front lines. Ms. Freij reminded us not only of the importance of ensuring that there is a security response to terrorism, but also that there is a need to build societies' resilience, including through civil society. It is important to win over hearts and minds, and failure risks reversion to terrorism in the future. I know that Under-Secretary- General Voronkov very strongly supports the role of civil society in tackling terrorism. Following the recent CTED visit to Beijing, we commend it for completing assessment visits now to all permanent members of the Council, as well, of course, to many of its current, previous and - I dare say it - future members. We welcome CTED's constructive engagement in facilitating those visits and that of those Members of the United Nations. The United Kingdom, for its part, invited a second follow-up CTED visit in October last year, covering a robust and comprehensive agenda. It is important that those visits not be simply for show, but produce detailed reports and recommendations, which can aid our counter- terrorism approaches. The United Kingdom has sadly faced two attacks in recent months from Da'esh-inspired terrorism. I want to pay tribute today to members of the public and police in the United Kingdom who confronted those terrorists and prevented greater harm. The United Kingdom will ensure that we take measures to tackle all forms of terrorism, including from the extreme right wing. As we continue to review our own report from CTED, we expect that all visited States will work towards the finalization of their reports. The Secretary-General's report rightly highlights the importance of respect for human rights in effective counter-terrorism policies. Indeed, the council has repeatedly stressed the importance of human rights in counter-terrorism and determined early on through policy guidance in 2006 that human rights is an important component of CTED's work. We also commend United Nations entities for their many initiatives in ensuring that measures to prevent violent extremism integrate human rights and gender as cross-cutting issues. We continue in that context to have strong concerns with regard to the human rights situation in Xinjiang, including the extrajudicial detention of more than | million Uyghur Muslims and other minorities in so-called political re-education camps, systematic restrictions on Uyghur culture and the practice of Islam, and extensive and invasive surveillance targeting minorities, much of which has been revealed in the Chinese Government's own papers.We recognize, of course, that China may have terrorism concerns, but it is our view that its actions are disproportionate and indiscriminate and, moreover, that they will be counterproductive in the long-term because they risk exacerbating ethnic tensions and creating conditions that lead to radicalization and terrorism. I note that Under-Secretary-General Voronkov visited China and went to Xinjiang, although he did not have access to the camps, and that such a visit was not on CTED's agenda. We therefore encourage China to agree an early date for a visit by United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Bachelet and to guarantee her free and unfettered access to Xinjiang. I would just say that I was a little surprised to hear my Chinese colleague say that the Security Council was not an appropriate forum for the discussion of Xinjiang. At the Security Council meeting on 25 September 2019, under the Russian presidency, State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi proactively raised the situation in Xinjiang and described China's actions as both "preventive counter-terrorism" and "implementing the United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism" (S/PV.8626, p.13). He spoke third that day, after the representatives of Kuwait and Belgium, neither of whom had raised Xinjiang in their interventions. It was therefore China's choice to place the issue on our table here. I do not wish to revisit yesterday's meeting (see S/PV.8715). That would take us far too long, but I would just say to the Russian representative that tackling terrorism can never be and is not an excuse or a reason for widespread attacks on civilians or for breaching international law. In conclusion, the terrorist threat is constantly evolving, and we must be ready to adapt our tools. However, one constant remains that human rights and counter-terrorism are mutually reinforcing and not contradictory goals. The Council has developed a robust and balanced counter-terrorism framework through its resolutions. We should continue our collective efforts to ensure that the measures we take do not contribute to exacerbating future challenges.
