Mr. Ellwood (United Kingdom): I warmly
welcome your initiative, Mr. President, in convening
today's important meeting on Iraq. I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov
and Foreign Minister Al-Jaafari for their informative
briefings.

I would like to congratulate Prime Minister Haider
Al-Abadi on the formation of Iraq's new Government
and welcome his commitment to creating an inclusive
Government that can work together to unite and
secure Iraq in the fight against terrorism and in the
pursuit of peace and prosperity. That is a critical
first step to addressing the serious security, political
and humanitarian challenges facing the country. The
United Kingdom also welcomes the new Government's
comprehensive programme, especially its commitments
on decentralization, reform of Iraq's armed forces,
dissolution of militia groupings and better delivery of
services and infrastructure to the Iraqi people.

The international community must help the
Government to deliver on these promises, and the
Government of Iraq must also demonstrate its own
unwavering commitment to delivering these reforms.
It is now vital that all political blocs work together to
overcome these challenges, including the threat posed
by ISIL. It is essential that Iraq's neighbours, which are
all threatened by ISIL's emergence, put their differences
aside and work together to deal with the threat.

The creation of an extremist so-called caliphate
represents a direct threat to the security and stability
of the region and to the national security of other States
Members of the United Nations, including the United
Kingdom. In seeking to establish its extremist State,
ISIL is already aiming to use the territory it controls to
launch attacks against the West, including the United
Kingdom, and is clearly contributing to insecurity in
the region.

We condemn ISIL's barbaric acts, including targeted
killings, forced conversions, abductions, trafficking,
sexual violence and sexual slavery. The callous and
brutal murder a few days ago of a British aid worker,
David Haines, following on from the equally appalling
murders of two American journalists, underlines ISIL's
ruthlessness and use of fear to retain power.

The Council has been united in its condemnation
of ISIL and all it stands for. So the United Kingdom
is ready to take whatever steps are necessary to
deal with this threat and keep our country safe. We
will be working closely with our allies and the Iraqi
Government on building international support during
next week's meetings.

The adoption of resolution 2170 (2014) sent a
clear political message to ISIL, Al-Nusra and other
Al-Qaida-inspired terrorists and has taken important
practical steps to combat the threat that they pose.
We strongly support the approach set out by President
Obama last week, which builds on a strong international
coalition working with Governments in the region and
others in order to defeat the threat from ISIL. We must
work together to drive back, dismantle and, ultimately,
destroy ISIL for what it stands for.

We must use all the tools at our
disposal - humanitarian, diplomatic, political and
military - to squeeze ISIL. We must tackle its presence
in both Iraq and Syria, and we will continue to support
those moderate forces fighting against ISIL.

At the request of the Iraqi Government, we have
provided heavy machine guns and ammunition and
transported other vital equipment to help the Kurdish
peshmerga defend the front line, protect civilians and
push back ISIL's advances. We also continue to give
priority to alleviating the humanitarian suffering of
those Iraqis targeted by ISIL terrorists.

The United Kingdom has already donated
$37 million in immediate assistance to provide clean
water, sanitation, essential medicine and funding for
non-governmental organizations and charities. During
the course of the conflict in Syria, we have also provided
$1 billion in humanitarian aid, which is reaching all of
Syria's communities, including those most at risk from
ISIL.

There needs to be a comprehensive, coordinated
approach with our regional allies at the forefront to
tackle ISIL. As part of this, the United Kingdom will
continue to be a steadfast supporter of Iraq and an
active contributor to international and regional efforts
to degrade and defeat ISIL and rid the world of this
repugnant terrorist organization.

As others have noted today, the sustainable
solution to this crisis lies in an inclusive, sovereign
and democratic governance. Only a united Iraq, with
a Government that has support from all of Iraq's
communities, can rid Iraqi territory of ISIL and its
violent ideology.

