Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to thank the
representatives of the two Tribunals for their written
reports to the Security Council and for elaborating
further on those reports in their interventions today.
That provides us with a clear picture of the Tribunals'
achievements so far and of the challenges ahead.

Denmark is a strong supporter of the Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. They have
made invaluable contributions to ensuring that
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity do
not go unpunished. They are instrumental in the
process of national reconciliation that the countries
concerned need to go through to come to terms with
their past and to look to the future. The impact of the
Tribunals, however, goes far beyond the specific cases
under their jurisdiction and beyond the specific
countries concerned. Their pioneering work has paved
the way for the International Criminal Court - a
permanent, universal institution standing ready and
alert to fight impunity for the most serious crimes.

It is crucial that the Tribunals finalize their work
according to schedule. The Tribunals, the countries
directly involved and the international community must
stand side by side to make that happen. The Tribunals
must continue to develop and implement sound and
realistic completion strategies ensuring a reasonable
match between objectives and resources. They must, at
the same time, make sure that justice is served in strict
accordance with international standards of due process.

We note with interest the focus of both Tribunals
on the referral of cases to competent national courts.
We agree that that will strengthen the involvement of
national Governments in bringing reconciliation,
justice and the rule of law to the countries in question.
It is, however, key that the necessary national capacity-
building precede such referrals in order to make sure
that international standards of justice are also met in
the transferred cases. The Security Council and the
international community, for their part, must ensure
adequate and predictable funding for the Tribunals. We
strongly encourage Member States to do their utmost to
meet their assessed contributions as a matter of
urgency.

The primary task of the Tribunals is to bring to
justice "the most senior leaders suspected of being
most responsible" for the crimes committed within
their jurisdictions. To that end, it is an unconditional
responsibility of Member States to cooperate fully with
the Tribunals. Full cooperation is critical to ensure that
the Tribunals can perform their functions. For the
countries of the former Yugoslavia, it is also a
precondition for their integration into European and
trans-Atlantic structures. Denmark is pleased to note
recent positive developments in that region. We
strongly encourage the countries concerned to keep
those developments on track and to make certain that
the remaining indictees are brought to The Hague.

The Tribunals continue to contribute significantly
to the fight against impunity. By bringing justice to the
victims of the massive atrocities committed in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia, the Tribunals play a crucial
role in the reconciliation processes so direly needed in
the aftermath of two of the most abhorrent conflicts
since the Second World War. We will continue to
follow actively the work of the Tribunals, and we look
forward to the next reports from them.

