Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency this month. I assure you of our full support. I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq for her briefing and, above all, for her important work and that of her team in this difficult situation. As the Special Representative indicated, Iraq today indeed faces particular and significant challenges. As it emerges from the conflict, the country has embarked upon the long road to reconciliation. Meanwhile, the Government must respond - in the short term and ina very difficult context - to the aspirations of its people. The freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly are fundamental rights that must be respected. They are crucial for advancing democracy. We condemn the use of violence, including by the security forces, in the context of the protests that began in the fall. As we have said before, we also expect that all human rights violations during the protests will be investigated and, if necessary, prosecuted. We call on all parties to engage in constructive dialogue in order to form a new Government that meets the legitimate aspirations of the people. The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has an important role to play in assisting the Iraqi authorities in that endeavour. I once again stress that the challenges are significant. We hope that the future Government will be able to continue the efforts of the previous Government, in particular with regard to the fight against corruption, economic recovery, job creation, security sector reform, reconciliation and the provision of basic services to the population. In addition, the Government should continue its important and courageous security sector reform initiatives so that it can eventually restore its monopoly over State authority. We have been very concerned for several weeks now about the lack of humanitarian access following the decision taken by the Iraqi authorities at the end of 2019 to put an end to the system of access letters for non-governmental organizations. That has had alarming consequences for the delivery of humanitarian aid in the country, as repeatedly emphasized by the United Nations Resident Coordinator. We therefore call on the authorities to immediately resolve that problem. Although the Islamic State is defeated militarily, the causes that enabled Da'esh to develop have not been eliminated. We must do all we can to avoid its resurgence, which implies continuing military and stabilization efforts. In that connection, we commend the important work and role of the Global Coalition against Da'esh, and hope that the international community and Iraq can continue their joint work. As the Special Representative stated, Iraq finds itself in a volatile regional environment. We call on all actors to show restraint. Finally, as Chair of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we recently reviewed the Secretary-General's latest report on the situation of children in Iraq (S/2019/984). Of course, most grave violations took place during the conflict, but it is clear that many challenges remain in that regard. The Working Group is committed to issuing conclusions in that regard.
