Mr. Swe (Myanmar): The Security Council
should be proud of what transpired today. If there is a
justifiable occasion for a permanent member to cast a
negative vote, this is certainly the occasion. We are
gratified that two permanent members - both of
whom know full well the actual situation of my
country and one of whom is an immediate neighbour of
Myanmar - have chosen to do so. I am most grateful
to both the People's Republic of China and the Russian
Federation for their strong position of principle. I also
greatly appreciate the four elected members who, in the
face of tremendous pressure, either voted against or
abstained - South Africa, Congo, Indonesia and Qatar.

The Member States of the United Nations have
conferred on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for maintenance of international peace
and security, pursuant to Article 24, paragraph 1, of the
Charter of the United Nations. There are many issues
that deserve - in fact demand - the immediate and
undivided attention of the Security Council. By no
stretch of imagination is Myanmar among them.

Myanmar does not pose any threat to
international peace and security. In fact, we have been
able to contribute to regional stability by bringing to a
Virtual end the insurgency that has plagued the country
for almost five decades. Of 18 major insurgent groups,
17 groups, numbering approximately 100,000, have
now returned to the legal fold. The Karen National
Union (KNU) is the only major insurgent group
fighting the Government. Even to that insurgent group,
the Government extends a hand of welcome and has
invited them to return to the legal fold. Negotiations
are going on right now. We conduct counter-insurgency
campaigns only against those KNU insurgents who are
engaged in acts of terrorism.

Myanmar has close and cordial relations with all
her five neighbours and other countries in the region
and beyond. It does not engage in any activity aimed at
undermining the peace and security of any country. All
this is attested to by Myanmar's neighbours and
countries in the region. This position is also strongly
held by the 118 members of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). The Chairman of the Coordinating
Bureau of NAM. wrote to the President of the Council
in July 2006 that

"the Non-Aligned Movement stresses once again
that the decision by the Security Council to
initiate formal or informal discussion on the
situation in any Member State of the United
Nations or on any issue that does not constitute a
threat to international peace and security as
contrary to Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Movement does not consider the
situation in Myanmar constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, and opposes
attempts by a member of the Council to
categorize Myanmar as such."

The Movement again wrote to the President of the
Security Council on 8 December and reiterated this
firm position and added that it was confirmed at the
fourteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement
recently held in Havana.

The draft resolution, had it been adopted, would
have created a dangerous precedent. It would also have
clearly exceed the mandate given by the Charter to the
Council and would have undermined the Council's
authority and legality. We are glad that the Council has
chosen not to do that today.

To have adopted the draft resolution would also
have been to act on information that is patently false. It
portrayed the situation in Myanmar "in particular,
HIV/AIDS, avian flu and trafficking in narcotics and
people" as transnational threats. That was language
was changed later to "international risks". It also
claimed that "the overall situation in Myanmar has
deteriorated and poses serious risks to peace and
security in the region". Nothing could be further from
the truth.

According to the UNDP Human Development
Report, Myanmar's economy grew at an average of 5.7
per cent over the last 14 years and Myanmar has been
elevated from a country with low human development
to a country enjoying medium human development.
The allegations with regard to HIV/AIDS, avian flu
and trafficking in narcotics and people have been
proved to be patently untrue by United Nations reports.
Moreover, the issues of HIV/AIDS, avian flu and
trafficking in narcotics are also global challenges that
need to be addressed with the cooperation of the entire
international community.
The draft resolution also made allegations of
attacks in ethnic majority regions on civilians,
including women and children, and in particular the
attacks on civilians in Karen State. This is a complete
falsehood. The Government has taken the United
Nations Country Team and the diplomatic corps,
including a representative of the United States
Embassy, to these areas. The civilians who were
Victims of the attacks by the insurgents clearly stated
that perpetrators of these attacks were members of the
Karen National Union. I also wish to say that we have
invited Under-Secretary-General Gambari to go to
these areas and see with his own eyes the real situation
there.

As part of the national reconciliation process, the
Government has been implementing development
activities in the border areas, which were previously
inaccessible to the Government because of various
insurgencies. These are the areas where the ethnic
nationalities live. The Government has spent over 65
billions kyats and 550 million dollars for development
works for the progress of border areas and ethnic
national races. Because of these national reconciliation
efforts, the representatives of the 17 former insurgent
groups - all of whom belong to the ethnic national
groups - have joined the National Convention to draw
up the basic principles to be enshrined in the new
constitution. Here I wish to say that our National
Convention process is inclusive. We have also invited
the NLD to join, but at the last minute they declined to
do so.

Myanmar is successfully building national unity
and at the same time laying a firm foundation for a
democratic society. It is both a complex and a delicate
process, which is fully understood by our neighbours in
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The joint communique of the 39th ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting, of 25 July 2006, clearly stated that ASEAN
recognizes that

"Myanmar needs both time and space to deal with
its many and complex challenges. ASEAN hopes
that Myanmar's efforts to deal with those
challenges will progress so that Myanmar can
effectively engage the international community,
and in this regard ASEAN would remain
constructively engaged."
07-20880

It is claimed that the draft resolution was aimed
at providing strong support for the Secretary-General's
good-offices mandate. The truth of the matter is that
the draft would not in any way have helped the good-
offices mandate that the General Assembly gave the
Secretary-General. It must also be noted that the visits
to Myanmar of Under-Secretary-General Gambari
under the good-offices role of the Secretary-General
mandated by the General Assembly are also providing
concrete results.

In his November 2006 briefing to the Security
Council regarding his Visit to Myanmar, Mr. Gambari
mentioned a number of key areas where he hoped to
see progress - among them "the release of a
significant number of political prisoners", including
"the five 88 Student Generation activists arrested in
September". On 3 January, the Government of
Myanmar granted amnesty to 2,831 prisoners. This was
welcomed by the Secretary-General in a press
statement. On 11 January, the international media gave
wide coverage to the release of the five individuals
mentioned by Under-Secretary-General Gambari.

I wish to conclude by reiterating our great
appreciation to our friends who have chosen to
safeguard the sanctity of the Charter by expressing
their strong principled position through their votes
today. We regard them not only as friends of Myanmar
but also as friends of developing countries and friends
of multilateralism. I would like to reaffirm that
Myanmar will continue on the path that the
Government and the people have set for themselves.
The National Convention - the first, crucial step of
our seven-step road map - is essentially complete. We
will resolutely implement the seven-step political road
map to its successful completion.

Cooperation with the United Nations is the
cornerstone of Myanmar's foreign policy. We are
encouraged by today's Security Council decision. We
will continue our cooperation with the United Nations.

