The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

At the outset, I wish to thank this afternoon's
three briefers, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake,
Ms. Wevyn Muganda and Ms. Sofia Ramyar - young
and influential leaders committed to peace in their
countries and throughout the world. We also wish to
express our gratitude for the support and contributions
of civil society organizations in preparing this briefing,
and that of the Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth, the United Nations Population Fund and the
United Nations Development Programme. We also
wish to express our appreciation and support for the
work of the Secretary-General's Envoy for Youth and
highlight the commitment of the Secretary-General to
the empowerment of young people.

Peru is firmly committed to promoting and
recognizing the role that young people are called to
fulfil in preventing and resolving conflicts, ensuring
justice and building sustainable peace. As part of that
commitment and during our presidency of the Council,
we organized an open debate on this topic in April
2018 (S/PV.8241) and, as has been recalled by other
delegations, we submitted, together with Sweden,
resolution 2419 (2018), which was adopted unanimously.
That resolution reminds us that we should stop viewing
young people as a problem and begin to recognize
them as central actors in peace processes, which is an
appropriate approach to exploiting and maximizing
their potential, commitment and resilience both in the
prevention and in the resolution of conflicts.

Nevertheless, resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419
(2018), which were adopted by the Council on this
topic, start from the premise that Governments and
the multilateral system still face obstacles in fully
including young people in processes aimed at building
sustainable peace, despite the fact that those same
young people represent the majority of the affected
population in armed conflicts around the world.

For the effective implementation of both resolutions,
we believe it fundamental to promote State dialogue with
youth-led organizations and to take their opinions into
account in drawing up policies and programmes. The
aforementioned resolutions can be implemented only
through the full and meaningful participation of young
people, while paying special attention to the inclusion
of young women in decision-making, mainly through
their political participation in peace negotiations and in
the management of more inclusive and representative
Government structures. We welcome the efforts
carried out by some peace missions in implementing
those resolutions, as is the case in Colombia, Kosovo
and Iraq, particularly through the establishment of
mechanisms that allow young people to participate
in and contribute to peacekeeping processes in their
respective national communities.

The youth, peace and security agenda is also
closely linked to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Sustainable
Development Goals commit us, inter alia, to creating
decent employment for young people, guaranteeing equal
opportunities, promoting peaceful societies, promoting
human rights, safeguarding diversity and combating
discrimination. Financing the implementation of the
agenda is also a pending issue. States, international
organizations and donors should promote accessible,
flexible and innovative funding opportunities for
organizations that are led by and for young people that
seek to support peace processes through activities to
consolidate peace and prevent violence.

To conclude, we believe that the Council should
continue to promote this important topic and grant it

regular follow-up, particularly in the area of conflict 1 new resume my functions as President of
resolution and building sustainable peace. We therefore the Council.

eagerly await the report that the Secretary»Generalwill There are no more names inscribed on the list
submit by May 2020, in accordance with the request ofspeakers.

made in resolution 2419 (2018). The meeting rose at 5pm.
