The President: I thank Mr. Beasley for his briefing,
and, in my national capacity, both briefers for their very
compelling story, narrative and clear call to action.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

1 should like once again to reiterate our thanks
to Mark Lowcock and David Beasley for their
comprehensive and informative briefings.

It is very clear that one of the main causes of
hunger is conflict: man-made conflict. After decades
of a steady decline in the number of people suffering
from malnutrition and famine, today we are faced with
a dangerous setback, one that endangers Sustainable
Development Goal 2, a world of zero hunger. The
unthinkable is happening: hunger is again on the rise.

Last year, the Secretary-General called on the
Council to take action in response to no fewer than four
major new famines: in Somalia, South Sudan, Yemen
and Nigeria. These famines were directly threatening
20 million people: men, women and children. These and
other examples of food insecurity have one important
factor in common, and one alone: conflict.

In our world of abundance, technology and big data,
famine is completely avoidable. Where it happens, it is
man-made. It occurs where people harm other people.
Regrettably, so-called man-made famine is almost
becoming a tautology.

While all-out famine has been barely averted in the
four countries I just mentioned, many people remain
extremely food-insecure. This entails grave risks
for regional stability, as conflict and hunger do not
respect national borders or boundaries. Rising levels
of hunger and conflict will lead to greater migration,
force displacement and put severe pressure on host
countries in the region and beyond. The fact that this
is happening in the twenty-first century, in an age of
unparalleled progress, technological possibilities and
wealth, is shameful.

If people are the main cause of famine and food
insecurity in conflict situations, then surely people are
able to resolve this issue. This means that the end of
famine depends on political will.

Armed conflict affects food security in many
ways. In modern warfare we see fields of crops being
destroyed, bakeries burned and markets hit. We see
parties to a conflict deliberately denying access to food
aid for civilians in need. We see indiscriminate bombing
that damages food sources and prevents civilians from
reaching them safely. We see this all too often, in too
many places.

I recently visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the camp of Katanika, an older lady told
me that all her family members had had to flee their
villages, leaving everything behind. They do not have
enough to eat and no longer have a way of producing
their own food. Going back to their villages of origin is
impossible: everything has been destroyed.

In South Sudan, army checkpoints prevent aid
convoys from reaching their destination. The recent
report by the Panel of Experts stated in no uncertain
terms that starvation was being used there as a weapon
of war.

Elsewhere, as in Syria, we witness situations that
we would not have imagined possible in our era. Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock said in a briefing
to the Council on 28 February, so very recently, that
without humanitarian access,

"we will soon see even more people dying from
starvation and disease than from the bombing and
shelling". (see S/PV8195, p. 3)

In Yemen as well, we see the denial of access
having grave consequences for the number of people
suffering from food insecurity.

Clearly, the problem is not a lack of rules. Rather,
it is the persistent failure of warring parties to comply
with those rules. That is what causes civilians in
conflict to suffer even more.

Together, we, the international community, have
agreed to regulate the conduct of warfare: to spare
civilians in conflict to the greatest extent possible and
to respect, above all, their human dignity. Flouting
the law of war not only turns these norms into hollow
phrases; it erodes the rules-based international order
itself. We cannot allow that to happen.

Hunger caused by conflict as well as starvation
reflect our collective failure, and the Council has a
collective responsibility to address it and to prevent it
from happening in future. For this we need a detailed
framework for action.

First, we should reaffirm the norms established
over the past 70 years: the prohibition of starvation
as a method of warfare, the protection of civilian
objects necessary for food production, and, above
all, guarantees for humanitarian access. International
humanitarian law, which all warring parties are obliged
to respect and comply with, defines our humanity. We
must not allow those rules to unravel.

Secondly, we should take a firm stance against
violations of international law by holding to account
those responsible for such Violations. That can be
done within national jurisdictions; but where those
jurisdictions fail, international mechanisms come into
play. In such situations, the most serious cases should
be referred to the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, we should step up our efforts to prevent
food insecurity in conflict. The Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Food Programme and their
partners have the means and technology to issue early
warnings, which they regularly report on. In conflict
situations, it is up to the Council to follow up with early
action, not only to prevent conflicts from exacerbating
food insecurity in the short-term by ensuring

humanitarian access, but also to save societies from the
perils of a generation raised in hunger. We therefore
need continuous engagement by the Council.

Finally, humanitarian aid in itself is not a sustainable
answer. It never has been. Only political solutions can
truly end suffering. Therein lies the most important
task for the Council.
Hunger is the most avoidable of disasters.
Starvation is the most heinous method of warfare. It
is incumbent upon us to ensure that the starvation of
civilians becomes a crime of the past - a practice both
forbidden and punishable. I am counting on the support
of those present and look forward to working together
to achieve that important goal.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

