Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): My
country congratulates you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We should also like to congratulate your
predecessor, who served in April, the month when the
Council decided to make a trip to visit the Great Lakes
Region.

My country appreciated that initiative of the
Council, in particular because its objective was to
search for all the ways and means by which peace
could return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to the entire African Great Lakes region. My
country welcomes the fact that the Council has focused
all its attention on the underlying causes that prompted
Rwanda to intervene militarily in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by virtue of its natural right of
legitimate defence under Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Rwanda's concerns with regard to the security of
our country and our population were expressed in our
letter dated 15 April 2002 (S/2002/420) addressed to
the Security Council and by the Rwandan delegation to
the political committee that met in Angola during the
Council's visit and during the audience that the
President of the Republic of Rwanda granted Council
members. Those concerns have received the Council's
attention, according to the representative of France,
head of the Security Council mission, and we welcome
that.

I recall clearly the crucial moment when we
decided to fight the former Rwandan Armed Forces
(ex-FAR) and the Interahamwe militias systematically
and to pursue them into their Congolese sanctuaries.
That was the day - I was in the Government at the
time - when, entering from Congolese territory, the
ex-FAR and the militias massacred many innocent
people in Rwanda, including a woman who was the
mayor of one of the districts of Cyangugu province,
which borders on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in southwestern Rwanda. I also recall the day -
during the time I served in the Government - when
we decided to advance the 600 kilometres referred to
earlier by the representative of France. There as well,
the action was based on the security of Rwanda and its
people.

Everyone will recall the statements of President
Kabila at Kinshasa and of President Mugabe at
Lubumbashi, in which the two heads of State declared
that they were going to bomb Rwanda. We all
remember those two statements, and the Government
of Rwanda took them very seriously. We thought that
such threats could be carried out only by using a
certain number of airports in Kisangani, Kindu and
Kalemi, among others. As the result of those threats to
bomb our country using a limited number of airports in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as declared by
the two heads of State, we were obliged to try to
prevent such bombing.

The Lusaka Peace Agreement, if it were
implemented in all its components, would reassure
Rwanda as soon as the planners and perpetrators of
Rwandan genocide now in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo no longer have the political, military,
material and financial support that they now have and
are disarmed, disengaged and reintegrated into the
socioeconomic life of the country, in the case of those
who have not been held accountable before the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in Arusha
or before other tribunals.

The inter-Congolese dialogue is a major
component, even a decisive component, in the
implementation of the Lusaka Peace Agreement.
Rwanda and the sister Republic of Uganda have just
publicized through our two Foreign Ministers the
common position of our two countries and the specific
proposals that could lead Sun City to a political
agreement and fully inclusive power-sharing.

The agreement between President Kabila and
Mr. Bemba is an agreement only between these two
individuals, who negotiated it in a hotel room, away
from the facilitator and the formal framework of the
inter-Congolese dialogue. We believe that the two
partners of the inter-Congolese dialogue must rejoin
the other Congolese partners under the auspices of
Facilitator Masire and negotiate inclusive power-
sharing acceptable to all.
As the Permanent Representative of South Africa
rightly said, all the Congolese partners of the inter-
Congolese dialogue must be considered equal. That is
what the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs for
the future of that beautiful land and the Congolese
people, who have been suffering for decades.

