Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I have the pleasure to
deliver my statement on behalf of the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
I extend my sincere congratulations to Sweden and
wish it every success, as the President of the Security
Council for this month.

This meeting is taking place amid severe
challenges besetting the Palestinian cause as a result
of the escalation in Israeli systematic violations
against the Palestinian people, their land and their
sanctities. Israel's ongoing aggression and threats
against the Palestinian Bedouin community of Khan
Al-Ahmar is clearly another deplorable chapter in
Israel's illegal, oppressive and destructive measures,
replicating a constant Israeli colonial, ethnic-cleansing
and displacement policy that has been aggravating the
ongoing human tragedy of the Palestinian people. Such
policy of forcible transfer of the Palestinian population
irrefutably constitutes a grave breach of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention and amounts
to a war crime, which highlights once again the urgent
need for accountability.

These developments, together with all measures
aimed at altering the demographic composition,
character and status of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, are all
null and void and have no legal validity whatsoever
and directly violate the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations. The OIC will therefore remain resolute
that any form of recognition thereof, whether explicit or
implicit, is illegal and bound to have far-reaching and
dangerous consequences on facilitating and deepening
the illegal annexation of East Jerusalem by Israel,
thereby undermining the possibility of implementing
the two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.

In that regard, we condemn Israel's continued
settlement colonization of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in contempt of the
Security Council's resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016) and the relevant provisions ofinternational
law. That illegal settlement policy, entrenching Israel's
decades-long military occupation of the Palestinian land,
remains a core challenge to the will of the international
community and a major obstacle to peace. It is a litmus
test for international collective resolve and particularly
that of the Council, which is required to take concrete
actions to ensure respect for and compliance with its
resolutions and prevent unilateral actions by Israel, the
occupying Power, that seriously undermine the vision
of the two-State solution to which we are committed, as
such acts have repeatedly thwarted a peaceful solution
to this conflict.

It is incumbent on the Security Council to
intervene urgently, responsibly and effectively to avert
dire repercussions that may plunge the volatile region
into a cycle of further instability. The Security Council
should, in that regard, take decisive action to implement
its relevant resolutions, including those pertaining to
Jerusalem, including resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016).

As the Israeli military onslaught, which has
surpassed all levels of brutality, continues to claim
the lives of hundreds of Palestinian civilians who
have been peacefully marching to protest the illegal
Israeli blockade, and aggravates the already critical
humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip, its tragic
consequences and implications should be central to all
international efforts. Immediate action should be taken
to halt the human rights violations by Israel, avoid and
end impunity, ensure accountability for its crimes and
illegal blockade ofthe Gaza Strip, provide international
protection for the Palestinian people and address the
dire humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.

The ongoing plight of millions of Palestine
refugees reflects the cruel reality of missing justice.
While praising in that regard the role and endeavours
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), the continued need for
its services bears witness to the dire situation being
endured by Palestinian refugees across the region
and embodies political commitment to their right to
return. The OIC reiterates its call, on this occasion, for
the international community to make sure their plight
and growing needs are receiving adequate attention,
including in terms of necessary funding to UNRWA,
and to assume their historical, political, legal and
humanitarian responsibilities towards finding a just
and durable solution to the question of Palestinian refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

In addition to the current political stalemate, the
continuation of Israeli settlement policies constitutes
a serious obstacle hampering the just and lasting
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The OIC
group remains firm in its conviction that the Security
Council must act to enhance prospects for peace, hope
and justice and maintain the viability of the two-State
solution, based on the 1967 borders, through immediate
engagement, along with international actors, in
launching and sponsoring a multilateral political
process to resolve all final status issues, on the basis
of the long-standing terms of reference and parameters
enshrined in United Nations resolutions and within a
specific time frame.

