Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I thank the
Security Council for this opportunity to discuss the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to thank the Council for its visit to
Kinshasa this past weekend despite its busy agenda.

The visit was very useful for several reasons - for
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and the Congolese,
but also for our partners and, lastly, for ourselves.
Through discussions with the major actors involved
in the ongoing political and electoral process, the visit
provided a unique opportunity for Council members
to observe at first-hand the situation on the ground,
stakeholder engagement and the progress already
made, as well as unresolved areas of disagreement.
With two and a half months remaining before the
national and provincial presidential and legislative
elections, the electoral process is unfolding according
to the electoral calendar. As Council members noted,
decisive steps have been taken. The electoral law has
been revised; the electoral register has been prepared
and submitted for auditing; 21 candidates have been
validated as candidates vying for the presidency, 15,505
as candidates for the National Assembly and 19,640
as candidates for the provincial assemblies. However,
regrettably, although more than 50 per cent of voters
are women, the percentage of female candidates is not
more than 12 per cent of the total number of candidates
in the legislative and provincial elections and there is
only one female candidate in the presidential elections.

Iwould like to take this opportunity to commend the
constructive stance of political actors on all sides, who
have been consistent in demonstrating their continued
engagement in the electoral process, including following
the decisions of the Constitutional Court, which
resulted in some leaders of the political opposition
being disqualified from standing as candidates in the
presidential elections. At the same time, as Council
members heard repeatedly in Kinshasa, the main
opposition leaders have a strong mistrust of the process
in general. Nonetheless, they have remained committed
to it thus far. In particular, they are calling for doing
away with the voting machines and for the electoral
register to be updated. It is therefore essential that
the main Congolese stakeholders reach consensus on
those issues so as not to compromise the acceptance of
election results. It is in that spirit that I am determined
to continue my mission of good offices.

On 4 October, the Independent National Electoral
Commission met with the 21 presidential candidates to
discuss differences on critical aspects of organization
of the elections. A technical committee to continue
the dialogue on the subject was set up, with its first
meeting having been held yesterday. Regrettably, it
ended with major differences of opinion. I welcome
the Commission's awareness-raising effort and urge
the joint forum to reach consensus on the points of
contention. I also welcome the publication of the
recommendations of the Westminster Foundation for
Democracy, which aim to clarify some of the concerns
raised about the voting machines. With regard to the
setting up and distribution of the voting machines and
electoral material, the President of the Commission
has assured us that the first set of voting machines was
received last Friday at the port of Matadi. He added
that delivery would continue in the coming weeks. The
machines and other material must now be transported
to the rest of the Congo, which, since the rainy season
has just begun and given the relatively short deadline of
23 December, represents a major logistical challenge.

In the context of the implementation of the measures
to ease tensions that were outlined in the political
agreement of 31 December 2016, it should be noted
that the public meeting organized on 29 September in
Kinshasa by seven main opposition parties took place
without challenges or major incidents. I welcome the
peaceful nature of the event and the restraint shown
by the demonstrators and the security services. We
have also just learned that an agreement has been
reached between the authorities and the opposition
to hold a march on 13 October in Lubumbashi, which
would be the first of its kind in the capital of Haut-
Katanga province. Such signs are encouraging, and I
will continue my good offices efforts in that regard to
help create an environment that allows candidates to
conduct their campaigns peacefully and in conditions
that foster the sharing of ideas and opinions. Applying
similar rules for all involved is a fundamental guarantee
of the credibility of the entire process.

Ensuring the security of the elections is another
prerequisite for credible and peaceful elections. It
is important to ensure the security not only of the
candidates for the upcoming elections, but also and
above all of the environment in which the campaign and
the actual polls. The task of securing the areas in which
armed groups - who are increasingly using the political
agenda for the benefit of their own interests - are
stationed promises to be a difficult one. To that end,
we recommend the establishment of electoral security
mechanisms and strategic coordination of the various
national defence and security entities.

(Spoke in English)
As the Democratic Republic of the Congo moves
towards elections, the complexity of the security
situation and the continuing activities of armed groups
in the east of the country continue to pose a major
challenge to the protection of civilians. To cite just one
recent alarming example, in the Petit Nord of North
Kivu at least 14 people - including a woman and three
children - were killed by alleged Nyatura combatants
this week. With potential links to political and
economic interests and a possibility of reprisal attacks,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
immediately deployed a standing combat deployment,
together with civilian components, to prevent any
further deterioration.

However, I am most concerned about current
developments in Beni, in the Grand Nord of North Kivu.
Presumed Allied Democratic Forces continue to stage
near-daily attacks on civilians, the Forces armees de
la Republique Democratique du Congo (FARDC) and
MONUSCO, increasingly close to the centre of Beni
town. I wish to acknowledge the high toll borne by the
FARDC in the context of this deteriorating situation.
Despite the rate of attacks, our Intervention Brigade has
taken an increasingly robust posture in recent months
under exemplary leadership. They undertake proactive
long-range patrols to ensure a protective environment
and respond swiftly to alerts, in several recent cases
repelling attacks as they are under way - most recently,
just two days ago.

The growing frequency and proximity to Beni
town of these attacks are, understandably, leading to
frustration on the part of the local population. In this
context, we are simultaneously stretched to respond
to an outbreak of Ebola in the Beni health zone and
surrounding areas, now including a town neighbouring
Uganda. I am increasingly concerned about the
trajectory of the disease. As of today, we have 194
confirmed or probable cases and 120 deaths.

While the response of the Congolese authorities
and humanitarian partners, supported by MONUSCO,
has been swift and exemplary, the security situation
has rendered the response increasingly challenging. In
some areas, the local population has shown mistrust
towards Ebola responders, in one case attacking a
convoy of health workers. Responders are currently
grappling with the issue of simultaneously scaling up
response efforts both in Beni and in other nearby areas,
while adapting their footprint to the deteriorating
security situation.

In these cases, as in many places throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, our uniformed and
civilian colleagues undertake significant efforts and
risks on a daily basis to implement our mandate to
protect civilians and provide security for humanitarian
personnel. In addition to the efforts of our Intervention
Brigade, I am equally encouraged to report that our
broader force shows a willing mindset to deploy where
it is most needed to ensure the protection of civilians,
and to note the integration of our response efforts
across our uniformed and civilian components and in
support of humanitarian partners.

It is therefore unfortunate that, even within this
concerning security context, we face challenges
in ensuring that our military personnel are as well
prepared as they should be and able to undertake
operations within the full spectrum of the mandate. In
recent weeks, we have faced increasing restrictions on
the importation of arms, ammunition and other military
equipment for several of our contingents, including our
incoming rapidly deployable battalions.

Although we continue to engage on these issues
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, I must unfortunately inform the Council
that discussions have not yet yielded tangible results.
This increasingly places our forces in a situation where
they are inadequately resourced to ensure the security
of our own personnel, protect civilians and ensure
preparedness for contingency planning, as requested by
the Council in the latest MONUSCO mandate.

(Spoke in French)

Despite all these challenges, we remain optimistic
and continue to make every effort, together with the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
ensure that this process is successful. The international
community has sent a positive message by awarding the
Nobel Peace Prize to Dr. Denis Mukwege and, through
him, to all women and girls of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo who are victims of sexual violence. I take
this opportunity to congratulate Dr. Mukwege on being
awarded the Prize for his fight against sexual violence
in times of war. This award honours him and the women
and girls he has cared for, who pay a heavy price for
the turmoil in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where rape is used as a weapon of war.

In South Kivu province, the cradle of the Panzi
Foundation, as in the other provinces affected by
insecurity, sexual violence continues to be perpetrated
daily by parties to the conflict. We hope that this award
to Dr. Mukwege and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will mark a turning point in obtaining assistance
for the thousands of victims of sexual violence and in
the fight against impunity against the perpetrators of
such violence. MONUSCO continues to stand with
them in this noble and indispensable struggle.

