Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to express our deep sorrow and
condolences to the Governments of the United States
and Sweden and the families of the two experts who
recently lost their lives in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I was honoured to work closely with Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan in my capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They were a true inspiration.
They were brave and dedicated to their work, despite
the risks and difficulties that surrounded their mission.

The heinous event that claimed their lives reminds
us of the difficulties and tragedies confronting many
victims of violence in the Congo. We must therefore
work with greater determination and commitment to
ending the violence and establishing permanent peace
in the country. This painful event also reminds us of
the sacrifices made by United Nations personnel in
the field, be they military, police officers or civilians.
These sacrifices deserve all our gratitude and respect.

Egypt welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2348 (2017). It stresses the importance of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which
plays a vital role in supporting stability and establishing
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
is the same message of the communique issued today
by the African Union Peace and Security Council. We
welcome the fact that supporting the 31 December
2016 political greement is one of the strategic goals
of MONUSCO's mandate, which is also charged with
providing support and assistance for the elections
process, given the importance of the agreement to
maintainng security and stability in the country. Egypt
calls for intensifying efforts to overcome the current
deadlock concerning the special arrangement talks. We
look forward to the resumption of the mediation efforts
by the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo, as
well those of the African Union.

The many challenges confronting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at the political and security
levels and the increasing activities of armed groups
and the spread the violence serve to underscore the
need to provide human and financial resources to
MONUSCO, including supporting and enhancing the
role of the Congolese army so that it can confront those
challenges. We agree that we need to take advantage
of peacekeeping operations and increase their efficient
use of resources, as well as when it comes to other
United Nations activities. We welcome the commitment
of the Secretary-General in that regard. Moreover, we
believe that reconsidering the number and resources
of peacekeeping forces should not be based solely on
realizing savings. We need to carry out a comprehensive
study of the situation and the needs on the ground and to
evaluate the nature of the resources required to enable
any mission to implement its mandate, so that they do
not face shortcomings that could have an adverse effect
on their performance.

Egypt is proud of its role as a MONUSCU troop-
contributor, as well as in other United Nations missions.
We consulted with other MONUSCO contributors with
regard to the contents of today's resolution. Troop-
contributing countries(TCCs) are one of the main
pillars of the United Nattions peacekeeping system.
Through their troops, TCCs make great sacrifices in the
service of peace and security. Any efforts to enhance
the efficiency of troops and overcome shortcomings in
their performance must therefore take place through
a triangular partnership among TCCs, the Secretariat
and the Security Council.

