Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation takes note of the concept note
(S/2018/444, annex) for this debate and ofthe Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/462) entitled "Protection of
civilians in armed conflict". We have some comments
and reservations regarding certain information and
assessments in the report, which we will convey to the
Secretariat in an official letter.

The Syrian Arab Republic believes that the
protection of civilians has been and remains the primary
and most noble purpose that the Governments of the
world have pledged to achieve, saving humankind on
a large scale, without any exception or differentiation,
from the scourges ofwars and conflict, while preserving
the fundamental rights and dignity of people. The
practices and policies of some Governments prove that
addressing that noble question is still selective, with
double standards adopted. Such Governments abuse
the issue of the protection of civilians in a cheap and
selfish manner to serve their political agendas, using
the topic as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs
of other countries.

The principle of the protection of civilians is
genuine only if accompanied by full compliance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the provisions of international law, including
respect for sovereignty, sovereign equality and the
non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries. The protection of civilians has been and
remains the primary responsibility of the country
concerned, namely, its Government and institutions,
as those are the sole authorities mandated to maintain
peace and stability in their territories.

Based on that, Syria will continue to cooperate
with its allies and friends by fulfilling its duties and
the constitutional right of protecting its civilians from
armed terrorist groups. Such groups are composed of
tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters who have
arrived in Syria from more than 100 countries. Those
are not words plucked from thin air; that information is
documented in United Nations committees and working
groups' reports related to combating terrorism. We
remind the Council, and we will continue to remind the
Council, of those facts.

Today Syria is witnessing a dirty terrorist war in
which intelligence agencies and Governments have
implicated themselves and which they have ignited
by creating armed terrorist groups, training and
providing their elements with financing and weapons
and facilitating the influx of foreign terrorist fighters
to Syria. The worst type of deceit is that focused on
concealing the truth. However, facts are blown out of
proportion when United Nations reports are politicized,
lack information and depend on sources that are openly
linked to armed groups or supported and financed by
the Governments of countries involved in supporting
and sponsoring terrorism. In that regard, I wish to touch
upon the so-called White Helmets, which are active in
areas under the control of the Al-Nusra Front, a group
that is classified as a terrorist entity by the Council, and
are one of thousands of examples.

The United Nations bodies and working groups that
are carrying out activities in the humanitarian field in
Syria have documented that those armed terrorist
groups have turned medical facilities and schools in
all the areas of Syria under their control into military
bases and headquarters from which they can launch
mortar and missile attacks after they have looted and
destroyed their contents, including advanced medical
equipment. United Nations working groups have
seen the warehouses that were under the control of
armed terrorist groups in Aleppo, eastern Ghouta,
Horns and other areas with their own eyes, which
were filled with thousands of tons of food supplies
and other medical equipment and material. Those
supplies were monopolized by those groups for their
own elements and families, preventing civilians from
benefiting from them - those same civilians used as
human shields - or sold at inflated prices. However,
regrettably, those documented reports, issued by the
United Nations, were and remain lost and have never
reached the Secretariat.

Some permanent members of the Council use
the topic of this debate to practice and exercise their
political hypocrisy or as a pretext to interfere in the
internal affairs of other countries. I would also like to
remind the Council that the United Nations mission to
assess the situation in Raqqa documented in a recently
issued report that the city has been almost completely
destroyed by the illegitimate international alliance,
including medical facilities, schools and infrastructure.

There is a legal and moral crisis facing
international entities that work under the umbrella of
the United Nations. Some Governments take no issue
with defending the continued Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territories, the Syrian Golan and parts of
Lebanon; they take no issue withconcocting pretexts
and explanations for Israeli violations of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law; and they take no issue with protecting
Israel from accountability for cold-bloodedly killing
unarmed civilians. The killing ofmore than 60 innocent
Palestinians and injury to more than 3,000 others is proof
of the Security Council's failure to provide protection
to civilians owing to the position of the United States,
which prevents the Council from exercising its mandate
for maintaing international peace and security.

The Security Council's open debates on this
issue can be consequential and effective only if their
objectives constitute a serious attempt to promote
safeguards for protecting civilians. However, if these
debates are just a means for political polarization and
deepening differences, then we would like to stress that
the Charter and international law are clear. Those who
want to protect civilians must start by addressing the root
causes of their suffering, including foreign occupation,
the threat or use of military force, the supporting and
financing of terrorism and interference in the internal
affairs of and destabilization of other countries.

I remind the Council that the founding Members
of the United Nations assigned the Governments
of Member States with one sacred duty - that of
preventing armed conflict, aggression and war.
However, some countries with political, military and
economic influence use that influence to support and
finance terrorism; they contribute to igniting war and
conflict all over the world while assuming the role of
firefighters and police officers - the corrupt kind .

In conclusion, and in response to the allegations
made by the representatives of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates in their statements, we wish to
stress that those countries are the first that must submit
to questioning and be held accountable for the lack of
protection of civilians. Oil money will never shield them
from accountability. We remind them that the people
of Syria will not forget that most of the money that
sponsors terrorism in Syria came directly from them or
through donations to suspicious charity organizations
that work under the guise of religious or humanitarian
charity work. I would like to remind the regimes of
those two countries that they lack the sufficient morals
and religion to speak about the protection of civilians.
Historically, the blood of Syrians and Yemenis has been
on their hands.
