Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to express once
again its great concern at the repeated feverish attempts
of certain delegations to distract the Security Council's
deliberations of the item on its agenda, the situation in
the Middle East, from the main objective and reason
for which it was included, namely, putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories and the settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, based on the well-known
terms of reference for peace.

Some are attempting to cover up the failure to find
a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, due to Israeli
intransigence, supported by some influential countries,
by involving other issues within the discussion of the
item with the intention of weakening the well-known
and established terms of reference for putting an end
to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, and to
thwart the establishment of a Palestinian State within
the borders of4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital.

That is how we understand the substance of this
agenda item. Therefore, I will confine myself to the
substance of the item under discussion. I will not
respond to the false claims and allegations made by
certain delegations against my country, Syria, at this
meeting. I will not fall into the trap, about which Syria
has repeatedly warned over many years, of involving
the Council in manipulations and manoeuvres that
could undermine Arab-Arab relations and establish
delusional fronts that can only benefit Israel and
its protectors. I would like to put an observation on
record - those who have most harmed the discussion
of this agenda item, the situation in the Middle East,
are certain Arab delegations that have consistently tried
to kill the spirit of the item in a manner that benefits
Israel's continued occupation of Arab territories at the
expense of the legitimate rights of the Arab people.

The fact of the matter, regrettably, indicates once
again that there is a systematic Israeli policy - which
some wouldnot like to subj ectto standards of international
accountability - of violations and practices that
contradict the absolute minimum of human rights
principles, international humanitarian law and all
moral and humanitarian standards. Israel, as we well
know, continues to disregard hundreds of resolutions
adopted by the United Nations since 1948 calling on the
occupying Power to withdraw from all occupied Arab
territories to the borders of 4 June 1967, with a view
to establishing ajust, lasting and comprehensive peace.

The reason behind the Israeli challenge can be
attributed to the absence of any serious deterrent to
Israel, which benefits from the promotion of the culture
of impunity and from putting itself above the law due to
the direct protection provided to it by certain influential
States. Those States that claim to be concerned with
international law and human rights are the same States
that guarantee Israel illegitimate immunity for all its
crimes during decades of occupation ofArab territories.
They are the same States that have provided Israel with
nuclear weapons and submarines capable of launching
nuclear weapons. They are the same States that have
defended Israel's failure to implement the resolution
on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of
weapons of mass destruction, adopted at the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(see NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I), Annex).

In that context, the Security Council regrettably
has not been able to rise up to its responsibilities in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
No progress has been achieved in that regard. On the
contrary, the situation has deteriorated since the United
Nations has become a disabled second fiddle to the
international Quartet with regard to the continued
escalation of aggression by Israel and the uncontrolled
and unprecedented settler activity, political intransigence
and preparation for new aggression in the coming days.
The Israeli escalation enjoys the political, military
and unlimited financial and media support of certain
influential States that are originally responsible for all
the tensions and conflicts in our region.

It may be useful to recall here that just yesterday,
in Brussels, the European Union entered into around
60 new agreements of cooperation with Israel, in spite
of Israel's violations of human rights and its policies
of aggression and settlement activity contravening
international law. Nevertheless, this morning we have
listened to the statements made by some colleagues,
ambassadors of European countries, in which they
spoke of the fact that the Palestinian State is now being
called Area C in the deliberations of the Council. Later
on, it will become Street A, B and C and not Area C.
Area C would be the Palestinian State. The Palestinian
State is no longer there.

Israel continues to refuse to return the occupied
Syrian Golan to its motherland, Syria, in flagrant
violation of resolution 497 (1981), which declares
Israel's annexation of the Syrian Golan null and void
and without legal basis. Israel also pursues its settler
policies, its State terrorism and the exercise of policies
of discrimination and oppression against the Syrian
inhabitants of the Golan. It continues to dismember
the Golan, build the separation wall and establish
the segregationist isolation of the Golan east of the
occupied Majd al-Shams village.

We have informed the Secretary-General and
the members of the Security Council of all of
those violations; we sent our most recent official
communication on 17 July. However, and most
regrettably, our complaints have fallen on deaf ears.
Not only did the representatives of the Secretariat
not address those serious Israeli violations in their
monthly media briefings to the Security Council under
the agenda item "The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question", but they also did
not refer to the Syrian Golan at all, including the threat
made by the Israeli Minister of Defence two days ago
that the Golan is a candidate for aggression and the
potential trigger of a full-scale war that would actually
backfire against Israel itself.

That approach by the representatives of the
Secretariat, which is repeatedly and blatantly collusive,
represents a clear violation of the Secretariat's duties to
brief the members of the Security Council on these and
related developments in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981). The simplest
lesson that we can draw from all of this is that this
approach has encouraged Israel to maintain its policies
of aggression and occupation and to keep the truth from
the members of the Security Council and the United
Nations.

There is another point that I would like to make
clear at this juncture concerning the reckless attempts
of certain countries to harm brotherly relations between
Lebanon and Syria. Violations of Syrian sovereignty by
armed terrorist groups from Lebanese territory have
recently increased. I have with me an official list of 114
cases ofweapons smuggling from Lebanese into Syrian
territory; there is none in the opposite direction. Those
114 cases are only the ones we know about, and they all
took place within a period of only two months, from
1 May to 24 July.

In that context, we do not need to stress the strong
bilateral Lebanese and Syrian ties, and we welcome the
measures taken by the Lebanese authorities in charge
of monitoring the common borders to prevent arms
smuggling to Syria and to stop all terrorists. However,
the problem lies in the actions taken not by the Lebanese
Government but by certain political parties in Lebanon
that finance, shelter and support those armed groups and
help them to smuggle weapons from Lebanon to Syria
to carry out terrorist operations that would prolong the
bloodshed and the conflict among innocent civilians and
members of the military. Those actions enjoy the direct
intelligence, military, media and financial support of
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and other countries, such as the
United States and France, which provide these armed
groups with sophisticated equipment.

Meanwhile, they claim that the equipment is
non-lethal, when in fact it is being used to facilitate
terrorist operations in Syria, costing the lives of
thousands of innocent Syrians, civilian and military
alike. We have provided the Secretariat and the members
of the Council with scores of documents and evidence
about armed incursions into Syria originating in
Lebanon and other neighbouring States. That reality has
been confirmed by the international media, including
through video and audio evidence, most recently in
an article in today's New York Times. However, the
representative of the Secretariat failed to mention any
of these facts in his briefing, to the great detriment of
the Secretariat's credibility.

In conclusion, the representatives of Qatar and
Saudi Arabia shed crocodile tears over the suffering
of the Syrian people. The Syrian blood being spilled
hourly by the Qatari-Saudi collusion - through direct
military, financial, diplomatic and political interference
and the media should suffice in the eyes of any

 
observer to contradict the outrageous claims made on
the Al-Jazeera and Al-Arabiya satellite channels and
by the officials of those two countries, to which Syria
has never done any harm. That coverage and those
statements clearly unmask the political approach of
the politicians of those two countries. Qatari and Saudi
foreign policy should have supported the Kofi Annan
plan and the Geneva document, instead of conspiring to
undermine both while escalating their attacks on Syria
and its interests in the General Assembly, having failed
to do so in the Security Council.

The Syrian people will find their own wellspring,
free of the petro-dollar spigot, Wahhabist-Salafist
forces and Western hegemony over their political fate
and options. I call on the Governments of Qatar and
Saudi Arabia to immediately respond to the demands
of their own people and to their internal and external
oppositions. Saudi civilians have suffered greatly
from oppression by the military and security forces
in Al-Qatif and Al-Awamiya. More than 250 Qatari
opposition figures - some of them members of the
ruling family 4 have made legitimate demands
for reform and for an end to the squandering of the
Qatari people's money and resources on attacks and
conspiracies against other Arab and Islamic peoples.
Qatar and Saudi Arabia are no example for anyone to
follow when it comes to democracy.

