Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
express its profound appreciation to the delegation
of Morocco for its initiative in convening this timely
debate. It is proper that the international focus be
directed at mechanisms being employed to ensure
durable peace in countries emerging from conflict.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comments
and appreciate the report that has provided the basis
for our discussion today (S/2012/746). We also thank
Ambassador Abulkalam Momen for his briefing.

Today's debate once again provides an opportunity
to assess the progress of and challenges to our
collective efforts to support peace and socio-economic
development, as well as prefer strategies to assist
countries emerging from conflict. Long before the
inception of the Peacebuilding Commission, Nigeria
undertook efforts to support post-conflict peacebuilding
in various countries in Africa. The lessons from those
experiences underline our deep concern that the scale
and scope of the new forms of conflict, and the ever-
present risk of relapse, are outpacing our collective
ability to respond effectively to it.

Recent developments and daunting challenges in
the post-conflict recovery process have underscored
the fact that peacebuilding requires a more integrated
approach encompassing political inclusiveness,
security, economic development, gender empowerment
and participation, human rights and the rule of law,
complementarities and coherence among the various
actors and partners. Indeed, a comprehensive approach
to peacebuilding requires partnership, consistency and
coherence among the various actors.

Our individual and collective commitment to the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission must be
supportive and results-oriented. The commitment of
members must extend beyond mere interests; it should
also be reflected in our desire to share experiences
and provide technical and financial contributions.
Resources and funds are very critical factors for
successful peacebuilding in countries emerging from
conflicts. Therefore, the commitment of Member
States should be reflected in their willingness to
make financial contributions, as well as to share their
experiences and provide technical assistance.

Nigeria commends the steps taken by the
Peacebuilding Support Office to continuously
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Peacebuilding Fund's third
high-level stakeholders meeting of 29 November
was a huge success. That laudable effort must be
complemented by exploring other options for longer-
term financing. Closely related to this is the need for
greater accountability, monitoring and evaluation of
peacebuilding projects and programmes, and to assist
countries on the peacebuilding agenda to develop a
mechanism of internal tax collection to boost their
revenue basis.

Nigeria is particularly encouraged by the
increased attention to the important role of women in
peacebuilding activities through the gender promotion
initiative. Women play a crucial role in economic
recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy.
Best practices can be replicated in the deployment of
gender expertise in conflict and post-conflict contexts.
We therefore call for greater women's participation in
peace and post-conflict processes.

Threats to peace have cross-border implications
and linkages, often requiring broader efforts and
mechanisms at the regional and subregional levels.
That is not only true of conflicts in West Africa,
but is the case in most regions of the world. For that
reason, we would like to emphasize the need to pay due
attention to the regional dimensions of peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding cannot be achieved using a short-term
strategy. It requires a comprehensive and integrated
strategy responsive to needs and priorities, as well
as the long-term commitment of all actors at the
national, regional and international levels. It is in this
consideration that Nigeria has endeavoured to actively
support post-conflict peacebuilding processes in the
West African subregion.

As a member of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission, we remain committed
to supporting integrated peacekeeping strategies for
sustainable peace and development. It is our fervent
hope that this debate will provide new insights on
impetus for enhancing post-conflict peacebuilding
activities. We are also determined to work in concert
with other stakeholders to make its impact positively
felt.

