Mr. Dauth (Australia): Forgive me,
Mr. President, ifI dispense with courtesies, but, unlike
Ambassador Mahbubani, I need all five minutes of my
allotted time. So let me get straight to the substance.

We in Australia are proud of what we have done
to assist Timor-Leste in building a stable and
sustainable democracy. No country has done more. We
remain committed to helping Timor-Leste with its
security and development challenges. Together with the
United Nations, we have a big stake in ensuring that
East Timor is equipped to meet the challenges it faces,
and that it succeeds. Australia's contribution has, of
course, been part of a highly cooperative and effective
international effort. It is our strong desire that this
cooperative, consensus-based approach continue as we
enter into a new phase of engagement with Timor-
Leste.

Despite the encouraging progress, further
international assistance to Timor-Leste remains
essential. That is not in question; it is the form of
assistance that we need to get right, and the Secretary-
General's report (S/2004/117) is a useful point of
departure. Australia fully supports the recommendation
for a one-year extension of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor at a reduced level. The
recommendations target the right areas of continuing
need.

It is clear that the Mission needs some form of
armed security component. Australia is firmly of the
View that a back-up United Nations policing
component is necessary to help East Timor address its
likely law and order challenges. If the Council so
decides, of course, we would also join the consensus on
a peacekeeping force.

As the Council is aware, Australia has been
carefully analysing Timor-Leste's security needs for a
long time. In October last year, we told the Council
what we believed the threats were and how they should
be addressed. Developments since then have confirmed
that our assessment was fundamentally sound. We
consider that Timor-Leste's security challenges -
highlighted, for example, by the 2002 Dili riot and the
armed assaults near the border in early 2003 - remain
substantial. But these are internal and will require a
police, rather than a military, response.

Timor-Leste's external threat environment is
relatively benign. Ex-militia elements in West Timor
pose a much-reduced threat; the small group of
remaining hardliners are focused primarily on cross-
border criminal activity. The last major security
incident took place more than a year ago, and
Indonesia continues to work against cross-border
destabilization.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment
about the weaknesses in Timor-Leste's security
institutions. The capacity, experience and policy
frameworks of its police service remain limited, and
this, too, suggests that a back-up emergency United
Nations police response group is likely to be required.

Our fundamental concern is that if a back-up
United Nations police unit does not help Timor-Leste
address its internal security challenges, what will? A
properly designed emergency police response group
would be able to deal with the broad spectrum of
security incidents that might arise, including in the
border area. Such a unit would serve an essential
complementary role to any peacekeeping force
presence - should, of course, the Council agree to
that.

A police unit would have appropriate training and
expertise to enable it to deal with Timor-Leste's
internal law and order problems and would provide a
more graduated and faster response to any incident. For
example, a police unit could provide a constabulary
function and would have the power to arrest. Under the
model proposed by Australia, day-to-day and executive
policing would be the sole responsibility of the Timor-
Leste Government and its police service. The United
Nations police unit would deploy only in emergency
situations that risked overwhelming the local police,
and at the request of Timor-Leste's Prime Minister. If
agreed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General - after consulting with the United Nations
police adviser and unit commander - the unit would
be the lead agency for an incident until it was resolved
and responsibility was formally handed back to the
Timor-Leste Government. The model is similar to the
call-out arrangements proposed by the Secretary-
General for a peacekeeping force. Australia's
experience suggests that such command and control
arrangements do indeed work.

I should say plainly that we fully sympathize with
the need for force protection for the unarmed military
liaison officers, and would envision the police unit also
having the capacity to protect United Nations personnel
in emergency situations, as United Nations gendarmes
have done in other contexts. The police unit must
therefore have the capacity for timely self-deployment
to both urban and rural areas and access to helicopter
support.

Day to day, we would envision the police unit
mentoring and providing some training to Timor-
Leste's specialist police units, as well as conducting
liaison visits throughout the country. This reassuring,
visible presence would promote calm and security.

In short, we would see an armed back-up police
unit being able to perform many of the tasks the
Secretary-General has set out in his report on East
Timor's post-UNMISET needs. The safety of such a
unit would not be predicated on the availability of a
substantial back-up peacekeeping force. The unit
would be of a size capable of handling likely law and
order threats. It would be well armed and backed by
local police and, subject to future legislation,
potentially Timor-Leste's defence force.

We believe that the best way ahead for the new
phase of UNMISET is clear. It involves a model built
on the key recommendations of the Secretary-General
that also addresses the real internal security risks and
weak policing capacities. We encourage the Council to
move expeditiously to endorse such an outcome and
maintain the tradition of consensus on this issue.
