Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing on the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/589), Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for his briefing in his capacity as facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his briefing on behalf
of the Joint Commission of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan ofAction (JCPOA) on the report ofthe Procurement
Working Group.

We welcome the two quarterly reports issued by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) - in
March and June, respectively - on the verification and
monitoring activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Malaysia appreciates the IAEA's efforts to continue
verifying the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
by Iran under its Safeguards Agreement.

Malaysia believes that the centrality of the JCPOA
must continue to underpin the Council's approach, and
by extension, the international community's approach
towards Iran.

Given the historical significance of the Iranian
nuclear agreement for the non-proliferation agenda, the
value of remaining steadfast in the implementation of
the provisions outlined in resolution 2231 (2015) cannot
be understated, so as to do justice to the diplomatic
efforts of all parties involved in ensuring the success
of the JCPOA. Hence, we welcome the crucial set-up
of the 2231 (2015) format meeting and the procurement
channel and commend the facilitator's stewardship of
2231 (2015) format meetings, as well as the Secretariat's
facilitation to provide coordination between the Council
and the Joint Commission of the JCPOA.

While we understand the concerns that have been
voiced with regard to the Islamic Republic of Iran's
progress on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), we believe that the shared concerns raised about
the complexities of the technicalities of the resolution
are best addressed through active engagement with Iran.

On the Secretary-General's report, Malaysia calls on
all parties to continue working constructively together
in good faith in order to make significant progress on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We are
encouraged by the approach of transparency, outreach
and practical guidance, anchored by the facilitator in
that regard, to ensure that the main provisions and
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) are well
understood. This is pertinent particularly given the
high interest in the implementation of the resolution on
transfers and activities as provided for in paragraph 2
of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).

In an effort to further remove ambiguity and lend
transparency to the implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015), Malaysia welcomes the
recommendations made in the Secretary-General's
report, particularly on the need to clarify the application
of paragraph 6 (b) to all supply, sale or transfer regardless
of change, following the participation of Iranian entities
in the fifth Iraq Defence Exhibition, held in Baghdad in
March. Notwithstanding, the obligations of all Member
States to fully implement all the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015) must not be understated.

As we proceed henceforth, Malaysia urges balance,
prudence and collective engagement in the Council's
work on facilitating the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). We reaffirm our commitment to work
constructively with other Council members, being fully
mindful of the need to preserve the Council's unity in
the process. We reassert that collective cooperation
and continuous engagement by all stakeholders are
indispensable to the success of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). We wish to also commend
the Secretariat's work, particularly in support of
the facilitator.

Malaysia continues to uphold its belief in the
importance of striking a balance in our discussions
on the nuclear non-proliferation agenda, particularly
on the nuclear disarmament side. The divisiveness
of discussions on the nuclear disarmament agenda
remains a cause of concern for all of us, particularly
for the non-nuclear-weapon States. We therefore urge
renewed commitment and action, particularly by the
nuclear-weapon States, to provide a fresh impetus and
reinvigorate discussions on this agenda, in a collective
effort by all the parties concerned to achieve the aim of
a world free of nuclear weapons.

Before I conclude, I wish to join the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine in his statement that
yesterday marks the second anniversary of the downing
of Malysia Airlines Flight MH-17. I wish to add that
we will continue to seek satisfactory explanations for
the event that led to the tragedy and strive for justice
through the avenues of international law.

