Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open meeting on East Timor. We are
grateful also to Mr. Annabi for his comprehensive briefing.

At the outset, my delegation would like to speak a
word of praise for the personnel of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and
of the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), for
the excellent work they are doing.

In April of this year the Brazilian delegation asked
the Secretary-General to brief the Security Council on the
incidents that had taken place in Dili on the preceding
weekend. That request for information marked the
reactivation of an item that had been dormant in the
agenda of the Council. That was only the beginning of the
final chapter of a long and painful process in the direction
of self-determination for East Timor. The Security
Council utilized all instruments available, including the
highly successful mission led by Ambassador Andjaba.
East Timor is an important source of lessons for the
Council in its future action.

The Brazilian people have always fully supported the
goal of an independent East Timor. In April, however, we
did not suspect that so much suffering was still to come.

Today' s briefing marks the start of the reconstruction
of East Timor. The very positive response by the
international community to the donors conference held in
Tokyo last week surpassed our best expectations. We
understand that much of the resources pledged at that
conference are still dependent on legislative approval and
are to be disbursed over a three-year period. We hope that
the commitments undertaken in Tokyo will be secured.

Brazil commends Japan and Portugal for their
generosity. Brazil is going to make a modest contribution
to the trust fund, and is ready to support East Timor in
training human resources as well as through the provision
of technical cooperation. In that context I note that
Ambassador Roque Rodrigues, Chef de cabinet of
Mr. Xanana Gusmao, is visiting Brazil and has been
received by our highest authorities.

The Tokyo meeting highlighted the good results that
fluid cooperation among Member States, the United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions can yield.
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and Mr. Jean-Michel
Severino, the World Bank's Vice-President, East Asia and
Pacific Region, deserve our applause for their leadership
in steering the meeting. That kind of leadership will be
necessary in the coming task of promoting post-conflict
peace-building and national healing. The reconstruction of
the physical infrastructure will have to be matched with

 

a political effort for further reconciliation in the transition
to independence.

Brazil considers that the National Council for East
Timorese Resistance (CNRT) has a very important role in
that regard. We are encouraged by the actions of the CNRT
leadership, such as the meeting held in Singapore at the
beginning of the month between CNRT officials and former
pro-integration politicians, which translated into deeds the
aspiration expressed by Xanana Gusmao while in prison to
unite the East Timorese. That attitude of forgiveness should
not prevent the implementation of a thorough investigation
to establish responsibility for the violence that was
unleashed upon the East Timorese.

We still have security problems, as Mr. Annabi clearly
indicated. We have learned that some of the so-called
militias have been dissolved. But others continue to prevent
internally displaced persons from returning to East Timor.
It is necessary to create the conditions for their return.

With the support of the international community,
UNTAET will assist in the building of democratic
institutions in East Timor and in the economic rehabilitation
of the territory.

Brazil's present term on the Security Council will end
in a few days. We will continue to work to support the
Council and the United Nations in the fulfilment of their
responsibilities with regard to East Timor. After
independence, when UNTAET will have left the country,
the United Nations will continue to have a role in assisting
the Timorese people to build a prosperous and democratic
country.

