Mr. Hausiku (Namibia): It is a great honour for
me and my delegation to participate in this important
meeting of the Security Council. At the outset, allow me
to extend to you, Madam President, our congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for January 2006. We are confident that your able
leadership and diplomatic skills will ensure success in the
work ahead, and I would like to assure you of my
delegation's support and cooperation during your tenure.

We are delighted, Madam, that you and other
members of the Council have organized this debate on
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region. That demonstrates that the Security Council
continues to devote most of its programme of work to
issues related to peace, security and development,
particularly in Africa. You have once again shown your
commitment, and that of your country, Tanzania, to
resolving one of Africa's most pressing problems by
bringing the issue to the Council's attention early in the
yean

We thank you, Madam, for the non-paper that you
have circulated, which is the basis of our discussions
today, and hope that it will result in the Council's
making informed decisions on the matter.

Namibia attaches great importance to the security
situation in the Great Lakes region, not only because
the people of that region have suffered for too long
from conflict and its consequences, but also because
the absence of peace in that region negatively affects
the rest of the African continent. The situation also
continues to pose a threat to international peace and
security. We are confident that participation in this
debate at the ministerial level will give great impetus
to the Council's deliberations.

We are cognizant of the fact that a conflict affecting
one country can rapidly engulf the entire region because
of the social, economic and cultural links that exist
among our people. The current trend of conflict and the
complexity thereof has consistently dictated the need
for concerted efforts by all stakeholders involved in
finding durable peace and security, which in turn paves
the way for sustainable economic development.

While there has been commendable progress in
the region, such as the holding of democratic elections
in Burundi and the referendum in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, continuing instability in other
parts of the region undermines peace efforts in the
Great Lakes region.

The presence of militia and foreign armed groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has created a deplorable situation that threatens
the civilian population and increases the widespread
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The situation thus requires the
cooperation of the African Union (AU) countries of the
Great Lakes region. Bilateral and regional initiatives
focusing on confidence-building measures should be
encouraged. We urge the countries of the region to
strengthen bilateral cooperation and commit
themselves fully to the effective implementation of the
African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence
Pact, adopted in Abuja on 31 January 2005, as a
regional security mechanism for conflict prevention,
management and peaceful settlement of disputes.

The process of demobilization, disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration in that part of the region
can be successfully carried out only through the
cooperation of all of the countries in the region. We
therefore reiterate our support for resolution 1649
(2005) and call for its full and urgent implementation.

Furthermore, efforts should be made by the
neighbouring countries to reach a comprehensive
agreement aimed at a long-term strategy for sustainable
peace and development and mutual understanding
among the countries of the region, thereby ensuring
that the region is transformed into one of peace and
security, where political and social stability, economic
development and regional integration, as well as
democracy and social justice, prevail.
We fully recognize the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security as mandated by the
United Nations Charter. At the same time, we also
acknowledge the role played by regional and
subregional organizations in finding durable peace in
the region.

The AU, for its part, has consistently maintained
that security is a sine qua non for development; hence,
the establishment of the African Union peace and
security organ, with the sole purpose of dealing with
conflict prevention and resolution and peacekeeping in
Africa. In this regard, we call for the speedy
implementation of resolution 1631 (2005), which urges
international organizations to contribute to the
strengthening of the capacity of African regional and
subregional organizations.

Women and children suffer the most during conflict.
In that connection, we strongly believe that in order to
achieve a comprehensive and sustainable peace, every
effort should be made to ensure the full participation
and contribution of women during peace negotiations and
during the execution of post-conflict strategies and
programmes. In this regard, we reiterate our commitment
to the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.

The first International Conference on Peace and
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region, held in Dar es-Salaam from 19 to
20 November 2004, provided an opportunity for the
countries of the region to devise effective ways and
means of finding durable solutions to the problems
facing the region. Namibia regrets the postponement of
the second International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, which was scheduled to take place in
Nairobi in November last year, and hopes that such a
conference will be convened in the near future.

During the 2005 world summit, our leaders took
important decisions, which provided an impressive
agenda for the reform and strengthening of our
Organization so as to enable it to meet the challenges
that we face today. The Summit Outcome document
mandated the General Assembly to finalize and
continue to deliberate on issues, including the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
was operationalized by the General Assembly and the
Security Council through resolution 60/180 and
resolution 1645 (2005), respectively. We commend
your delegation, Madam President, and that of
Denmark, for the effective leadership during the
difficult negotiations. We look forward to the
contribution of the Peacebuilding Commission to the
achievement of durable peace and sustainable
development in the Great Lakes region.

The international community should therefore be
encouraged to continue to support the people of Africa
in their quest for sustainable peace and development.
In this context, we welcome the Secretary-General's
proposal to support the 10-year capacity-building plan
for the African Union, as outlined in his report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, contained in
document A/60/640.

Finally, my delegation supports the draft
resolution on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region, and calls for its adoption by the
Security Council.

