Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, and Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul, for
organizing this public meeting on this important
subject despite the heavy calendar of the Security
Council this month.

This debate once again affords us an opportunity
to deliberate on the situation in East Timor in the
presence of the country's Senior Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and
the head of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, who are together in this Chamber.
High tributes are owed to both. The participation of
Prime Minister John Howard this morning was
encouraging, Australia having been such a key player.

The Secretary-General's current report underlines
progress in a number of important areas regarding the
situation in East Timor. While awaiting his report on
UNTAET's successor mission, I should emphasize a
few critical elements on the journey ahead.

First, East Timor is on course to becoming a
major success story of the United Nations. But that can
be assured only if the United Nations exit is premised
on a sound strategy and not only on political
expediency or financial considerations. I would only
emphasize that the Security Council underscored the
need for a gradual and orderly exit from East Timor
beyond independence when adopting presidential
statement PRST/2001/32 at its 4403rd meeting last
October, during which Ambassador Mahbubani also
made reference to the Secretary-General's report.

Secondly, we recognize the constructive role of
Indonesia in ensuring the stability and vitality of the
Timorese State and its people. We were heartened by
last week's meeting in Kupang, Indonesia, between the
East Timorese Government and its West Timorese
counterpart to address reconciliation and the return of
refugees to East Timor. The Indonesian Supreme
Court's recent verdict, we hope, will add to a positive
spirit in next month's high-level talks in Denpasar to
address the outstanding bilateral issues
comprehensively.

An early resolution of those issues will have a
significant effect on the containment of an illegal
economy along the border and on the return of refugees
to East Timor. For a nascent Government like that of
East Timor, the draining of precious foreign currency
through smuggling can indeed prove destabilizing, as it
introduces many other vices into society. Similarly, the
return of the remaining 60,000 to 75,000 refugees to
East Timor before independence will also remain a
critical benchmark. An early conclusion of the
Memorandum of Understanding between East Timor
and Indonesia in that regard, we believe, would also
deepen the relations between the two countries.

Thirdly, continued financial support to East
Timor will remain critical in the foreseeable future.
The rationale and pitfalls in that respect are well
articulated in the report, especially in paragraphs 75
and 84. The Timorese Government should be assured
of adequate assistance. As has been stated this
morning, there is a need for early funding in a number
of areas, particularly for making operational the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation,
accomplishing tasks related to the prosecution of
serious crimes. However, the essential point remains
that, for an independent East Timor to be viable and
vibrant, UNTAET's successor mission should be
funded through assessed contributions.
Finally, Bangladesh supports the extension of
UNTAET's mandate and other observations and
recommendations that the Secretary-General has made
in his report. Just like the others present here,
Bangladesh is looking forward to the ceremonies in
May in East Timor. That occasion will be a celebration
of hope, in which Bangladesh will be privileged to
participate at a high level, in keeping with our
involvement in East Timorese reconstruction.

