Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to begin by expressing my
condolences to the families of the Palestinians who
were killed in the Gaza Strip and wishing a speedy
recovery to the wounded. We mourn together with the
Palestinian people.

We are grateful to Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his substantive briefing.

Moscow is deeply concerned about the escalation
of tension in the occupied Palestinian territories, which
reached a dangerous level against the background of
the ceremony marking the beginning of the transfer
of the American Embassy from Tel Aviv, which
coincided with Palestinians' commemoration of their
day of catastrophe or Nakba. The number of victims is
seriously worrying and we share the feelings expressed
by our Security Council colleagues about it.

Security Council resolutions state unambiguously
that all issues related to a definitive settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian situation can be resolved only
through a direct dialogue between the leadership of
Israel and Palestine. We believe that this also applies
to Jerusalem, a city that should remain open to all
representatives of the three monotheistic religions.
Unilateral actions revising agreements affirmed
decisions of the international community have become
alarmingly frequent. It is obvious to us that they cannot
contribute to achieving a just and lasting peace or,
where a settlement in the Middle East is concerned,
to realizing the national aspirations of the Palestinians
and ensuring Israel's security. Unfortunately, those
who undertake such actions are not only demonstrating
that they are unwilling to see reason and stop, they are
actively trying to provoke yet more States, increasing
the risk of involving them in the destructive conflict in
the Middle East.

We reaffirm the right to peaceful protest and
firmly condemn the indiscriminate use of force
against civilians. We urge the parties to refrain from
steps that could make the situation worse. The current
events have once again shown that in the continuing
political vacuum of the past four years or so, the calls
for violent solutions and the revision of previously
reached agreements are reverberating with an ever-
more destructive resonance. They are exacting a real
price, expressed in human lives, tears, ruined lives
and dashed hopes. However, that does not stop the
irresponsible politicians. The result is a Vicious cycle of
Violence that begets Violence.

In these explosive circumstances, we see the
urgency of mobilizing the efforts of the international
community to relaunch the political process between
Palestinians and Israelis on the international legal basis
that we are all familiar with, including the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the principles
of the Arab Peace Initiative, which should enable the
establishment of a two-State formula and the creation
of an independent and a sovereign Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital. For our part, we will
continue to consistently work to promote an Israeli-
Palestinian settlement based on a two-State format
approved by the international community. Russia has
proposed its services as a mediator several times and
has offered to host a summit between the leaders of
Palestine and Israel in order to start a direct dialogue.
The offer still stands.

As recent events have shown, a vacuum in
constructive international efforts is extremely
dangerous. In particular, we think it is the right time
to reactivate the engagement of the Middle East
Quartet of international mediators, which, whatever
anyone may say, remains a unique universal mediation
format supported by Security Council resolutions. We
welcome and support the inclusion in a Middle East
settlement of constructively minded regional players,
especially Egypt.

We underscore the importance of the work being
done by the United Nations and its specialized agencies
in the occupied Palestinian territories and refugee
camps. The support provided to hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
continues to be indispensable.

To sum up, we would like to note the following.
Despite some international actors' ambitious plans
and grandiose projects, neither the world generally nor
the Middle East in particular has become any safer in
recent years. There have been many unilateral actions
that have flown in the face of international law and have
only worsened the trends towards destabilization. The
current situation in the Palestinian territories is a clear
example of the fact that the situation is going in the
wrong direction. In the past few days, unfortunately,
our feeling that those who are taking these steps have no
intention of changing their direction has strengthened.

