Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I congratulate Russia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
deeply admire and thank Poland for the manner in
which it conducted business as president of the Council
in May.

It is highly regrettable that the Council was unable
to find unity around a meaningful decision in response
to the situation in and around Gaza over the past few
months. Sweden voted in favour of the draft resolution
presented by Kuwait (S/2018/516) for a number
of reasons.

First, it calls for full respect by all parties of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including with regard to the protection
of the civilian population. The draft resolution requests
that the Security-General recommend a mechanism for
that purpose.

Secondly, the text condemns all acts of violence,
including acts of terrorism. It deplores both excessive
disproportionate and indiscriminate force by Israeli
forces against civilians in Palestine and the firing of
rockets from Gaza into civilian areas in Israel.

Thirdly, it calls for immediate steps to end the
closure of Gaza. While fully understanding the
legitimate security concerns of Israel, Palestine and
Egypt, we have repeatedly called for the lifting of
restrictions and full and sustained access for all donors.

Fourthly, the text welcomes and urges further
engagement by the Secretary-General and the Special
Coordinator to assist in immediate efforts to de-escalate
the situation on the ground. We urge all parties to act
with utmost restraint to avoid the loss of life, break the
cycle of violence and prevent a new conflict.

I would like to pay tribute to the Kuwaiti delegation
for facilitating the draft resolution. We all know that
the matter is sensitive, but our Kuwaiti colleagues have
displayed good faith, inclusiveness, flexibility and
transparency during the negotiations process.

With regard to the draft resolution proposed by the
United States, we believe that the language does not
address the full reality or context of the situation in Gaza,
including the violence and tragic loss of life we have
witnessed since last March. In addition, the proposal
does not contain important language on international
humanitarian law and humanitarian access, which are
of fundamental importance to the people on the ground.
The draft resolution does not address the end result of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for which the Council
has been striving for many years - a negotiated two-
State solution based on international law, previous
agreements, relevant United Nations resolutions and
known parameters. Furthermore, the draft resolution
was not presented for negotiations or consultations
among the members of the Council, in accordance
with established procedure. For those reasons, while
sympathetic to many aspects of the draft, we abstained
in the voting on the text.

While the Council could not agree today, we must
not abdicate our responsibility under the Charter. On
Wednesday, the Special Coordinator clearly warned
us of how close to the brink of war we currently are
and of the pressing humanitarian situation in Gaza (see S/PV.8272). The Council must come together to address
the crisis and the tension. Otherwise, we risk sliding
into another devastating conflict like we did four years
ago. This is indeed about conflict prevention.

The Special Coordinator presented a plan last
week that included the urgent implementation of
already approved projects for Gaza, which would have
immediate benefits for the daily lives of people, revive
efforts to empower the Palestinian Authority to take
up its responsibilities in Gaza, and sustain the 2014
ceasefire understandings on the ground, including
halting the militant build-up.

Sweden stands ready to contribute to efforts in the
Security Council to take such measures forward with
renewed urgency and determination.

