Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I thank the Council for the
opportunity to address it today on behalf of the Federal
Government of Somalia.

I acknowledge the statements provided to the Security
Council by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mr. Nicholas Kay and Ambassador Sidikou of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The Federal Government remains appreciative of the
support for political progress and stability provided by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
as well as the support provided by AMISOM, which is
a backbone for Somalia at the moment.

There can be no escaping the fact that Somalia has
had an eventful few months across the spectrum in terms
of politics, security and development. Commentary
on Somalia has focused on political instability and
disunity for the past few months. We are hopeful that
the political situation is fast approaching resolution.
The new Council of Ministers was announced by Prime
Minister Sharmake on 27 January. It will be presented
to Parliament for a vote on Monday, 9 February.

While there can be no denying that the political
instability has tested the patience of all domestically
and internationally, it would be wrong to presume that
this has completely stifled all progress. It has made
progress more difficult, but not impossible. In fact,
while political stability and unity is, of course, optimal,
it is the lack of capacity of the federal institutions that is
the more pressing issue faced by Somalia. Somalia is not
alone in facing political instability, but other countries
weather political storms because they have robust
institutions in place that continue with the business of
the Government, despite politicians. Somalia does not
have this luxury. If our political situation is exposed,
then our institutions are also exposed. The President
and Prime Minister have called attention to this and
encouraged the new Council of Ministers to exercise
restraint in replacing civil servants within ministries,
instead advocating that senior civil servants, if they
have been performing, remain in their positions so that
the Government work continues apace.

Despite the situation, progress has been made. The
legal framework required for the implementation of
Vision 2016 advanced; the Independent Constitutional
Review and Implementation Commission law was
passed by the Council of Ministers and endorsed by
the Parliament; and the Executive Commission was
appointed by the Speaker. The Parliament passed the
Boundaries and Federation Commission law and the
decree for its establishment was signed by the President
on 31 December 2014. It is the intent that several other
outstanding pieces oflegislation, including the National
Independent Electoral Commission law, the Human
Rights Commission and the Political Parties Law, will
be approved by the Parliament in this sitting.

The process of federation continues with improved
cooperation with Puntland and the Interim Juba
Administration and the agreements reached for the
establishment of the south-west and central interim
regional administrations. Technical committees are in
the early stages of establishment and discussions are
ongoing for the establishment of an interim regional
administration covering the remaining southern and
central regions of Somalia.

District-level administrations are being established.
Following the Local Governance law, interim and
permanent administrations are being established in
several districts and caretaker administrations have
been put in place in all recovered districts. Gains made
are fragile and will need consolidation to become
sustainable. The formalization of the Government
system must now extend outward to regional-level
governments. This process must be overseen by the
centre, but be responsive to local demand and mindful
of local contexts. Time must be allowed for change to
take root and due process to be followed by all agents
of change.

Accompanying these political and governance
processes, reconciliation activities are taking place,
ranging from social to civic dialogues and political
reconciliation activities at the district and national
levels. Reconciliation conferences have been initiated
in Kismaayo and Baidoa, and there is a commitment
to holding one such conference in each newly formed
interim regional administration. The political progress
in reaching out to the regions is commendable. Making
progress on the Somali Compact objectives hinges on
the resolution of political challenges, with ongoing
close and regular monitoring required. It was agreed
at the High-level Partnership Forum in Copenhagen
that the political progress would be reviewed within six
months.

Somalia signed the Convention for the Rights of the
Child in January, making the United States and South
Sudan the only remaining countries in the world not to
have signed. The Federal Government will now work
on drafting and adopting child-friendly policies and
systems, and implementing measures to target child
survival, development, participation and protection,

and provide regular reports on its progress to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child.

Security remains critical for political, social and
economic progress. Establishing capable, accountable
and inclusive Somali security institutions remains Vital.
The integration ofexisting security forces into a cohesive
structure is a priority that goes hand in hand with the
progress on political inclusiveness. The integration of
local armed groups into the Somali National Army
and the federal and regional security structures is a
critical part of the political benchmark and constitutes
a cornerstone of a mutual accountability framework
between the federal Government and the states. There
has been progress on the Federal Government's road
map on the integration of forces and an agreement to
rapidly develop a concept note and detailed plan setting
out integration principles.

The Somali National Army, in joint operations with
the African Union Mission in Somalia, has successfully
accomplished two joint offensive operations, recovering
80 per cent of southern and central regions of Somalia
from Al-Shabaab. The Government's policy of offering
amnesty for defections from Al-Shabaab extremist
groups was highly effective, with a steady stream of foot
soldiers defecting. Several high-value defections were
also recorded - the senior Al-Shabaab commander,
Sheikh Mohamed Said Mohamed, "Atom"; Zakariya
Ismail Ahmed Hersi; and the commander Hussein
Dhubi. We acknowledge the cooperation ofthe Security
Council in delisting those individuals from the United
Nations Sanctions List.

Progress has been made in meeting the requirements
of the resolution 2142 (2014). Weapons and ammunition
management has progressed with the establishment of
a defined institutional framework for oversight. The
Somali Federal Government also signed a maritime
interdiction letter in compliance with the Security
Council's most recent resolution on the matter.

We acknowledge the constituting of the new United
Nations Monitoring Group and we look forward to
establishing a respectful, robust professional working
relationship with it. To that end, we remind the Council
of our joint commitment to convening twice-yearly
meetings to discuss the progress made in Somalia
within the framework of the Committee's guidelines
for the conduct of its work, with the goal of improving
the effectiveness of our Government's engagement with
the Monitoring Group, the Security Council and the
Sanctions Committee. The last such meeting was held
in August 2014 in Mogadishu. We therefore urge the
Council to consider convening a meeting in Mogadishu
soon.

The President has been clear that 2015 must be the
year for delivery. Somalia is at a critical juncture in its
efforts to achieve security and stability. We are winning
the war but must win the peace. As we look towards to
the next two years, we must urgently deliver on priority
legislation, establish commissions and ensure the
public consultations that will enable us to achieve the
three intertwined strands of the Vision 2016.

The Federal Government of Somalia appreciates
the Council's consideration of the matters raised today.
I am available for any questions the Council may have.

