Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Peacekeeping is a vital
instrument of the United Nations in containing conflict
and helping countries emerging from crisis to pave
the way to long-term stability and sustainability
development. The complex and changing problems
that peacekeeping faces requires concerted action by
all stakeholders. We reiterate the critical importance of
regional organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding,
recovery, reconstruction and development, and the value
of better interaction between regional organizations
and various United Nations agencies.

Beginning in 1993, the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) played a crucial role
in contributing to peace and stability in my country
by providing humanitarian response and mediation
strategies. Unfortunately, the Mission came to an end in
June 2009. Regrettably, that action created a dangerous
precedent in United Nations history. The forcible
termination of the UNNOMIG mandate, preceded by the
end of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) mission, created a total vacuum of
an international presence in the occupied regions of
Georgia and turned them into black holes and "one of
the most inaccessible places on Earth", as observed by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Today, the
European Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM) is the
only international mechanism maintaining security and
stability on the ground.

Despite the repeated efforts of Georgia and the
European Union (EU), the EUMM. continues to be
denied access to the occupied regions and is thus unable
to fully exercise its mandate throughout the territory of
Georgia. Nonetheless, we deem the Monitoring Mission
to be an essential guarantor of Georgia's security,
with a key role to play in averting a deterioration of
the situation on the ground. It also serves as a primary
source of first-hand, unbiased information on the
ongoing developments. The role of the EUMM. is
increasing in View of the continuing process of the
installation of barbed-wire fences and other artificial
obstacles along the occupation line and other alarming
developments. Therefore, it is of crucial importance to
preserve and extend the Mission in future, as well as
to ensure its access to occupied territories of Georgia.

While a recipient of international support,
Georgia also has extensive experience as a contributor
to international security and stability. Georgia
remains committed to assuming an active part in the
strengthening of international security in the region
and worldwide through its contribution to peacekeeping
operations. Georgia continues to further develop and
upgrade its armed forces to ensure their full-fledged
and more effective participation in peacekeeping and
assistance missions, including those led by the United
Nations.

Our active participation in international peacekeeping
operations in the Balkans, Iraq and Afghanistan dates
back to 1999. In 2005 and 2007, a Georgian battalion
was included in the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, where almost 600 Georgian soldiers defended
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad. Today,
Georgia is the largest non-NATO and per capita troop
contributor to the International Security Assistance
Force in Afghanistan. We are maintaining 1,600 strong
personnel and remain committed to Afghanistan's post-
2014 peaceful development.

We believe that partnerships are increasingly
important in peacekeeping. With that in mind, a
framework agreement on Georgia's involvement in
crisis-management operations under the EU's Common
Security and Defence Policy was concluded in Vilnius
in November 2013. The agreement was put to good use
only a few months after its signing; by contributing
one light infantry company, Georgia has become the
second largest contributor to the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in the Central African Republic.
Georgia has also applied and secured positions in
another EU-led military operation in Africa. Following
the force generation conference on the EU Training
Mission in Mali, two posts on a rotational basis with
Montenegro and Portugal were attributed to Georgia.

Georgia continues to explore other opportunities
to participate in other missions, such as the European
Union Mission on Regional Maritime Capacity-
Building in the Horn of Africa. We hope that our efforts
will be particularly beneficial to the EU-led operations
and mission. At this stage, Georgia continues to look
for ways to enhance its support to United Nations
peacekeeping. Consultations are under way to identify
relevant fields of Georgia's involvement in other United
Nations operations.

Current developments in our region, including the
tragic events in Ukraine, illustrate the importance of
enhanced regional cooperation and mutual endeavours
in ensuring security and preventing the escalation of
tensions. In that context, we welcome the deployment
of the OSCE special monitoring mission and the EU
advisory mission for civilian security sector reform
in Ukraine. We call for greater cooperation with the
United Nations and regional organizations to ensure
sustainable peace, justice, respect for human rights and
development. We believe that regular consultations and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations are indispensable in View of common
development strategies.

