Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's important meeting at
a time when several developments and challenges are
increasing in our region. It is an opportunity to hear
the various views on the most complex and sensitive
issues with regard to the Middle East. Furthermore,
we thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
valuable briefing.
Today more than ever, we see just how important it
is for the international community to play a greater role
in ensuring the implementation of its resolutions aimed
at achieving peace and security in the Middle East
and create conditions conducive to providing every
opportunity for the success of the political solutions.
That includes protection of the people affected, an
end to interference in the internal affairs of countries,
and assistance to countries in safeguarding their own
sovereignty, security and independence. In that regard,
we deplore the situation in Gaza and the escalation in
the recent protests, which have claimed many victims.

The Kingdom ofBahrain reiterates its firm position
in support of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. It underscores that a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the region will be achieved only
through a two-State solution, Israel's full withdrawal
from all Arab territories that were occupied on 4 June
1967, the return of all Palestinian refugees to the lands
from which they were expelled, and the creation of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. This should be based on the
relevant international legitimacy resolutions, terms of
reference related to the Arab peace process and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

We emphasize that East Jerusalem is part and parcel
of the territories occupied in 1967 and that it is among
those issues related to the final status. It can be resolved
only through negotiations between Palestinians and
Israelis, based on international law and the two-State
solution. We demand that Israel stops taking unilateral
actions to change the status of Jerusalem because they
are contrary to international resolutions and hamper the
efforts to achieve peace and stability in the region.

The Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to playing
its full role in the Arab coalition to support legitimacy
in Yemen and allow the legitimate Yemeni Government,
led by President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi, to perform
all its duties, namely establishing security and confront
the coup militias that threaten security and stability,
sow sectarian strife and spread terrorism. Furthermore,
we support a peaceful solution based on terms of
reference agreed upon, such as the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism,
in addition to the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and resolution 2216 (2015). We note the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations, through the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths.
The Kingdom of Bahrain condemns the fact that
Iran-backed coup militias in Yemen continue to launch
ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia, a brotherly
country. We stand by Saudi Arabia and completely
support its measures to defend its territories and
safeguard its security and stability.

The suffering of the Syrian people continues
to worsen day after day, despite all efforts to find a
comprehensive, consensus-based political solution.
The international community must take speedy action
to find a solution that is acceptable to the Syrian
people, based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). This would preserve
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and
prevent interference in its internal affairs, as well as
ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
Syrian people and restore security and stability in order
to rise again with the participation of its entire people.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain will pursue
its actions and efforts, together with the international
community, to resolve conflicts using peaceful means
and to achieve security and stability in the region and
throughout the world.

