The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation to the representative of Guinea-Bissau to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. dos Santos
Jalo' (Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Gambia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Grey-
Johnson (Gambia) took the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. David Stephen, Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Stephen to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Dumisani
Kumalo, Chairman of the Economic and Social Council
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kumalo to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in that country
(5/2003/621).

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. David Stephen, Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, and
Mr. Dumisani Kumalo, Chairman of the Economic and
Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-
Bissau.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. David Stephen,
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.


