Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): I wish to thank Canada and especially you, Sir,
and the Permanent Representative of Canada for your
very welcome initiative of convening the Security Council
and inviting the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Director General of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

 

Children and Armed Conflict to express their views on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

At the outset, I wish to pay a very special tribute to
the work of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
which it carries out with the greatest discretion. In an era
when every gesture is broadcast by the media, I think we
need to be aware of and grateful to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for the way it works in silence
and with such effectiveness. It performs this work with the
greatest sense of human respect and dignity and strives
daily and tirelessly to alleviate the sufferings of peoples,
regardless of their origin, race, religion, gender or status.

In this fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions,
I therefore believe that it is time to pay tribute to President
Sommaruga and the unflagging work of the International
Committee of the Red Cross under his leadership to ensure
respect for the human condition. Tribute also must be paid
to the thousands of volunteers who often work at risk of
their lives and who reflect honour on the founder of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Henri Dunant,
the first recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize.

This struggle is more necessary today than ever before
in order to ensure respect for the fundamental and very
simply rules of international humanitarian law, according to
which defenceless persons must not be attacked. In the light
of the debate we held last month, however, and particularly
in the light of the statement made by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, we must focus today on the means of action
available to us. Everyone has mentioned here that conflicts
are in fact no longer confined to struggles between clearly
identified national interests or to clashes between States
that, for the most part, are adherents to treaties and
conventions. That ensures a certain reciprocity and
occasionally allows those international instruments to be
observed.

We are today witnessing a proliferation of parties to
conflicts, many of which are not State actors. This leads to
a situation that is much more complex and gives us cause
to think about what instruments can be implemented in
order to deal with this new state of war and to ensure
respect for humanitarian law in accordance with common
article 1 of the Geneva Conventions.

Many of the preceding speakers have already indicated
quite concretely and precisely what the priorities are. For
our part, we would emphasize five elements. The first is
preventive in nature and involves the dissemination of the
fundamental norms of humanitarian law, which is one of
the obligations contained in the Geneva Conventions. As
we know, the International Committee of the Red Cross
is involved in this work, but we must actively support the
work of disseminating and making common knowledge of
the norms of humanitarian law. This entails education
about human rights and respect, in both wartime and
peacetime, for the fundamental principles relative to the
human person, such as the right to life and the
prohibitions against torture, the deportation of
populations, disappearances and illegal detentions. These
are inalienable principles that, in accordance with human
rights conventions, cannot be suspended for reasons of
security or law enforcement and whose violation
constitutes a war crime. Missions of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights can contribute to
strengthening this prevention on the ground and to
supporting the establishment of national judicial systems
and legislation that will make it possible to deal with
violations of humanitarian law.

At a time when almost everyone has access to the
most sophisticated means of information and
communication, it is important to make good use of those
means. This goes along with the comments made by
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who the other day denounced
the use of the media as a tool of mass conflict. In this
connection, I also support Mr. Otunnu's project with the
United Nations Children's Fund to prepare radio
programmes to make it possible to sensitize children, and
of course adults as well, regarding respect for the rights
of children.

Finally, just a word to say how very right
Mr. Sommaruga and Mr. Otunnu are in warning against
attempts to demonize. Some might be tempted to
demonize a given leader, but we sometimes see,
subsequent to such attempts, that the country of that
leader is also demonized. That can lead to a spiral of
threats and sometimes even violence.

The second obligation that concerns us has to do
with weapons, in particular with small-calibre arms and
light weapons. While a number of conventions have been
drawn up in the course of the last century to ban certain
categories of weapons - especially weapons of mass
destruction and anti-personnel mines - light weapons
and small-calibre arms continue to cause more and more
harm by virtue of their accessibility, even to children. The
Security Council must therefore see to it that arms
embargoes are implemented. In this respect, we should
recall resolution 1209 (1998), which was adopted by the

 

Security Council last November, on illicit arms movements
to Africa and within Africa.

The European Union adopted a joint action last month
in order to combat the accumulation and the destabilizing
spread of small-calibre weapons and to help reduce existing
stockpiles. We consider it necessary to strengthen
international cooperation in this respect, in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter. Our objective in this field
should be to achieve the same success as that which was
achieved in the extremely rapid adoption of the Ottawa
Convention. We cannot fail to thank Canada and the
International Committee of the Red Cross once again for
the tireless energy they applied to that work, which resulted
in success, and to congratulate them. The report that is to
be published by the International Committee of the Red
Cross next month on the problem of the spread of small-
calibre arms and light weapons should be an opportunity for
further consideration of this fundamental problem.

The third instrument is that of sanctions. This
instrument is available to the Security Council, and it
should be used. But it must be used appropriately to target
those responsible and not to increase the suffering of
populations, especially those who are most vulnerable. In
this respect, we endorse the conclusions of the Council
regarding the recommendations of the various chairmen of
the sanctions committees. This reflection must be continued
while bearing in mind the contributions made by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in order to
limit collateral damage to the civilian population as much
as possible and to take its needs into account.

The fourth direction in which we must work is the
fight against impunity. Wherever necessary we must
conduct investigations and see to it that they are given the
necessary follow-up. Major progress has recently been
made. This can be seen, inter alia, in the establishment of
international tribunals. Let us simply recall that the Council
will have an important role to play with regard to the
International Criminal Court once it is in operation.

The last element concerns the authorization by the
Council of resort to armed force. This may be indispensable
to ensure the security of populations and humanitarian
action. In some cases it is armed force alone that can make
it possible to create a humanitarian space, corridors of
access and protection for the delivery of aid. That objective
must be borne in mind, even though relatively recent
examples in history have unfortunately shown that the
efforts of certain countries - including Canada - have not
been successful and have had very regrettable
consequences. Of course, with regard to this question of
resort to armed force, it will be necessary for us to
establish very clear mandates so that tasks will not be
confused and the neutral and impartial nature of
humanitarian aid will not be undermined. The
International Committee of the Red Cross is quite rightly
devoted to that principle, but we should perhaps more
often envisage the cooperation that can be provided by
peacekeeping forces to alleviate the needs of populations
- for example, by introducing a demining or
disarmament component in the mandate of these forces or
by adding some specifications and provisions for the
demobilization of children.
I will dedicate my final words to the issue of
children and to pay tribute both to the comments made by
Ms. Bellamy in her very strong statement and to the work
of UNICEF, as well as to the forceful, very efficient,
rapid and precise work accomplished by Mr. Otunnu.

The enlistment of children in a war dooms a
country's future for generations. It means there will be no
more education, and only learning how to kill one's
neighbour and engender a cycle of violence. The Geneva
Conventions and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child guarantee the protection due children under the age
of 15. It is without doubt imperative for that age to be
raised to 18. We support the efforts made by Ms. Bellamy
and Mr. Otunnu in this direction.

But the primary responsibility in this field resides, in
the last analysis, with States. Thus, my country has begun
the necessary internal procedures for ratification of
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions, and France hopes
to be able to adhere to it this year.

The important thing, in conclusion, is that we always
act pragmatically. In each and every one of the situations
before the Council, we must hear the views of the
humanitarian agencies on the consequences for civilian
populations. These elements must also be taken into
consideration in the peace processes, as can currently be
seen in the contribution made by International Committee
of the Red Cross to the negotiations in Rambouillet this
very day.

Mr. Otunnu's initiative aimed at including the
demobilization and reintegration of children within the
Arusha peace process is an excellent, concrete example
that we should bear in mind in the action we take under
your leadership, Mr. President.

 

