Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is
a pleasure to see you presiding over the work of the
Security Council this month, Madam President,
and we would like to thank you for organizing this
ministerial-level open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing, taking stock of the current
situation and highlighting the challenges facing the
international community with regard to the protection of
civilians. I would also like to thank Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Ms. Edwar for their informative
briefings. The regularity with which the Security
Council addresses this important topic is unfortunately
quite justified given the turbulence in the international
arena, which compels us all to work to promote and
respect the principles of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Morocco
reiterates its condemnation of all acts of aggression or
intimidation against civilians. I would also like to make
the following comments.

First, we reiterate that the protection of civilians
is primarily the responsibility of States. However, we
are compelled to conclude that in times of conflict,
some States' ability to execute that task is inadequate
or non-existent. In those cases, the international
community has the responsibility to support them by
strengthening their capacities and providing them with
the means to live up to their obligations.

While the protection of civilians is often at the heart
of the mandates of multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, it is one of the most difficult aspects to
implement, given the scale of the task. The fact is
that peacekeeping operations are often deployed in
unstable areas, making it difficult to carry out their
mandates. The protection of civilians therefore requires
adequate financial and human resources in terms of
Blue Helmets' numbers, equipment and training. The
expectations of the various parties involved - the
local populations, the host country authorities and the
Security Council - also have to be managed. And the
protection of civilians is not just about mere physical
protection. All of the components of a mission that
is mandated to protect civilians have a part to play,
which is why it is important to clearly delineate each of
their responsibilities.

Secondly, humanitarian assistance within the
framework of the protection of civilians should be
clearly separate from political aims and shielded from
any kind of exploitation by any of the parties to a conflict,
in order to improve the protection of humanitarian
personnel and ensure efficient transportation of
humanitarian aid. Missions should deploy appropriate
protection measures to prevent civilians from becoming
targets. It is the States' task to fulfil their obligation to
combat impunity and prosecute all those responsible
for the commission of genocide, war crimes or crimes
against humanity.

Thirdly, the protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel in conflict situations means
respecting the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, as well as all
relevant international instruments on the protection of
the wounded and sick, and of humanitarian and medical
personnel, when engaged in exclusively medical-related
work. In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/462), issued in accordance
with resolution 2286 (2016). This kind of protection
requires a comprehensive, multifaceted approach on the
judicial, humanitarian and security fronts and a clear
allocation of mandate responsibilities for humanitarian
and medical personnel, when engaged in exclusively
medical activity and operating in complex situations,
in close coordination with one another.

Lastly, we believe that it is important to focus on
a preventive approach to protecting civilians. That can
be developed by strengthening the capacities of the
countries concerned, promoting the rule of law, ensuring
good governance, entrenching a culture of human rights
and establishing early-warning mechanisms to identify
potential conflicts and ensure that they do not turn into
overt conflicts.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco shares the
Secretary-General's firm belief that the protection of
civilians requires the implementation of the provisions
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to all those who work to protect civilians
in conflict situations.

