Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I offer very many
thanks to colleagues for their warm welcome, as this
is the first time I take the floor as the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom. It is an
enormous honour to represent the United Kingdom. It
is very nice for me personally to be back in New York.
I see many good friends in the Chamber, including
Ambassador Mansour.

Today's debate is an important one, and I will save
the bulk of my remarks for the consultations room, but I
just want to make the point that improving the situation
on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territories
remains vital, particularly in Gaza. We endorse what
the Special Coordinator said about the implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and about
the legitimate Palestinian Authority. Of course, I
want to put on record our condemnation of the recent
attempted assassination of Prime Minister Hamdallah.
We take this opportunity once again to condemn all
acts of terror.

I also want to put on record that we are going to talk
about improving the situation on the ground, but that
will only take us so far. I agree with previous speakers
who said that a political horizon is needed so as to keep
the prospect of the two-State solution alive. We support
peace efforts being advanced by the United States. We
look forward to seeing a plan presented at the earliest
opportunity. We encourage re-engagement by all sides.

I also want to take the opportunity to follow my
colleague from Kuwait and say something about the
attack on Saudi Arabia by the Houthis this morning.
It is a sad day today because it is the third anniversary
of the conflict in Yemen, which is a conflict that has
gone on too long, but it is also true that missiles fired
into Saudi Arabia against civilians is dangerous and
provocative, and will do nothing to help the conflict
be resolved. It is against international law. We send
our condolences to the Saudi people. We want to see
the efforts of the United Nations on a Yemeni political
process succeed. As the United Kingdom, we will give
our every support to Martin Griffiths and the Secretary-
General to that end.

