The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. O'Brien, United Nations Legal Counsel, for her
statement.

Before giving the floor to other speakers, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes, in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are requested to circulate their texts
in writing and deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.

With the Council's permission, I will now make a
statement in my national capacity.

Strengthening the rule of law in the work of the
United Nations is a priority for Mexico. We thus
welcome the fact that, four years after the Council's
most recent open debate on this subject, which was
organized by the Danish presidency, today we can
come together to build on and discuss the progress
achieved and the challenges we still face.

The promotion and strengthening of the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace and
security represents two different, though closely
interrelated, notions. On the one hand, it entails the
idea of integrating international law to a greater degree
in the daily work of the Security Council. On the other,
it refers to the tools at the Council's disposal with
which it can enhance compliance with international
law in its various areas of competence. Both
components are essential for the Council to fulfil its
primary responsibilities.

Given today's ever-changing global challenges,
the Council has learned to respond effectively, using
the discretion it has under Article 39 of the Charter, in
expanding, on a case-by-case basis, the very concept of
a threat to peace. At the same time, however, it is very
important to recall that, according to Article 24,
paragraph 2, of the Charter, the Council is bound to
discharge its duties in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations. These include
essential components of the rule of law, such as respect
for the principles of justice and adherence to
international law and human rights.

Four years ago, it was stressed that many
controversies spring from disputes of a legal nature.
If - as has often happened - such disputes give rise
to situations that constitute a threat to or a breach of
the peace or an act of aggression, we can logically
suppose that both the determinations made by the
Council pursuant to Article 39 and the actions that it
decides to take should be grounded in and motivated
by international law. In the past four years, there have
certainly been important improvements in this regard,
as demonstrated by resolutions on, for example,
non-proliferation or the most recent one, on Iran.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done.
In this context, I would like to recall the words of
the then President of the International Court of Justice,
Judge Rosalyn Higgins. At a 2006 debate on this
subject, she reminded us that:

"International law is, of course, the law that
governs relations between States and between
States and international organizations. It is the
law of each and every one of us. In a world often
divided by politics, it is our common language."
(S/PV.5474, p. 5)

Now, in 2010, we can note with satisfaction the
progress that has been achieved with respect to
effective compliance with international law. Suffice it
to mention the series of Security Council resolutions
urging the parties to armed conflicts to comply with
international humanitarian law. There has also been
marked progress in the area of the protection of
vulnerable groups, such as women and children.
Indeed, the Council has become the collective
guarantor of international humanitarian law, as
provided for in the Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the
Protection of Victims of International Armed
Conflicts - Protocol I.

However, we recall that compliance with, and
enforcing compliance with, international law are
mutually reinforcing objectives. Those who promote
respect for the law must strengthen it with their own
actions. The primary responsibility conferred on the
Security Council carries broad powers designed to
guarantee its effectiveness, which is viable only to the
extent that the Council and its Member States conduct
themselves in accordance with those norms. That is not
only an ethical imperative, but also the most important
premise of the rule of law in its most fundamental
concept. It has been reflected in a series of concrete
measures, many of which have been articulated in
previous debates. One useful guideline in that respect
is, for example, the 2008 final report and
recommendations emerging from the Austrian initiative
on the Security Council and the rule of law.

The Security Council can play a key role in
promoting a fundamental principle of the Organization.
That is to achieve the settlement of disputes through
peaceful means and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law. That dual
responsibility - the obligation to settle disputes by
peaceful means and the power of the Council to

promote that outcome - should be exercised more
often in practice. In particular, in cases in which a
dispute has its origins in divergent interpretations of
the law, the Council can promote a legal solution by
investigating a dispute or a situation pursuant to
Article 34.

In recent years, we have been pleased to note a
tendency to have more frequent recourse to the
International Court of Justice, in particular through
special arrangements between parties, but its potential
has not been fully exploited and its advisory role could
be put to greater use. For many years, Mexico has
supported and advocated the idea that the General
Assembly should authorize the Secretary-General to
request advisory opinions on matters related to its
functions in order to also strengthen the role of the
Secretary-General, and thereby that of the
Organization. However, we should bear in mind the
fact that the Council also has the power to request
advisory opinions on any legal matter, which would
lead to strengthening international law in the its daily
work in cases where that is required.

A separate issue is the role that the Council
should play in the execution of a decision of the Court.
There have been situations of non-compliance with the
Court's rulings in the past, and these could continue to
arise. In cases of non-compliance, paragraph 2 of
Article 94 sets out the path to follow. However, we
know and experience shows that States have rarely
activated that mechanism. By contrast, we can
encourage the Secretary-General's good offices to
facilitate and ensure the implementation of a decision,
as has already happened in some cases. Mexico
reiterates its call on States that have not done so to
draw up declarations of acceptance of the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court, and on those that have lodged
reservations of a non-technical nature to consider
withdrawing them.

While we have much to do to ensure the entry
into force of the amendment that has just materialized
at the Kampala Review Conference of the Rome
Statute, which established the International Criminal
Court, we already have a definition of the crime of
aggression that allows us to fit the conduct being tried
with the principles of international law. More
important, the due relationship that should exist
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court has been preserved, with full respect
for the Charter.

We welcome the fact that the Kampala
Conference resolved the judicial mechanism that the
International Criminal Court must activate in those
cases in which the Council refrains from determining
the existence of an act of aggression. That will allow
the Court to exercise its jurisdiction and ensure that
such serious acts as that of aggression do not remain
unpunished.

Mediation is one of the most effective ways to
resolve conflicts peacefully that can be resorted to once
a conflict has started or in the post-conflict phase, with
great peacebuilding potential. I wish to recall the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/8) that the
Council adopted in 2009, during Mexico's first
presidency, which underscores the need to put
mediation processes in place from the earliest stages of
conflicts through the peacebuilding phase. Thus,
Mexico believes that an essential task of the Council in
establishing mandates for peacekeeping operations is
to contribute to strengthening the rule of law in
countries affected by conflicts or in the immediate
aftermath when they are emerging from them. My
delegation recognizes that the Council has increasingly
used that idea in its decisions.

Reviewing the developments that the Council has
seen since 2006 with regard to the rule of law, it is
clear to us that there has also been progress in the area
of sanctions. The sanctions regimes concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, in accordance with
resolution 1267 (1999), have seen fundamental
changes. Resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009) are
very important steps in that direction, and we therefore
welcome the recent appointment of the Ombudsperson,
which constitutes a change in the area of targeted
sanctions. However, we believe that the right to an
effective remedy is still pending. We are on the right
path, but we still need to strengthen the delicate
balance between effectiveness and legitimacy.

I conclude by recalling the brilliant jurist Hersch
Lauterpacht, who reminded us that the principal
function of international law is "the subjection of the
totality of international relations to the rule of law". By
promoting compliance with international law through
its actions and decisions and by functioning within the
framework of international law, the Security Council
helps to fulfil its primary responsibility.
