Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me say first of all
how pleased we are to see you, Mr. Minister, preside
over the Council's deliberations today on this very
important issue. Let me also thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for
his very useful briefing.

It has been more than four years now since the
landmark resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) was instituted to implement the
provisions of this resolution. Since then, UNMIK
personnel have been working relentlessly, sometimes in
difficult circumstances, to fulfil their obligations. It is
most unfortunate that UNMIK has been the subject of
criticism by the Kosovo Assembly recently. Resolution
1244 (1999) specifically mandated UNMIK to bring
peace and establish the rule of law in Kosovo.
Therefore, any arrests undertaken by UNMIK should
not be seen or construed as being politically motivated,
but as an essential part in the exercise of its duty,
within the authority given to it by the Council.

Mauritius fully supports UNMIK and is fully
confident that all the suspects arrested by UNMIK will
have the chance for fair and objective justice as soon as
possible. We call on the people of Kosovo to have full
trust in, and to collaborate with, UNMIK in bringing
peace and stability to the province for the benefit of all
Kosovars, without discrimination. We encourage the
Government of Kosovo to continue its close
collaboration with UNMIK and KFOR, especially in
the fight against organized crime and in solving other
cases of criminal acts. We also support UNMIK in its
effort to prevent any further escalation of last month's
incidents and to uphold the rule of law as mandated by
resolution 1244 (1999).

Municipal elections are due on 26 October, and
the widest participation of all Kosovars is important to
ensure a free, fair and democratic election. We call on
all Kosovars, especially the Serb minority community,
to participate fully in the process to ensure that they are
represented at all levels of decision-making in the
Government of Kosovo. It is also important for
political leaders to refrain during their election
campaigns from making statements in public that may
destabilize the situation in the province. My delegation
notes with satisfaction that preparations for the
elections are going well, and we welcome the
certification of Serb parties to participate in these
forthcoming elections.

It is equally important to ensure the full success
of these October elections. In this regard, we call on
the Belgrade authorities to use all their influence on the
Serb and other minority communities so that they may
participate in great numbers during the forthcoming
elections.

On the issue of refugees and internally displaced
persons, we welcome the various steps taken by
UNMIK to encourage their return. Though the return
process has been rather slow, we hope that in the
future, with the completion of the various projects
under way and the availability of more facilities, the
number of returnees will increase considerably.

As regards the economic situation of Kosovo, we
have taken note of the positive developments,
especially the plans for privatizations and so on, and
we encourage the donor community to continue its
contribution in order to boost Kosovo's economy.

Finally, I wish to express the appreciation of my
delegation to the head of UNMIK, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Steiner, and
his team for the good work which they are doing in
fulfilling their mandate under resolution 1244 (1999).

