Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by conveying Canada's
condolences to the families of the three staff members
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) who were slain on 6 September
at Atambua, West Timor. Their murders, and the deaths
of the as yet unknown number of refugees they were
working to assist, are profoundly disturbing to Canada.
They strengthen our resolve to see the state of terror in
which such refugees live brought to an end.

(spoke in English)

We are distressed at the situation in West Timor,
both for the people concerned and because of the
potential of that situation to further undermine the
process of reconstruction in East Timor. We very much
welcome the insights offered by Mr. Vieira de Mello on
this issue. One year has passed since the international
community undertook to end the suffering that criminal
militias visited on the East Timorese for simply
exercising their right to self-determination. But more
than 100,000 of the 250,000 who fled the violence or
who were forcibly removed still remain in refugee
camps in West Timor. They have yet to experience the
freedom from fear and freedom from harm that is their
right under international law. Until they can return
voluntarily and safely to East Timor or can resettle
elsewhere, there will be no closure on this issue. Nor,
indeed, will the relationship between East Timor and
Indonesia be placed on a proper and normal footing. I
have taken particular note of Mr. Vieira de Mello's
comment that the militias present

"a serious threat not only to East Timor, but also
to the integrity of Indonesia itself". (supra)

For those reasons, the disbanding of the militias
and the safety of the 100,000 refugees in West Timor
and of the international personnel assisting them must
be uppermost in the minds of the Government of
Indonesia, as it equally must be uppermost in our own
minds. It is important that the Government of Indonesia
work closely with the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and with the
UNHCR. This is particularly necessary at the planning
stage of any resettlement effort, to ensure that refugees
are not simply relocated to an equally hazardous region
or exposed to unreasonable hardship or danger along
the way.

It is appropriate at this time, and in the light of
recent events, to recall the commitment of the
Government of Indonesia to ensure the safety of
refugees and humanitarian workers. That commitment
has been freely entered into, and has been frequently
reiterated. We take note of the letter dated 25
September from the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2000/899). We acknowledge that the
Indonesian Government has inherited, as Mr. Vieira de
Mello has put it, a dreadful legacy. It is therefore
important that the Government succeed in securing
domestic support to carry out the action required.

And what is necessary to bring an end to militia
violence is immediate action. A priority task in that
regard is stopping cross-border incursions into East
Timor, which in the past few months have caused the
death and wounding of UNTAET personnel and of
members of the civilian population. Nothing less than
the complete disarmament and disbanding of the
militias and the arrest and prosecution of the
perpetrators of human rights and humanitarian law
violations will do. We note that the Indonesian
Government and army have begun a two-phase
operation aimed at disarming the criminal elements
responsible for the recent violence against refugees and
aid personnel. At the same time, the fact that no one is
even under arrest for the crimes committed at
Atambua, crimes that Mr. Vieira de Mello observes
were committed in the presence of 10 Indonesian
police officers, is unacceptable. Similarly, suggestions
by members of the Indonesian Government -
suggestions that do not appear to have been officially
contradicted - that the recent murders were somehow
committed by foreign agents or that the attacks were
somehow inevitable, caused by the refugees' presence
itself, are, frankly, very worrisome. For those reasons,
we emphasize the need for neutral international
monitoring of the disarmament process. That way we
can all verify whether the militias have been disarmed
and disbanded. We will also be able to testify that the
efforts of the Indonesian Government are indeed an
effective response to the request for action in Security
Council resolution 1319 (2000).

Indonesia has taken important steps in
investigating the violence that followed the referendum
in August 1999. That progress could be lost and
Indonesia's reputation could suffer if crime now goes
unpunished. We urge the Government of Indonesia to
take whatever steps are necessary to arrest and
prosecute those responsible for the recent attacks
against refugees and international workers.

Finally, we reiterate our call for the Government
of Indonesia to work with us on the visit to the region
by a delegation of the Security Council. The
Government of Indonesia and the Security Council
would both benefit from full and frank dialogue on the
best means to resolve the refugee issue and to begin in
earnest the process of reconstruction in East Timor.

