Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): I, too, would like to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
Jeremic', and the Foreign Minister of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni, to the Chamber and to thank them
for their statements. We also welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto
Zannier and thank him for his comments and his
tireless work.

Croatia welcomes the continued and steady
progress that Kosovo is making along its path of
creating a stable, secure and democratic society while
simultaneously strengthening both its economic and its
development capacities. Notwithstanding some minor
incidents, Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General's
assessment that the overall security situation in Kosovo
is stable.
Croatia would like to commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for - as stated by the Secretary-General -
the effective and useful role it plays in mediating
between communities and promoting practical
arrangements that can benefit both Pristina and
Belgrade. We believe that this fact in itself confirms
the indispensable role that UNMIK plays in Kosovo,
particularly on issues of external relations and
international legal assistance, and we would call on all
parties to continue to cooperate with Special
Representative Zannier and his team in an effective and
efficient manner.

Croatia welcomes the full deployment on 6 April
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, to which Croatia contributes, and would like
to take this opportunity to commend its leadership and
other contributing countries for their efforts.

Finally, we want to acknowledge the efforts made
on the question of the reconstruction of cultural
property and the issue of returns. Further progress in
this field remains a question of critical importance. We
look forward to common success in the development of
a vibrant, pluralistic and democratic society in Kosovo,
strengthened by its commitment to the values of peace,
tolerance, human and minority rights, dialogue and
cooperation.

