Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation in Libya remains extremely
unstable, despite all the efforts to reunify the country.
The Government of National Accord is still only
preparing to become a full-fledged executive body as
it awaits the approval of the legimate Parliament, as
provided for in the Skhirat Agreement. The terrorist
groups being pressed by the Libyan army and receiving
reinforcements from outside are not surrendering.
Criminal activity linked to the smuggling of people
from distressed regions across the Mediterranean is
flourishing. The socioeconomic and humanitarian
problems are getting worse.

In other words, the foreign military intervention
of 2011 has resulted in severe long-term consequences
that can be overcome only by patient collaborative
efforts to cooperate in developing a dialogue within
Libya conducted under United Nations auspices.
Staking everything on quick decisions favouring one or
other of the parties could exacerbate the conflicts even
further and reverse the positive beginnings that have
been made.

On 23 May, the eleventh report of the ICC
Prosecutor was released, but it contains no radically
new information. As in the past, we get the impression
that the Security Council is receiving a report not
from an organ that is responsible for investigating
and prosecuting criminal acts but from some sort of
monitoring mission. Furthermore, as the report does
not disclose the Prosecutor's response to the procedural
problems that have arisen, the question becomes what
the point ofa dialogue with the Security Council is.

We get the impression that the current situation with
regard to the ICC's consideration of the Libyan case is
akin to the situation in 2011. A few days following the
foreign military intervention, the Prosecutor began a
preliminary investigation into Mr. Al-Qadhafi. But they
did it so quickly that the evidence given was proved to
be unfounded.

For example the former Prosecutor spoke of mass
rape. But that was refuted by the United Nations own
commission on Libya and by many non-governmental
organizations. Many reliable sources doubted the
other acussations made by the ICC at the time - for
instance, with regard to the use of recruits to suppress
demonstrations prior to the foreign military intervention.
However, such refutals had no impact on the situation.
ICC legal support for the foreign military intervention
was implemented, and it seemed that the Court believed
that the mission had been accomplished.

Over the past five years, the ICC has not brought
a single new case, although it is very clear that the
Libyan authorities were not the only party that could
have committed acts that fall under the Rome Statute.
In particular, the ICC has commenced no procedure
to investigate information that has come to light on
alleged crimes by the rebels. The Prosecutor has not
considered the victims of NATO air strikes. And there
is also proof, which was submitted to the United Nations
commission investigating the Libyan situation, that
non-military targets were destroyed in the air strikes.
The Commission recommended that this proof be
studied because it had been shown that the information
provided by NATO was not reliable. Access to evidence
of the consequences of the NATO attacks was open.
Nevertheless the Prosecutor limited herself in 2013 to
stating that she was unable to find evidence of actions
that fall under the Rome Statute. However, the material
that she submitted to the Security Council does not
show why she came to such a conclusion.

Finally, this is not the first report of the ICC
Prosecutor to show the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is having an impact on the situation in Libya.
However, no real efforts has been made to investigate
these things. In addition, with regard to limited
resources and the attempts bring the Libyan situation
to the Security Council within a certain period of
time show that in 2011 the idea of bringing the ICC
investigation on Libya to the Security Council was put
forward by the Prosecutor without considering what
would be required to do that.

In conclusion, we would like to point out the
experience of the ICC on the Libyan situation cannot be
considered successful, neither in terms ofimplementing
justice and preventing new crimes, nor in terms of
supporting national reconciliation. It just enhances our
doubt as to whether any new matters should be referred
to the ICC.

