Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this public
meeting. We commend your initiative and leadership in
addressing the issue of Haiti in the Security Council.
We also thank Mr. Valdes for his observations. We
commend his excellent work as the Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

My delegation welcomes the presence at this
meeting of His Excellency Mr. Rene Preval, President-
elect of Haiti. We also welcome his important
contribution to our debate. Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate him on his election and to
wish him, on behalf of my Government, every success
in the future in his important work.

As the Permanent Representative of Austria will
make a statement on behalf of the European Union
shortly, and as Slovakia fully associates itself with that
statement, I will make only a few brief additional
comments.
We applaud the people of Haiti for their
continuing commitment to democracy, as reflected in
the record turnout in the first round of presidential and
parliamentary elections. At the same time, we would
like to underscore the importance of completing the
electoral cycle, including by holding local and
municipal elections in the same manner and spirit.

We agree with the Secretary-General's stressing
that the completion of the elections will be only the
first step in the political transition process. The newly
elected Government of Haiti will have to address many
formidable challenges to consolidate democratic
processes. Those challenges include weak State and
local institutions, insufficient administrative
infrastructure, deep poverty, violent gangs and a
flourishing trade in drugs and money-laundering.

Haiti will need further international support and
assistance to cope with those problems. In that regard,
my delegation expresses its full support for
MINUSTAH's continued role in Haiti to ensure
security, reinforce democracy and support the
implementation of civil-service, public-administration
and security-sector reform, as well as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes in the
country.

At the same time, we believe that only the people
of Haiti themselves can solve the problems of their
country. Haitian ownership and leadership in
rebuilding Haiti are indispensable for the success of the
country's transition. Inclusive national dialogue and
reconciliation are, in our view, the most important
priorities and imperatives for launching the long-term
process of transformation. We urge the political leaders
of Haiti to seize this important window of opportunity
and translate it into concrete actions.

Long-term development challenges lie ahead in
Haiti. There are also immediate humanitarian needs
that, if not urgently addressed, could well imperil the
frail stability in the country. They have to do with
improving the most basic social services, including
education and health care, as well as the deplorable
economic conditions of the vast majority of Haiti's
people. In that regard, special attention should be paid
to the grave situation of the thousands of street
children forced to fight in gangs or to become part of a
subculture of bonded servitude. Success in addressing
those urgent problems is contingent upon immediate
and durable donor support and upon close coordination
among all stakeholders.

The long-term part of Haiti's struggle for
stability, normalcy and development should be based
on democratic institution-building, good governance
and strengthening respect for human rights and the rule
of law. Democratic institutions are essential to ensuring
political stability and are basic foundations of
economic growth.

An atmosphere of calm and security must return
to the country. We agree with Mr. Valdes that a
particular priority in that area is to strengthen Haiti's
judicial and law enforcement institutions. Effective
judicial reform in Haiti will be a long-term project. It
must start, first of all, with the training of a new
generation of judges and qualified personnel, and with
their speedy integration into the system. We are
encouraged by the commitment of the newly elected
President to a well-trained and depoliticized police
force. The reform of the national police, which at
present is dangerously understaffed and ill-equipped, is
imperative in efficiently fighting criminality, disarming
violent groups, restoring domestic law and order and
protecting the people of Haiti.

Last but not least, in our opinion, Haiti's
participation in regional cooperation and integration,
including building confidence with its neighbours, will
also be important in the process of successful
transition. In that context, we welcome the readiness of
the Caribbean Community to readmit Haiti into the
Community's councils.

Cooperation with the Dominican Republic to
implement measures to better manage security along
the border will be key to effectively combating
trafficking in arms and drugs in Haiti, as well as to
fighting organized crime in general. In this regard, we
welcome the positive signs in relations between Haiti
and the Dominican Republic, including reactivation of
the Haitian-Dominican mixed commission.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Slovakia is ready to share its experience from its own
successful transformation with the new Government of
Haiti and assist it in asserting its legitimacy and in
promoting good governance at all levels.

My delegation supports the adoption of the draft
presidential statement and commends the delegation of
Argentina for having elaborated it.

