Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
wish to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), for their comprehensive
briefings. We welcome the efforts of both Tribunals to
ensure due and full implementation of their mandates.

Significant progress has been registered in the
implementation of the completion strategies of the ICTY
and the ICTR during the reporting period. We note with
concern that, as in the previous reporting periods, the
difficulties in retaining qualified and experienced staff
remain an obstacle to the pace of the Tribunals' work. In
the past six months the Tribunals have continued, under
difficult circumstances, to work professionally towards
establishing accountability for the worst crimes.
They have also made valuable contributions to the
establishment of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.

We welcome the important measures implemented
by the Tribunals to ensure a smooth handover of judicial
functions to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. We take note of the referrals by the
Tribunals of some cases to national jurisdictions. That
approach serves not only to reduce the overall workload
of the Tribunals, but also to strengthen the capacity of
national judicial systems and the enforcement of the
rule oflaw at the national level.

The cooperation of States with the Tribunals is a
crucial pillar for the latter 's effective work and constitutes
an essential component of regional ownership. It is
therefore important that States remain committed to
living up to their obligations to the Tribunals.

We are pleased to note that all fugitives accused
by the ICTY have been arrested and transferred to the
Tribunal. However, since nine fugitives indicted by
the ICTR still remain at large, the continued extensive
cooperation of the relevant States is needed.

In conclusion, we wish to commend the Presidents,
the Prosecutors and the staff of the two Tribunals for
their work and for the steady implementation of their
mandates. The continued support of the Security
Council is needed, as the Tribunals are in the process
of undertaking the necessary steps to keep the trials on
track.

