Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, especially since you are from a friendly
country that makes a much-appreciated contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The best proof of that is that during your presidency
the Council has held important events, the most recent
of which was the open debate on a multidimensional
approach to peacekeeping operations (see S/PV.6903).
Pakistan is a country with extensive experience in
peacekeeping, as it has been one of the biggest troop-
contributing countries to United Nations peacekeeping
operations for many decades. I would also like to
express our appreciation to Mr. Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. We
thank him for his briefing to the Council.

The report before the Council on the situation
in Darfur (S/2013/22) clearly indicates that a state
of security and stability prevails in Darfur's five
provinces. We would like to highlight paragraph 2 of
the report, where it states that the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur is moving ahead on various
axes, following the Darfur Regional Authority's full
assumption of its responsibilities. The Authority is
being managed by the people of Darfur themselves,
and has started to implement projects pertaining to
resettlement of returnees, development, reconstruction
and economic recovery, not to mention the fact that
preparations for holding a stakeholder conference for
internally displaced persons and refugees have almost
been completed.

In the meantime, the Chairman of the Authority,
Mr. Seise, is currently on a tour to some donor States,
including the Republic of Korea and Japan. He will
also visit other States that are permanent members of
the Security Council in order to prepare for the donor
conference on Darfur.

The report also states that measures have been
completed to appoint members to the Darfur Regional
Authority's Executive Council, which is made up of
67 members. In the formation of that Council, several
seats were left vacant, in anticipation of the possibility
that certain representatives of movements who are
expected to sign the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur might do so.
We would like to note that Doha, the capital onatar,
is currently hosting a meeting with representatives of
some of those movements, which have left the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) and, responding to the
voice of reason, decided to join the political process
to pave the way towards signing the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. We hope that those efforts will be
successful soon.

It is worth noting that the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, especially in
terms ofjustice and reconciliation, has gone ahead. In
that connection, we would like to highlight paragraph
6 of the report of the Secretary-General before the
Council, which notes that the office of the national
special prosecutor for crimes committed in Darfur has
commenced its work and opened investigations into
10 cases. Those cases pertain to crimes committed in
Darfur over the past few years. That is a good start.

I would also like to note that, among the cases
before the national special prosecutor are cases in
which peacekeepers and humanitarian workers were
attacked. One of the most prominent cases under
consideration now is the October 2012 attack on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) caravan. Many suspects allegedly
involved in that attack have been detained.

I would also like to note the joint efforts by the
Government of the Sudan and the Voluntary Return
and Resettlement Commission of the Darfur Regional
Authority in resettling people, in the light of the
increased number of voluntary returns from camps,
now that security and stability have been established.

Allow me to correct some inaccurate information
contained in the report before the Council, in particular
with respect to the protection of civilians.

The report notes in many instances what it calls
renewed clashes between Government forces and rebel
movements that have not signed the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, when most of those incidents are
actually strictly tribal clashes in which the Government
only intervened to maintain order, enforce the State's
authority and help with tribal reconciliation by
coordinating with elders and tribal chiefs.

In that context, I would like to highlight the bloody
confrontation mentioned by Mr. Mulet that took place
in the area of Jebel Amer in North Darfur. That was
no more than an armed confrontation between the two
tribes of the sons of Amer and Beni Hussein over areas
of traditional gold-mining activity. As the Council
knows, Jebel Amer is an area where people extract gold
using local, traditional methods. Yet the report before
the Council states that the Sudanese Armed Forces
bombed a gold mine, which is not true.

That incident confirms that the root causes of the
conflict in Darfur continue to be the competition over
resources. It started with competition over land, water
and grazing areas, and now, after precious minerals
such as gold were discovered, the tribes are competing
over precious metals.

The report submitted by the Secretary-General
also makes clear the extent of the cooperation that
UNAMID is receiving from the central and provincial
Sudanese authorities. The report notes, in paragraph
34, that, with a few exceptions, the Government of the
Sudan approved all 3,938 flight requests submitted by
UNAMID. That confirms that the Government is keen
on facilitating the movement of the Mission, except in
a very few instances in which the Mission might be in
danger or where there might be military activity on the
part of the rebels.

The same is true of the requests made for travel
permits for UNAMID convoys, as the authorities
involved do not object in principle to any movement
by the mission. However, as I have mentioned, certain
areas are very dangerous, because rebel movements
target UNAMID convoys.

In that context, the Government of the Sudan and
its Mission in New York reiterate that we will continue
our cooperation with UNAMID in all areas relating to
the performance of its duties. Just yesterday I had the

opportunity to meet with Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
the new Joint Special Representative for UNAMID and
head of UNAMID in Darfur. I discussed with him all
aspects of the situation in Darfur, starting with the root
causes of the conflict and the efforts and policies of
the State aimed at arriving at a negotiated, permanent
solution to the conflict. I assured him that we would
cooperate with him to the extent possible and in a
manner that would guarantee the safety, security and
unity of the Sudan.

At the end ofthe meeting, I noted that in that context
we hoped that all members of UNAMID would abide
by the principle of neutrality, which is enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. I also noted that the
Government of the Sudan, like other countries, would
not allow anyone who is involved or has been proved
to be involved in activities that threaten security in the
country to enter into the Sudan, and that the relevant
authorities had the right to deny them entry into the
country.
In conclusion we reiterate our long-standing view
that the Security Council must urgently and resolutely
take all of the necessary measures against those who
reject peace among the leaders of the armed rebel
movements in Darfur and who continually seek to
obstruct the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace. We hope to see additional measures taken and
that stronger messages will be sent to those armed rebel
groups that reject peace. We expect the Security Council
to take action against them by imposing sanctions.

Also in that context, we deem it important for
the Council to compel the State of South Sudan to
disengage and dissociate itself immediately from the
rebel movements in the Sudan, including the ones
in Darfur, that reject the Doha Document. The rebel
movements in Darfur continue to conduct military
operations in the border areas and in South Darfur.
They have been launching attacks from South Sudan,
which continues to sponsor those rebel movements and
to provide them with logistical and political support, in
blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and resolution 2046 (2012), whose main demand is an
immediate halt to the provision of support to the rebel
movements by any country.

I wish, in concluding, to note that even as the
Government of the Sudan is working hard to arrive at
a peaceful solution to the conflict in Darfur and other
areas, some are attempting to obstruct those efforts. In
that connection, I would like to note the destructive role
recently played by Uganda when it openly hosted in
Kampala, on 5 January, a meeting ofa coalition of armed
rebel groups opposing the Government of the Sudan.
That meeting included the rebel movements in Darfur
as well as the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North, as well as some other political factions. Uganda
gave that coalition support and assistance. As I said
earlier, we have provided the Council with the details of
that meeting. We ask it to hold Uganda fully responsible
for having placed obstacles in the path of the peace
process in Darfur, and the same applies to South Sudan.

