Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to start by expressing
our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Mali and on the activities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We continue to
appreciate all of the efforts and sacrifices being made
by MINUSMA peacekeepers, who, as we all know,
operate under extremely difficult circumstances and
continuously face asymetrial attacks by terrorists. They
certainly deserve our support and solidarity. We are
also pleased to see the new Foreign Minister of Mali,
His Excellency Mr. Coulibaly. We look forward to
hearing his maiden statement to the Security Council.

We note with satisfaction that no ceasefire
violations by signatories to the greement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali have been reported since the
previous briefing (see S/PV.8062). It is also encouraging
that Malian political actors have been able to achive key
stabilization objectives for the succesful establishment
of interim authorities in all northern regions of the
country and the launching of mixed patrols in Gao.
Their discussions on finding a political settlement to the
ongoing intercommunal conflict is also worth noting.

On the other hand, the challenges that Mali faces in
relation to the deteriorating security situation remain a
source of serious concern. In northern and central Mali,
the repeated targeting of Malian civilian authorities by
terrorists clearly serves to indicate their destructive
intention to undermine State authority. We note from
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1105)
that the number of State officials redeployed to those
regions showed a decreasing trend because of the
prevailing insecurity. Reversing that situation is a
major challenge, as observed during the Council's visit
in October. There is no doubt that there is need for
additional enhanced efforts to extend State authority in
all territories of Mali.

With regard to the expansion of social services,
the rehabilitation of health centres and schools and
the digging of bore holes in the regions of Timbuktu,
Menaka, Gao and Taoudenni through domestic
financing is encouraging. We call on international
partners to help bridge funding gaps for the
rehabilitation of infrastructure and equipment, which
is a serious challenge that continues to affect the speed
of the recovery process in the country.

We appreciate that the Peacebuilding Fund
allocated a significant amount of resources to address
the deteriorating security situation in the Segou
and Mopti regions, including for reconciliation and
conflict prevention.

Improving the logistics nightmare by opening the
Cotonou-Niamey-Gao supply route in order to service
camps in eastern and northern Mali, as well as the
new centralized warehouse facility in Gao, has been
a landmark achievement, as the whole process will
significantly improve the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and goods to the regions.

Strengthening of cooperation between the
Malian armed forces and MINUSMA in the
conduct of coordinated operations, logistics and
operational support, including information- and
intelligence-sharing, as well as planning and training,
remain critical. It is only through such cooperation
by MINUSMA and support by the United Nations
country team that the Sustainable Development Goals
in terms of a structural transformation of the economy
and consolidating governance and security capacity
can be achieved. In that spirit, we strongly support
efforts in addressing the root causes of conflict through
investment and job creation in the country.

The peace and security of Mali is closely linked
with that of the region. The Security Council's
continued support to the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force remains vital. We are pleased to note that
the Joint Force achieved initial operational capability
in October and has conducted its first operation - in
the tri-border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the
Niger, from 27 October to 11 November 2017.

Finally, we welcome the renewed commitment
by the Malian parties to the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement and the understanding they have reached
on the revised timeline for the implementation of
the outstanding provisions by the end of March. It is
absolutely essential that the parties abide by their
commitment to respect the timelines. As agreed by
the Council, action must be taken with regard to those
who are found to be obstructing the timely, full and
effectively implementation of the Agreement. We
hope that the Council will send a unified message
to the Malian parties calling on them to fulfil their
obligations under the Peace Agreement and accelerate
its implementation.

