Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Since the outset
of the Libyan popular uprising, Portugal has
consistently condemned the indiscriminate violence
against civilians and the gross and systematic violation
of human rights and of humanitarian law perpetrated
by a regime that has lost all its credibility and
legitimacy vis-a-vis its own population and the
international community.

We have appealed for the cessation of all violence
and for the establishment of an immediate ceasefire as
well as for the full protection of civilians and foreign
residents in Libya and their right to leave the country
without hindrance and in safe conditions. We have
drawn attention to the plight of the thousands and
thousands of refugees forced to flee the violence and
the need to afford them all humanitarian assistance
possible.

Due to these reasons, we voted with the other
members of the Council for resolution 1970 (2011),
which was adopted unanimously. Nevertheless, the
authorities in Tripoli took no note of that resolution
and have failed totally to abide by it. On the contrary,
since 26 February, the violence has escalated, as have
the crimes committed against the Libyan population.
Civilians have been bombarded from land and air.

Portugal has also constantly stressed the need for
a national political dialogue that would enable the
Libyan population to fulfil its legitimate aspirations to
build a democratic, modern State based on the
sovereignty of the people and on institutions that
would represent them effectively.

For the international community, the regime that
has ruled Libya for more than 40 years has come to an
end by the will of the Libyan people. It has to be
fundamentally reformed through a peaceful process.

Today we voted for this resolution because we
believe that it fulfils these essential objectives: to
establish an immediate ceasefire; to put an end to
violence; to protect civilians; to allow for unimpeded
humanitarian aid; and to lead to a national dialogue
among the Libyans conducive to the establishment of a
democratic State, guaranteeing the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
the country, as desired by the Libyan people.

In that context, we fully support the mission
entrusted by the Secretary-General to Mr. Al-Khatib
and his efforts to find a sustainable and peaceful
solution to this crisis, as we support the efforts of the
Arab League and of the African Union in this same
sense.

