Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for your invitation in French to take the floor.

First, on behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Haiti, I would like to thank the Government of
Ukraine for its kind invitation to this open debate
in the Security Council devoted to a topic of major
importance - the protection of critical infrastructure.
I welcome the presence of His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Pavlo Klimkin,
this morning, and commend him on the quality of his
statement and his suggestions on the paths for us to take
in reflecting upon the issue and taking action.

The United Nations has made the implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy a key priority.
The protection of critical infrastructure undeniably
plays a major role in that regard. My delegation fully
supports the goals of the comprehensive and integrated
response Strategy at the national, regional and
international levels.

The likelihood of large-scale terrorist acts being
committed and targeting civilians through attacks
on critical infrastructure has only increased over the
past several years. To varying degrees, of course,
that danger is felt everywhere. The emergence of
new threats, amplified by the rapidly evolving nature
of communications technologies, has dramatically
increased the probability of such an attack as well as
the seriousness of such a threat's consequences with
regard to international peace and security.

In the merciless struggle that must be waged against
terrorism, Haiti is party to the United Nations counter-
terrorism system and to several regional cooperation
mechanisms established at the level of the Caribbean
Community and the Organization of American States,
in particular the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism. At the national level, the Government of Haiti
strives to maintain a level of vigilance commensurate
with the threats posed by movements influenced by
extremist ideologies. To this end, it fully supports
international efforts to strengthen the capacity of States
to act collectively in the prevention of incitement to
terrorism and to improve the security and protection of
particularly vulnerable targets, such as infrastructure
and public places, as specifically called for by the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

However, we must recognize that, while acts of
incitement to terrorism are frequent, the international
counter-terrorism regime, particularly with regard
to the protection of essential infrastructure, remains
tragically inadequate. This is evidenced by the threats,
thwarted attacks and incidents by which many countries
in Europe, Asia, Africa and America have been targeted
in the recent past. If the rise of terrorism seems on
occasion to have been slowed, its momentum is far from
broken. Its sphere of action, while contained in certain
theatres of operation, is elsewhere in full expansion.

It is therefore essential to redouble efforts, intensify
international cooperation on all fronts, including j udicial
and police cooperation, the exchange of information,
the provision of relevant and adequate technical
assistance to States that require it, in particular the
least developed among them, so as to maintain a high
level of protection of critical infrastructure, increase
resilience against terrorist threats, and prevent the loss
of human life and the disruption of essential services,
as outlined in the concept note issued by the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine (S/2017/104, annex). In
that regard, I should like to make a few brief comments
on the terrorist threat and the overall response strategy.

First, it is essential to pinpoint the terrorist threat in
order to defeat its actions, which no rationale f including
the national, political and religious demands generally
advanced by the perpetrators - can justify. Terrorism
cannot be associated with any religion, nationality or
civilization. However, there is undeniably a number of
conditions conducive to its spread, be it the perpetuation
of regional conflicts that are often at the root of violent
extremism, discrimination, exclusion, socioeconomic
marginalization, poor governance and poverty.

It is therefore urgent for the international
community to address these issues and to provide
the developing countries, particularly the poorest
among them, with the adequate support they need to
acquire the necessary infrastructure and overcome the
serious economic and social challenges they face. My
delegation, moreover, believes that no State, however
powerful it may be and whatever the degree of priority
it attaches to the fight against terrorism, can alone
achieve the overriding objective of protecting its
citizens and its critical infrastructure. Partnerships are
therefore essential at the international, regional and
national levels. Similarly, regional counter-terrorism
mechanisms should be significantly strengthened and
adequately resourced in order to enable them to respond
more effectively, taking into account the realities and
needs on the ground, as well as the evolution of the
terrorist threat to critical infrastructure.
Finally, the development of integrated national
responses for the prevention of terrorism and the
protection of critical infrastructure is of particular
importance. In that regard, I offer my delegation's
support for the Ukrainian proposal to incorporate
a critical infrastructure protection component into
all national and international programmes for the
prevention of terrorism.

The Government of Haiti, for its part, will continue
to pay the utmost attention to measures to prevent
and combat terrorism, including those relating to the
protection of essential infrastructure. Recent changes
have been made to the Haitian penal code, reinforcing
the range of legislative and legal measures to prevent
and contain ideologies of hatred and violent extremism.
The strengthening of the rule of law, the judicial system
and law enforcement agencies is one of the main lines
of action of the programme of action defined by the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel
Moise. At his inauguration on 7 February, he reiterated
the high importance he personally attaches to the
consolidation of the rule of law in Haiti. There can be
no doubt that the new Government of Haiti, which shall
soon assume power, will stay true to that spirit and
strive to take the necessary measures in response to the
evolution of the terrorist threat to critical infrastructure.

The meeting rose at 3.45 pm.
