Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
first of all to thank the Secretary-General for the
comprehensive report contained in document
S/2000/738, and to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
statement this morning. I wish also to express the
gratitude of my delegation for the excellent work being
done in East Timor by the United Nations Transitional
Administrator, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. My
congratulations go also to all personnel of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) on the excellent job they are doing.

The United Nations has taken up a major
challenge in undertaking the administration of East
Timor and preparing it for independence. In that
connection, the report of the Secretary-General
indicates the scale and excellent quality of the work
that has been carried out thus far. But we know that a
great deal remains to be done to lay the foundations for
a politically stable and economically prosperous East
Timor.

A key political factor is the training of local
leaders so that they can guide the country's future once
the United Nations leaves. Here we welcome the recent
initiative to include four Timorese officials in the
transitional cabinet, because this will help familiarize
them with the administrative work that will be their
sole responsibility in the future. We also see as very
positive the transformation of the National
Consultative Council into a more broadly
representative National Council with greater authority.

In addition to the goal of increasing the direct
participation and responsibility of the Timorese in the
political arena, we believe that the people should be
prepared for democratic elections. That is why we
consider very timely the creation of the UNTAET
programme entitled "The future of democracy in East
Timor" whose objective it is to promote civic
education, constitutional development, the rule of law
and political education. In this context, we support
efforts aimed at developing a culture of tolerance in
East Timor.

From the economic perspective, international
assistance has contributed to the rehabilitation of the
infrastructure of the territory and to job creation. The
main challenge for the future is to facilitate the
creation of conditions to ensure that the Timorese
economy can generate its own resources. We therefore
believe it necessary to continue to make efforts to
promote appropriate development of agriculture, which
provides 80 per cent of the food for the population, and
the oil industry - two sectors in the territory with
good prospects.

We cannot fail to draw attention to the fact that,
in contrast to the progress achieved in the political and
economic areas, one serious problem has not been
resolved satisfactorily, despite the passage of time. I
refer to the suffering of the thousands of refugees who
remain in West Timor. I should like to express the
profound concern of my delegation about the
seriousness of the current situation, particularly in
certain areas where the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has had to
suspend important activities, such as the registration of
refugees, because of intimidation by militias against
UNHCR workers. My delegation trusts that the
Indonesian authorities will continue to display a
constructive approach in the framework of respect for
the commitments undertaken, so as to resolve this
serious problem.

We note the Secretary-General's intention to
make a major reduction in the force if the situation
remains stable in the eastern sector, and also to reduce
significantly the number of military observers. We
would like additional information from the Secretary-
General as to whether the conditions in the field are
such that a reduction would be truly appropriate,
particularly given the recent events that led to the death
of a peacekeeper from New Zealand, on which we
await clarification. We take this opportunity to express
our very sincere condolences to the family of Mr.
William Manning and extend our sympathy to the
Government and people of New Zealand.

