Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the presence in this Chamber of a number
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Deputy Ministers.
We also extend our greetings to Ms. Nadia Murad,
to whom we pay heartfelt tribute for her dignity and
courage. We thank the United Kingdom and Iraq for
their leadership in negotiating resolution 2379 (2017),
which we just adopted today unanimously.

Uruguay voted in favour of the resolution and
co-sponsored it because it views it as an important
initiative that seeks to bring to justice the members of
the Da'esh terrorist group, who are responsible for the
worst possible crimes.

War crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
cannot go unpunished under any circumstance, wherever
such acts may be committed. The crimes committed by
Da'esh cannot and should not be exceptions to this rule.
Their actions should be punished with full force of law.

Respect for human rights and justice are two
concepts that are intrinsically linked. Ensuring
justice for victims and their families and protecting
all members of a society, without ethnic, religious
or gender-based distinction, is a duty of States. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights indicates in its
preamble indicates that freedom, justice and peace in
the world are based on the recognition of the inherent
dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of all
members of the human family.

Example-setting can also be an important factor.
In addition to the efforts undertaken by the Iraqi
Government to military combat Da'esh, bringing to
justice its leaders and members who are responsible for
having committed crimes will contribute to discrediting
the group, making the heinous nature of its actions
known to public opinion, with positive effects in terms
of dissuading anyone who might have been otherwise
attracted to this group.

For that reason, we believe that the request for
international assistance made by the Government of
Iraq, aimed at collecting and preserving evidence that
will make it possible to bring to justice the members
of Da'esh who have perpetrated such crimes on its
territory, deserves the support and attention of the
Council and the United Nations as a whole.

We trust that similar support will also be provided
when the time comes for accountability, because that
time will come in connection with the crimes committed
in Syria, Somalia, Yemen and, unfortunately, so many
other areas.

Uruguay deems it key to eliminate discrimination
and sexual violence against women in all arenas. The
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence
against girls and women as a weapon of war and its
use by terrorists as a terror tactic deserves the strongest
condemnation by all societies without distinction of
any kind. Such condemnation must be effective and
translated into action. We believe that it is key that
the investigative team have at least one expert on the
issue of gender, sexual violence and the protection
of children.

Finally, we would like to recall at this time the
importance of international legal cooperation in the
fight against terrorism, as stated in resolution 2322
(2016), which in its preambular part underscores the
importance of strengthening international cooperation
by investigators, prosecutors and judges to prevent and
investigate terrorist acts and bring their perpetrators
to justice.

