Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their briefings.

With regard to Al-Hudaydah, we welcome the
smooth operation of the de-escalation mechanism and
the joint operations centre. We once again call on all
the parties to implement the withdrawal agreement,
fully respect the ceasefire and resolve outstanding
points of disagreement. We welcome the release of
prisoners by the Houthis and urge all the parties to take
additional steps to implement the prisoner-exchange
agreement and the statement of understanding on Taiz.
The implementation of the Stockholm Agreement in its
entirety is paramount.

At the same time, Belgium continues to encourage
the Special Envoy to continue preparing for the next
steps in the political process. The process must be
inclusive, with the meaningful participation of women
and young people, and it should reflect the ethnic,
geographic and political diversity of the people of
Yemen. As the presidential statement of 29 August
(S/PRST/2019/9) underscored, a political agreement
negotiated following an inclusive dialogue is the
only way forward to resolve disputes and address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, including those in
the south of the country. In that context, we welcome
the talks organized by Saudi Arabia in Jeddah to try
to find a solution to the situation there and call on all
parties to engage constructively in those talks.

However, it will be crucial to expand efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation, which remains
disastrous, as we have heard. We commend the
humanitarian agencies for their outstanding work
despite the difficult circumstances. It is essential
that all parties facilitate access to humanitarian aid
and respect international humanitarian law. We are
particularly concerned about the fuel shortages' impact
on the situation, including the risk of rising food
prices and the repercussions for the operation of pump
systems, hospitals and clinics. We urge the parties to
the conflict to work with the Special Envoy to address
these economic challenges in a constructive manner.
We note with interest the announcement made by
Mr. Lowcock that several ships transporting fuel are
currently en route to Yemen.
We would like to draw the Council's attention to
the excellent report on human rights violations by the
Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts
on Yemen (A/HRC/42/ 17), and we welcome the Human
Rights Council's renewal of its mandate in September.
We call on all parties to respect their obligations and
commitments under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.

The violence throughout the rest of the country
continues, as we heard again this morning, and is
exacerbating the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, it is affecting access to humanitarian aid.
We therefore call on all the parties to cease hostilities
throughout the country. Belgium remains very
concerned about the large number of children who are
victims of air strikes and the fighting on the ground,
and demands that all parties take immediate measures
to protect children. Lastly, Belgium shares Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock's disappointment
with the obstacles encountered by the United Nations
team of experts sent to assess the FSO SAFER tanker's
situation, which forced them to abandon the mission.

