Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
conclusions and recommendations drawn up by the 12
Ambassadors who were part of the Security Council
mission are available in English, prior to being
available in all the official languages.

I will address four points in my presentation. First
I will make general comments about our mission;
secondly, about the results we were able to achieve for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; thirdly, about
the initiatives that should be taken for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the days and weeks to come;
and, finally, about the situation in Burundi. Let me
begin with general comments.

Members will recall that this is the second
mission in a year by the Security Council to the Great
Lakes region, and the fourth meeting in the course of a
year with the Political Committee for the Lusaka
Agreement. Made up of 12 Ambassadors, the mission
was an especially large one and, lasting 10 days,
particularly long. We visited eight countries and met at
length with 10 heads of State and two facilitators -
President Masire for the inter-Congolese dialogue and
President Mandela for Burundi. Beyond that, we had
occasion to meet with representatives of political
parties and civil society, with religious leaders and, of
course, with leaders of the armed groups, both in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. On
behalf of the Security Council delegation, I would like
to convey my warm thanks to all the people we met,
whose warm reception of our mission was truly in
keeping with Africa's great tradition of hospitality.

My second comment is to underscore the feeling
we all had that there is today a real window of
opportunity for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to move towards peace. The young President Joseph
Kabila has a lot to do with that. There is also a
widespread feeling in the region that there is no
military solution to that war, and a feeling of weariness
in the light of fighting that no longer makes much
sense. Quite simply, our objective was to help the
parties that negotiated the Lusaka Agreement and those
that negotiated the Arusha Agreement on Burundi to
turn the page on war and, what is more difficult, to
build lasting peace between them.

My third comment is to stress that with respect to
last year's mission - and there were three of us on this
year's mission who also participated in the mission last
year - the atmosphere between the parties and the
United Nations was radically different and, in fact,
much more positive and trusting. The meetings were
always constructive. We concluded that in fact a
negotiating structure had been set up little by little, one
that was without a doubt an optimal one.

In that context, I would like to refer to what
happened about 12 years ago, when we were trying to
find a way out of the crisis in Cambodia. At the time,
we set up a conference that was including the countries
of the region and the Security Council and that had co-
chairmen. That is the same sort of arrangement we
have set up among the partners of the region, the
Political Committee for the Lusaka Agreement and the
Security Council. In fact, that partnership was sealed
when the United Nations and the Security Council gave
the green light to deploy on the ground the contingents
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
observers. From that moment on, we are forced to
succeed together; otherwise we will fail together. We
are partners for peace.

My last comment is to once again clearly specify
the role of the United Nations in the region. This is a
question of helping the parties to implement their
commitments by sending observers to monitor respect
for those commitments on the ground, along with
contingents to ensure the safety of the observers and
the security of facilities, and to set up riverine units to
make real progress in the economic sphere. It is
therefore not at all a matter of imposing anything, and
certainly not a matter of imposing peace. Rather, this is
a matter of helping the parties to implement their own
commitments. Beyond that, it is also a question of
helping the parties to resolve their own differences in
the interpretation of the agreements they themselves
have negotiated. I believe that is an important role.

Our mission was not simply to observe events. At
times it took the form of a true contribution to bridging
differences. Indeed, it also provided for real
negotiations between partners on sensitive issues to
make progress towards peace. At times we had to
remind all the parties of their commitments and their
obligation to respect international law, human rights
and humanitarian law.

If we can play this positive role, I think it is
largely because of two traits that bring us together
around this table: first, the duty of complete
impartiality towards all of the parties to the conflict;
and second, a strong unity joining all the members of
the Council on the approach to be followed. I believe
that our interlocutors were forced to acknowledge our
impartiality and were certainly struck by the unity of
our delegation. At this stage I would like to thank all of
the ambassadors who were part of the delegation. We
played together, as they say in sports, like a team
passing the ball well and in an unfailing harmony.

Beyond these comments, what were the results
that our mission was able to achieve?

We achieved results in the military sphere, which
is obviously the first area to be taken into
consideration. For four months the ceasefire has been
holding, which is a first success; yet we have to
strengthen it and move it forward. Beyond the
ceasefire, the next stage is disengagement. Before we
arrived, United Nations observers were able to confirm
implementation of the agreement on the ground, except
in Equateur Province, where the Front de libe'ration du
Congo (FLC) lead by Jean-Pierre Bemba had made
demands that were not in accordance with the
commitments that were signed and endorsed.

The Political Committee of the Lusaka
Agreement and the Security Council obtained through
their joint action a firm announcement on the part of
Jean-Pierre Bemba, on the one hand, and the Political
Committee, on the other. The message is simple and
unambiguous: on Friday, 1 June, the FLC forces will
withdraw from the zones they are currently occupying
to the agreed positions. This is set out in the written
communique adopted jointly by the Political
Committee and the Security Council delegation
following our meeting, so that things would be
clarified. There was a parallel and unconditional
decision to send humanitarian observers to Bquateur
Province, as elsewhere throughout the Congo, in order
to improve the human rights and humanitarian
situations.

The step following disengagement is naturally the
stage of withdrawal of foreign forces, all foreign
forces. The objective is total and complete withdrawal.
The Security Council has its own interpretation in
resolution 1304 (2000), but everyone's concern is to
move towards this withdrawal. It is reassuring to say
before this Council that the ministers present at the
Lusaka meeting, as well as the heads of State whom we
met, all reaffirmed their agreement and their common
objective, which is a total withdrawal of all foreign
forces.

The date of 22 February 2001 as a D-day from
which the timetable is calculated was confirmed. In
fact, it should be stressed that the disengagement and
withdrawal of certain forces has already begun.
President Mugabe confirmed the withdrawal of several
thousand Zimbabwean forces from Congolese territory.
When we met with President Museveni in Kampala, he
very clearly indicated that in three weeks all Ugandan
forces will have left Congolese territory, with three
exceptions: a battalion will remain in Bunia for the
present; a battalion will remain in Buta; and finally,
forces from six battalions will remain deployed in the
Ruhenzori mountains along the border between Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The final point concerning the military aspects in
general is the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration or resettlement of the so-called negative
forces. Events are not exactly in line with the Lusaka
Agreement at present. There were undeniably
thousands of Burundian Front pour la defense de la
de'mocratie (FDD) militia who left the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with their weapons to return to
Burundi, thus doing more to transfer the war than to
resolve the conflict.

Similarly, during our stay in Rwanda, there were
incursions along the border by hundreds of former
Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe,
and so we repeated to all of the heads of State
concerned that it was crucial for us to be able to
receive, under the auspices of the Joint Military
Commission, very specific plans providing for
disarmament and demobilization, then reintegration or
resettlement of the "negative forces". We heard directly
from General Mwaniki, Chairman of the Joint Military
Commission, that he is working on an initial
programme involving several thousand militia
members, combatants, and he hopes to be able to
convey this programme to us in the days or weeks to
come.

In addition to these military aspects, it is very
important that we see progress in the inter-Congolese
political dialogue. There is no automatic link between
the two, but we feel, as does the Political Committee,
that these two approaches should move forward in
parallel. Otherwise the entire peace process will be
unbalanced.

From that point of view, the two meetings that we
had with former President Masire, facilitator of the
dialogue, were very encouraging. First, a date was set
for the opening of the preparatory dialogue, the
preparatory conference. The date is 16 July. Secondly,
in order to properly prepare this initial meeting,
Mr. Masire's representative in Kinshasa, Professor
Ould Lebatt, and Ambassador Mogwe will travel
through the 11 provinces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to prepare this dialogue, to identify in
every province particularly representative individuals
beyond the representatives enrolled in office, if I may
say, which are the Government and the armed groups
who have signed the Lusaka Agreement, as well as the
political parties in Kinshasa.

Finally, one last particularly encouraging
development. On the eve of our arrival in Kinshasa,
President Kabila announced the abolishment of decree
194, which had forbidden any activity by political
parties. We were able to spend an entire morning in
dialogue with the political parties, while there were
demonstrations in the streets of Kinshasa, with banners
and slogans, for the first time in two and a half years.
The political parties are now authorized to express
themselves in public. We have heard the political
parties, civil society and religious leaders express their
hope that this inter-Congolese political dialogue can be
held on Congolese territory. Of course, we must still
identify the venue, but we have received this message
and it is important to convey it.

Apart from those two aspects of the Lusaka
Agreement, the Security Council delegation was
determined to make progress in two areas that we
thought were very important: the economic area and
the human rights area. In the economic field, we were
able to publicly announce some 40 small quick-impact
projects that will be carried out in areas where
MONUC contingents are deployed. It should be
pointed out that when MONUC moves in, security and
confidence are restored. In most cases the population
has literally doubled in the span of a few weeks in the
small communities where MONUC contingents are
deployed. If confidence is restored, in addition to
security, the economy will also be restored. It was in
this spirit, thanks to the mobilization of the
international community in Kinshasa - the
ambassadors there, the United Nations agencies and the
representatives of the Bretton Woods institutions-
that we were able to put together these 40 small
projects, which are funded and will be carried out in
the weeks to come.

More importantly, when the delegation was in
Mbandaka, on the banks of the Congo River, we were
able to announce the arrival on 7 June of the
Uruguayan riverine unit. This is a major development,
because it made it possible for us to announce the
reopening of the river to commercial navigation. It
should be known that in this country that no longer has
road or rail infrastructure the rivers are the only means
of transportation. It is a major and very positive
development because until three years ago the city of
Kinshasa was dependent on food products from
Kisangani for its survival, and conversely, the clothes,
salt and soap in Kisangani came from Kinshasa. It is
that two-way traffic that we will be able to restore,
thanks to the riverine unit and thanks to the
establishment of a commission that, with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamel
Morjane, will be able to bring together representatives
of the Government, of the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratic (RCD-Goma) of the FLC and of the
two neighbouring countries concerned - the Central
African Republic and the Republic of the Congo. This
must all be achieved with everyone's cooperation. It is
a major development. There should be no obstacles
impeding the achievement of this development so
anxiously awaited by millions of Congolese.

The second aspect that we think is very important
and that we have developed systematically with all our
interlocutors, as well as in all our public statements, is
the area of human rights and humanitarian rights. We
have strongly emphasized that we must make progress
in these two areas. Roberto Garreton, the Special
Rapporteur, will visit the country more frequently. As I
said, we will deploy human rights and humanitarian
observers with all MONUC contingents. We have
encouraged the non-governmental organizations and
the religious leaders to publicize the massacres of
which they become aware, because secrecy is often the
accomplice of these massacres. The very fact that
information is circulating is a deterrent. But beyond
that, we have said publicly, and to all our interlocutors
in the Congo, that impunity must come to an end, that
procedures must be established to prosecute those who
carry out massacres and that it is up to the Congolese,
within the framework of their dialogue, to decide what
procedures should be followed in this regard. Those are
the results we have achieved.

I will now turn to a third aspect: actions to be
undertaken in the weeks and months to come. In the
military sphere, the most urgent matter is to help the
Ugandan army leave Congolese territory, as was
decided by President Museveni. From that point of
view, two initiatives should be taken immediately. The
first is to help one of the Ugandan battalions, situated
east of Kisangani, leave by using one of Kisangani's
two airports, because the alternative is for this battalion
to open a road through the Congolese forest. This,
obviously, would be a burden that we should spare that
battalion. Unfortunately - and we said this very
clearly at the Lusaka meeting - the town of Kisangani
is not demilitarized today. It should have been so a year
ago, in implementation of Security Council resolution
1304 (2000). It is still not demilitarized because armed
elements of the RCD-Goma are still in the town. They
are impeding the use of the airports by the withdrawing
Ugandan troops. Therefore, this must be handled
urgently. The authority of the Security Council is at
stake, and Kamel Morjane, with the Council's active
support, should be able to deal with this item in the
days to come.

For the rules of the game to be respected, the
withdrawal of Ugandan forces, announced by
President Museveni, should be observed in the field,
through the presence of MONUC observers. Beyond
this initial aspect, we must carry out the co-location
between MONUC's chiefs of staff, who are in
Kinshasa, and the Joint Military Commission's chiefs
of staff, who are still in Lusaka. As regards the site,
everything is ready. From the security point of view,
the arrival of a contingent of 200 Tunisian soldiers and
officers when we were in Kinshasa provided a very
strong reassurance for those who might have had
doubts about their security. This was the response
awaited so that parties that hesitated to take this step
could come to Kinshasa. The co-location must take
place as soon as possible.

The third item from the military standpoint is
before us. On 15 June, the current MONUC mandate
comes to an end. We will have to find the means to
move forward. Since we are awaiting detailed plans
that the Political Committee must convey to us on the
basis of the work that has been done thus far by the
Joint Military Commission, whether concerning the
withdrawal of forces or the disarmament of the
negative forces, we are not in a position today to
recommend moving on to phase III. We have found a
formula that proposes a transition towards phase III.

The ceiling of 5,537 men that was decided by
Security Council resolution 1291 (2000) seems to be
adequate. It is a comfortable ceiling and gives us some
leeway for action. We remain under the ceiling of
5,537 men, and we are ready to move towards phase
III. We are opening the door of the transition to phase
III. Now the ball is in the court of the Political
Committee and of the Joint Military Commission to
provide us as soon as possible with the detailed plans
that we need in order to be able to plan, under the aegis
of the Secretary-General, the next steps of deployment
on Congolese soil, of MONUC observers, and, if
necessary, additional contingents. That covers the
military sphere.

As for the national dialogue, MONUC must
certainly assist the facilitator's team in moving
throughout the country, which has no infrastructure,
with aeroplanes or by making helicopters available.
Our Security Council has the feeling that it could
discreetly help bring about a consensus, together with
President Masire, on which city would be the best site
for the national dialogue and would welcome it as a
symbol of the reconciliation of the Congolese people.

A difficult point for which we do not have a
solution at present is the provisional administration of
zones evacuated by foreign forces. It is clear that the
Congolese forces that are currently deployed will
remain in their zone, whether space is opened up by the
Government of Kinshasa, by the FLC or by the RCD
Goma. We are afraid that in some very well-identified
areas in the eastern part of the country the withdrawal
of forces could lead to security risks. We are very
aware of that point, even though I stress that it is not
up to MONUC but rather to the Congolese parties
themselves to ensure security in the zones under their
control. It is up to them to maintain law, order and
security in these areas. But this point concerns us as
well, because we are responsible actors.

From the economic standpoint, besides what I
have already mentioned, we returned from Kinshasa
with the feeling that the devaluation that was decided
upon immediately after our departure is bringing
considerable turbulence to the Congolese economy and
social life. We are attentive to this, because, while it is
good to set up a peace plan, we also have to concern
ourselves with social stability, especially in the capital.
This is a message that we will relay to the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, which are
concerned with this situation themselves.

Another economic point I wish to make regards
the pillaging of the Congo's natural resources. This is
mentioned in the report, as it was at each of our
meetings with the heads of State concerned, and we
stressed that our message was clear: the pillaging must
stop. We are not aiming to punish; we are aiming to
encourage. The dialogue has begun. It is up to
everyone to take the necessary measures to rectify what
needs to be rectified. As for the Council, on the basis
of the addendum that is being prepared, we will meet in
three months to have a more detailed discussion of the
situation and of the developments that we hope will
have taken place within the next three months.

Finally, we proposed a project for the future that
is not new but that today is increasingly topical: the
idea of a conference of all the States concerned, those
of greater Central Africa - a regional conference - in
order to deal with the matter of security between States
in the region, their integrated economic development
and human rights issues, especially minority rights.
These are the three categories that we have suggested.
The idea was well received everywhere we went, even
if some stressed that we first had to make progress
towards peace in every country before organizing the
conference, but the idea is once again topical.

The fourth and last part of my statement deals
with Burundi. As much as we were encouraged by the
situation and developments in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we remain quite concerned about an
impasse - a kind of vicious circle - in which
Burundi finds itself locked at the present time. We met
with President Buyoya, with the political parties and
with the leaders of the two armed groups that are
threatening to renew hostilities. We visited President
Mandela at length in Johannesburg on the first day of
our visit to the region. We said very clearly to the
leaders of the two armed groups that there was no
military solution. We have the most respected
personality in the world dealing with the fate of
Burundi, and he has proposed a path to peace, so it is
certainly unacceptable that some would consider taking
the capital by force or pursuing offensives, even if only
to support a political process. The path of dialogue
exists, and President Mandela embodies it. The Arusha
Agreement is on the table. If some have corrections,
additions or criticisms to make, they must do so around
the negotiating table.

There is a temptation in the region to impose
sanctions against those two groups. We reached an
agreement with President Museveni, who is the
Chairman of the group of States concerned, that in the
immediate future the messages of the Security Council
to the two groups must be used in order to consult the
grass roots. We are waiting for their responses. We will
give them some time; but if by the deadline, which has
not been set, there is no positive response from the two
armed groups as to their intention to return to the
negotiating table, then perhaps the heads of State of the
region could decide among themselves to take
measures.

President Buyoya spoke about his deep concern
over the return, as I said earlier, of combatants from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We spoke about
this clearly with President Kabila. He also spoke of his
concern about the refugee camps that house 500,000
Burundian refugees on Tanzanian soil, on the other side
of the border, and that, according to President Buyoya,
are a starting point for quick operations carried out by
armed groups on Burundian soil. In our meeting with
President Mkapa in Dar es Salaam, we suggested that a
possible idea would be to set up a Tanzanian-
Burundian commission in order to study this matter
and to find concrete, pragmatic ways of trying to
reduce the tension.

My final comment about Burundi is that we have
to find a way that would allow President Mandela, the
resident facilitator in Johannesburg, and the Secretary-
General's Representative in Bujumbura, Mr. Jean
Arnault, who has done an excellent job, to be able to
work better together. We made contact with President
Mandela after having spoken with the Secretary-
General, but we undoubtedly need some imagination
and creativity when it comes to finding ways to help
President Mandela succeed in Burundi.

I would like to conclude by warmly commending,

on behalf of our entire delegation, the remarkable work
carried out by the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. The Senegalese
contingent, which we saw in the field in Mbandaka,
working under extremely difficult conditions, provides
a clear example of what the United Nations can
accomplish. As I said earlier, we were also very
impressed by the arrival of the Tunisians.

In addition, I would like to pay tribute to two
men: Kamel Morjane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who, with exemplary determination, caution,
wisdom, readiness and unremitting effort, has managed
to create something that last year seemed to be
impossible - the clear climate of trust and cooperation
that now exists between the United Nations and the
Congolese authorities, whoever they may be; and Jean
Arnault in Bujumbura, who, under equally difficult
conditions, has done a remarkable job of engaging all
the parties in dialogue. Finally, I would like to pay
tribute to all the members of the Secretary-General's
team, who helped us to prepare for the trip. It was a
pleasure to be able to carry out such a well-prepared
mission.

Let us be clear: the United Nations will be
deployed for a long time. We must carefully follow up
the results of this mission on an almost daily basis. We
will have to move gradually towards peace. We cannot
stop along the path, because stopping would mean
retreating. I believe that our entire delegation has that
determination, because if the United Nations and the
Security Council does not get involved, who will go
there?
