Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I too
am very grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing. I pay tribute to him
and to the whole team of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their
extraordinarily dedicated work in Kosovo in the most
difficult circumstances. This is not just a traditional
accolade; they, and we, are making progress in that
province - net progress, but progress nevertheless.

At our last meeting on Kosovo, my delegation
began by focusing on the arrest by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities of two British
policemen employed by UNMIK. It is time briefly to
update the Council. More than eight weeks after their
arrest, the detainees are still being held and have still
not been charged. Two Canadian citizens and four
Dutch citizens are being similarly treated. Although the
conditions in which the men are being held have
improved from the completely unacceptable, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities are not
respecting consular agreements. We call upon them to
release the men immediately or to bring specific
charges. As my delegation said last time, the two
British policemen were contributing to stability and
peace in Kosovo as part of the important work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) under United Nations resolutions. It is in no
one's interest that that work should be interrupted.

The United Kingdom is encouraged by the
thorough preparations being made for October's
municipal elections. Those elections are important
because they are a key step in returning the governance
of Kosovo to its people. We note that some 45,000
Serbs voted in safety in Kosovo in a different set of
elections, on 24 September, elections which
Ambassador Holbrooke has pointed out could change
the whole character of what we are doing in the
Balkans.

The United Kingdom thanks Mr. Kouchner and
his team, together with the Kosovo Force (KFOR), for
doing such an excellent job in witnessing those
elections on 24 September, as well as in providing
reassurance for voters in Kosovo. That has helped
minimize the scope for malpractice by President
Milosevic. We regret that, as it looks at present, those
45,000 Serbs and their compatriots will not be voting
in Kosovo's municipal elections next month. But who
knows? Perhaps democracy and non-violence have
been born in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia this
week. The effect could be quickly felt in all
communities in Kosovo if President Milosevic draws
the correct conclusions from the turn ofthe tide.

Although Serbs are reluctant at present to vote in
Kosovo's elections, it is right that Kosovo's Serb
community is represented in the local government
structure. We welcome the agreement that
Mr. Kouchner and UNMIK will appoint representatives
to sit on municipal councils after the elections.
The Secretary-General sets out clearly in his
report that security continues to be a problem
throughout Kosovo. The United Kingdom has joined
others, including its partners in the European Union, in
condemning recent incidents of ethnic and political
violence, not least by members of the Albanian
community in Kosovo.

Mr. Kouchner and KFOR have continued to
condemn the violence and to take what steps they can
to address it. Just as important, most of Kosovo's
political leaders have also spoken out against such
violence. They gave their support to the principles of
non-violence and inter-ethnic dialogue at the Airlie
House meeting in Virginia in July, and that was
extremely welcome. Thuggery by a vocal minority will
not be allowed to decide Kosovo's future. We must
build a security framework that facilitates return by
Kosovo Serbs and others to their homes.

The incident mentioned just now by Ambassador
Lavrov involving the Russian Ambassador and, as it
happened, British KFOR troops on the boundary
between Serbia and Kosovo was unfortunate, but those
troops were doing their job at a time of increased
tension and no disrespect was intended to the Russian
Ambassador. Security was the only motivation and
recent events in Gracanica have shown the need for
vigilance in that respect.

The United Kingdom has noted the Secretary-
General's appeal for more international judges and
prosecutors. We share the Bangladeshi view that the
administration of justice is a key issue for Kosovo.
Indeed, the United Kingdom has offered large numbers
of judges and prosecutors and stands ready to assist
further. So far, however, we have been told that United
Kingdom candidates are not required. Should we not be
concentrating on increasing the number of international
judges and prosecutors and give that priority over some
other areas of UNMIK's work?

Whatever happens in Serbia proper over the next
few days, we shall need UNMIK in Kosovo for some
time to come. The United Kingdom will remain,
politically and in practice, fully supportive of their
efforts.

