Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to express my thanks for the briefings from the
Secretariat and the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Georgia.

The Council is discussing a particularly sensitive
issue this afternoon. We are faced with a situation that
my country thus far regards as a forcible
dismemberment of a State Member of this
Organization, a situation that my country regards as
unacceptable.

The aspirations of the South Ossetian and Abkhaz
peoples to independence are well known on the
international scene. Those aspirations and the de facto
authorities that exercise authority over the territories of
South Ossetia and Abkhazia had not been recognized
as independent political entities before 26 August,
notwithstanding the unilateral proclamation of
independence that both entities had promulgated some
months ago. It is as a result of the invasion of Georgian
territory by the armed forces of the Russian Federation
and their overwhelming and hardly surprising military
victory that a State first recognized the independence
of those territories. That State was precisely the one
that carried out a military invasion of the territory of
Georgia.

Members of the Council can hardly forget that a
note (S/2008/545), signed by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, addressed to
the President of the Council and circulated in this
Chamber on 11 August, affirmed that the military
intervention by the Russian Federation in Georgia
aimed

"to protect the Russian peacekeeping contingent
and citizens of the Russian Federation from the
illegal actions of the Georgian side and to
prevent" - I repeat, prevent - "future armed
attacks against them".

Thus, as a result of a military action that included
preventive goals and led to the complete weakening of
Georgia, we now see the dismembering of its territory
through recognition of an independence that had been
ignored for a long time. Diplomatic recognition is
much more than that. The announcement of the signing
of mutual assistance and cooperation treaties is
something by which the Russian Federation is seeking
to secure, through its huge military power, the
dismemberment that it has brought about. We cannot,
and the international community should not, reward
those actions, which go against international law in all
respects.

Costa Rica continues to support the six-point plan
drawn up by Mr. Medvedev and Mr. Sarkozy, and
equally firmly supports the territorial integrity of
Georgia. The international community now has the
tremendous duty of finding a solution to this unusual
situation, a solution that cannot be that might is right.
The situation is all the more serious in that it involves a
permanent member of the Council with all the powers
entrusted to it by the Charter.

My country remains ready to work alongside the
other members of the Council to find a lasting solution
to the conflict, a solution that must include the
territorial integrity of Georgia, the rights of the peoples
of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and, above all, the
integrity of international law and the full observance of
the principles of peaceful coexistence, enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

