Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First, allow me to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing to the Security Council.

We have witnessed over recent days a further
escalation of violence and a deepening of the
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela. Hundreds of people
are crossing the borders as we speak, joining the more
than 3 million Venezuelans who have already fled
the country and leaving behind many more millions
inside the country in extremely miserable conditions.
The Council cannot remain idle in face of a crisis that
has such an adverse effect on peace and security in
the region.

We particularly condemn the indiscriminate and
excessive use of force against unarmed protesters
by the Venezuelan security forces and pro-Maduro
irregular armed groups, which has already led to
deaths and hundreds of injuries. We also deplore the
systematic and widespread human rights violations
and abuses committed by security forces and irregular
armed groups. They must stop, and they must stop
now. We call on everyone to refrain from violence,
which can spiral out of control and further complicate
this multidimensional conflict. We call for respect for
democracy, the rule of law and fundamental rights
and freedoms, including the freedom of assembly and
of expression. Because of the political origin of the
conflict, we strongly believe that the solution to it can
only be political. There is no other alternative.

We reiterate our recognition of the National
Assembly and its President, Mr. Juan Guaido, as the
only legitimate power in Venezuela with a democratic
mandate, won in free and fair elections, in line with the
Venezuelan Constitution. We join President Guaido's
call for the urgent holding of free, transparent and
credible presidential elections in accordance with
international democratic standards. It must be heard by
Venezuelan authorities.

The oppressive regime of Nicolas Maduro has
led to an unprecedented migration and humanitarian
crisis that has an undeniable impact and tremendous
consequences on the situation in neighbouring Latin
American countries. No matter how eloquently and
passionately representatives of Nicolas Maduro deny it,
the humanitarian catastrophe in Venezuela is real and
its citizens are in dire need of urgent humanitarian aid.
It is Maduro's policy that has led to it, and it is Nicolas
Maduro who is further exacerbating the crisis by not
allowing foreign humanitarian aid and deliberately
hurting his own citizens. Let us stress that this is a
human-made humanitarian crisis.
It falls to regional organizations to play a special
role in diffusing this crisis. We believe that the genuine
efforts of the Lima Group and the International
Contact Group to de-escalate and find a way to move
forward should be recognized. In line with the common
European Union approach to the recent events in
Venezuela, Poland excludes the use of military force
and calls for talks leading to a durable, peaceful and
democratic solution.

In conclusion, I would once again like to underline
that the demands of society cannot be left unanswered.
People have massively called for democracy. Their
voices shall not and cannot be ignored.

