Mr. Wang Yi (China) (Spoke in Chinese): The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and their means of delivery constitutes a real threat
to international peace and threat, as well as a shared
challenge for the international community. Therefore, I
deem it extremely necessary and timely for the Security
Council to devote today's meeting to that subject so as
to discuss how to address the proliferation challenges,
mobilize international consensus, enhance capacity-
building and strengthen coordination and cooperation.

Thanks to the unremitting efforts of the
international community, the non-proliferation regime
has become increasingly refined and sophisticated. The
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the
Iranian nuclear issue serves as a useful lesson for the
diplomatic settlement of key non-proliferation issues.
With the continued and steady implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), international efforts have been
strengthened in order to deal with challenges posed by
non-State actors.

Meanwhile, we have to recognize that the current
international security situation is undergoing profound
changes. Non-proliferation still faces challenges and
risks. A few individual countries defying the consensus
of the international community have conducted several
nuclear tests. The risk of non-State actors, especially
terrorists, acquiring and using WMDs is on the rise. The
international non-proliferation regime must urgently
increase its authority, universality and effectiveness.

Non-proliferation is a matter of international
peace and security and makes up an important part of
communally building a shared future for humankind.
It requires coordinated, good-faith international
cooperation on many fronts.

First, it is necessary to address both symptoms
and root causes. Non-proliferation is basically a matter
of security. Security concerns may be the biggest
motivation behind proliferation. Countries must pursue
common cooperative, comprehensive and sustainable
security and pursue a new type of international relations
that feature win-win cooperation. Countries must
renounce the notion of their own absolute security and
opt for universal security for all. That is the effective
way to fundamentally resolve proliferation issues.

Secondly, we need to adhere to the orientation

of diplomatic settlement. It is necessary to impose
sanctions and pressure as appropriate on countries
that blatantly violate international non-proliferation
rules, but Sanctions are not a panacea - dialogue
and negotiation present a fundamental solution.
Confrontation and sanctions alone only lead to the
escalation and spilloverof conflicts. We need to discard
the willful use of long-arm jurisdiction, as it is in the
interests of nobody.

Thirdly, we must uphold the international
non-proliferation regime. The Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) is customary international law in the field of
non-proliferation. The international non-proliferation
regime, with the NPT as its bedrock, is an essential
element of the international security order established
after the Second World War. It has prevented more
countries from accessing weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) while protecting global strategic balance and
stability. The practice of using international law when
it is suitable, but putting it aside when it is not, should
be discarded. Double standards or a selective approach
should also be discarded; otherwise, the dyke of the
international non-proliferation regime could collapse a
result of one small leak.

Fourthly, we need to strengthen the non-proliferation
capacity of various countries. The primary responsibility
rests with Governments. We must respect and support
countries in formulating their non-proliferation policies,
according to national circumstances, and help countries
bolster their laws and regulations on non-proliferation,
strengthen law enforcement capacities and carry out
exchanges, mutual learning and cooperation in the
field of non-proliferation, so as to jointly enhance
non-proliferation performance and capacity.

China firmly opposes the proliferation of WMDs
and their means of delivery. We have set up a complete
non-proliferation and export control system and have
ensured its effective implementation. At the same time,
China is also actively participating in international
non-proliferation processes, while comprehensively
and completely implementing relevant Security Council
resolutions, and has been dedicated to the political
settlement of hotspot non-proliferation issues.

China has played a contrustive part in negotiations
on the JCPOA and contributed its own proposals. China
has made tireless efforts for a negotiated settlement to the
Korean nuclear issue. We have raised a suspension-for-

suspension initiative and a dual-track approach, which
are feasible and practical solutions to the issue. China
believes that Security Council resolutions on the Korean
nuclear issue should be implemented in their entirety
entirety and in an effective way, while intensifying
sanctions. It is also important to promote the resumption
of talks and dialogue. Sanctions pressure needs to be
translated into the motivation for negotiations. China
also supports the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and United Nations agencies in
reaching comprehensive objectives and carrying out
comprehensive, objective and fair investigations into
the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

International non-proliferation efforts require
the participation of various countries, and vice versa.
China is ready to work with all parties to make a
greater contribution to maintaining and strengthening
the international non-proliferation regime, promoting
cooperation on global governance in the field of
non-proliferation and building a community of shared
future for humankind.

