Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing.

We remain fully and permanently committed
to a negotiated two-State solution, based on the
internationally agreed parameters, as the only viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends
the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all
permanent-status issues in order to end the conflict.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is, first and
foremost, a political conflict that requires a political
solution. In anticipation of the upcoming Bahrain
workshop to be held next week, we will look into any
proposal that is aimed at improving the socioeconomic
living conditions of Palestinians. Addressing the
economic aspect of the conflict, however, cannot
replace a solution negotiated between both parties in
order to achieve lasting peace. We will support any
meaningful initiative that aims at reviving the political
process that is acceptable to both parties and based on
the internationally agreed parameters.

One of the main obstacles to achieving a political
settlement is the ongoing Israeli occupation and the
continued settlement activities in the territories occupied
in 1967. We reiterate our position that settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are
illegal under international law and undermine the
prospect for a negotiated two-State solution. The
continuous expansion of settlement activities by Israel
is a matter ofgreat concern to us That includes the recent
approvals of construction of, and tenders for, hundreds
of new housing units in settlements in the occupied
West Bank and East Jerusalem, including those dating
from the end of May. We reiterate our rejection of any
unilateral steps that jeopardize a two-State solution.
That also includes the construction of settlements in
violation of international law and the related demolition
of Palestinian structures in Area C. We call on Israel
to end the expansion of settlements, the legalization of
outposts and the demolition and seizure of Palestinian-
owned structures.
We are also extremely concerned about repeated
statements from various sides alluding to a possible
annexation of part of the West Bank. There is no right
to annexation. Should such statements be translated
into Government policy or law, that would constitute
a clear violation of international law. We strongly
advise against taking any steps in that direction, as it
could lead to serious consequences. We reiterate that
Germany will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the parties through negotiations.
In its relevant dealings, Germany will continue to
distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel
and the territories occupied since 1967.

Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully
implemented not only with regard to settlement
activities, but also with regard to acts of terror,
violence against civilians, incitement, provocative
action and inflammatory rhetoric. We welcome the
fact that the latest report of the Secretary-General also
focuses on those obstacles to achieving peace, and the
Special Coordinator gave some appalling examples in
that regard during his briefing. Germany condemns
all attacks on Israel in the strongest possible terms,
including the latest firing of rockets from Gaza, which
are putting Israel's security and the lives of civilians at
risk. Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to
Israel's security as a Jewish and democratic State, and
we will not be silent when Israel's security or right to
exist are questioned or compromised. We call on Hamas
and other groups to stop firing rockets from Gaza into
Israel, and we strongly urge all parties to de-escalate,
exercise restraint and refrain from provocative rhetoric
and actions.

It is obvious that joint efforts to restore a political
perspective on the resumption of the peace process are
urgently needed. We support all attempts to restart
meaningful direct talks and negotiations between
the parties with the objective of creating a lasting
peace. At the same time, we must avoid any unilateral
measures and work collectively to counter the negative
developments on the ground that are undermining the
viability ofa negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict on the basis of the internationally
agreed parameters.
Before I conclude, I want to make one last point. In
the meantime and until a solution is found, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) remains indispensable to
the provision of humanitarian assistance and essential
services in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria as well as
within the Palestinian territories. UNRWA is the key
to stability in the region, and we continue to firmly
support its mandate and encourage others to similarly
continue to support the Agency's work, politically
and financially.

