Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Recently there has been some improvement in the
situation in Haiti. Life has gradually returned to normal;
Government departments have begun to operate; and
preparations for the elections are under way. These
developments are inseparable from the efforts of the
international community and of the Security Council, and
we welcome them. At the same time, we have noted that,
as the Secretary-General observes in his report, crime
remains rampant in Haiti today; yet it is unlikely that a
police force will be established very soon. Thus, there
exists a security vacuum. This situation cannot but cause
grave concern.

All along, China has supported the Haitian people in
their efforts to achieve peace, stability and national
reconstruction, which, we believe, will help maintain peace
and stability in the region. We have consistently stood for
the peaceful settlement of disputes and opposed the use or
threat of use of force in international relations. Therefore,
we had reservations on Security Council resolution 940
(1994). In order to support the Haitian peace process,
however, we maintained a serious and responsible approach
throughout the consideration of the Haitian question in the
Security Council, and we properly handled related questions
in cooperation with the parties concerned.

Considering the possible changes in Haiti's situation,
and particularly the security situation following the
completion of the deployment of the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) by the end of March, we deem
it necessary that the Security Council should at that time
reconsider such questions as the mandate and size of
UNMIH, just as it reconsidered these questions for the
peace-keeping operations in Georgia and Tajikistan and for
some of the operations in Africa.

We had therefore proposed a number of amendments
in a constructive manner and had hoped that agreement
could be reached in a spirit of consultation and cooperation.
Regrettably, however, our reasonable proposal was not
accepted. We must therefore abstain on the draft resolution
before us.

