First of all, I wish to thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for briefing us today on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I would also like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing on the latest developments in my country. For over a year now, the situation in my country has not changed. Violations and aggression have continued, including the systematic indiscriminate shelling of Tripoli and its outskirts, causing the deaths of dozens of civilians and the destruction of infrastructure, in order to terrorize and frighten people. As we gather today to listen to briefings and reports, everyone must be wondering what is new in and what is next. If we refer back to the prior reports of the United Nations and other international entities and the records of the meetings of this organ, we find them almost repetitive; the only thing that changes in them is the increase in the number of victims and the diversity and monstrous nature the violations. The common denominator among these reports and records is the words of condemnation and outrage, and the calls addressed equally to all parties to stop the fighting, without ever identifying the responsible party who has led, carried out and instigated all those actions, and who bragged about them before everyone's eyes and in the presence of the Secretary-General during his visit to Tripoli last year. In my statement, I will naturally - and as usual - enumerate the latest crimes committed by the war criminal himself, as well as his terrorist militias and mercenaries, even though we know that the Security Council already has all the facts and is well aware of what is happening, who is committing these crimes, who is supporting them, who sparked this crisis, who is responsible for the bloodshed and who has plunged the country and the region into a mess that has affected everyone. In that regard, I recall some of the resolutions adopted by this very Council, of which there have been 16 since the signing of the Libyan Political Agreement in 2015, all on punishing and holding spoilers accountable. If those resolutions had been implemented by the Council, we would have avoided the current situation today. The eleventh preambular paragraph of resolution 2278 (2016) reads in part: "Reaffirming the importance of holding accountable those responsible for violations or abuses of human rights or violations of international humanitarian law, including those involved in attacks targeting civilians." The twelfth preambular paragraph of resolution 2376 (2017) states: "Reaffirming the need for all parties in Libya to engage constructively with the United Nations and refrain from any actions that could undermine UN-mediated political dialogue and reiterating that there can be no military solution in Libya." The sixteenth preambular paragraph of resolution 2486 (2019) reads: "Reaffirming that all parties must comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as applicable, and emphasizing that those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights must be held accountable." Two weeks ago, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Ms. Bensouda, presented her nineteenth report (see S/2020/371), and I am confident that all Council members have now seen or heard evidence of the violations taking place in my country. On this occasion, we extend our thanks to Ms. Bensouda for her clarity and for clearly identifying the perpetrator of those war crimes by name. However, we are still waiting for the Council and the international community to show similar courage and to put an end to the series of politicized statements that the war criminal and the States that support him have used to continue committing crimes and violations and creating chaos. As a reminder to the Council, after announcing a false humanitarian truce, the aggressor deliberately launched hundreds of rockets against Tripoli, targeting the central hospital. Prior to that, he bombed Al-Hadaba hospital, dedicated to treating coronavirus disease patients, in addition to attacking civilian neighbourhoods in Souq Al-Jum'a, Abu Salim and Bab Ben Ghashir. His forces also bombed areas near diplomatic missions in the Zawiyat Al-Dahmani neighbourhood on 7 May. The aggressor's violations did not stop there. He also bombed a shelter for internally displaced persons in the Farnaj area last Saturday, killing seven civilians and injuring dozens, as if it were not enough to have already forced the victims to abandon their homes. Further numerous terrorist acts have caused more killing, displacement and destruction. Despite all that, as I keep repeating, we still hear statements about an anonymous perpetrator. It no longer makes sense to remain silent about countries that support those violations and terrorism. Everyone has read the recent reports of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) and has seen first-hand the type of weapons and mercenaries being used by the militias committing the aggression. The best example of this are the regular flights by Emirati freight planes and aircraft operated by Syria's Cham Wings Airlines, not to mention the recruitment of thousands of mercenaries of various nationalities, including from Chad, the Sudan and Syria, affiliated with the Russian Wagner Group. Those are not only our words; this is being reported in United Nations documents. Regarding weapons, for example, Council members witnessed the successful liberation of cities on the west coast by the heroic soldiers of our Libyan National Army, such as the liberation yesterday of Al-Watiya airbase. In the process, we captured a number of Russian-made Pantsir-Sl air defence systems, destroyed a number of Emirati Tygra or Panthera armoured vehicles and found tons of high-tech ammunition and weapons. Before that, we shot down several Wing Loong II drones, made in China. In that connection, we wish to inform the Council that we have damning evidence, supported by previous reports - which we are sharing with the Panel of Experts - of the repeated involvement of the United Arab Emirates in the transfer of those specific weapons to the war criminal and his subversive militias. Accordingly, today we officially call, via the penholder on Libya, for the urgent convening of a Council meeting with a view to taking steps to end the systematic illegal interventions of the United Arab Emirates in an attempt to overturn the legitimate Government of Libya, in violation of all relevant United Nations resolutions. We also call on the countries concerned, especially those of the manufacture or origin of the weapons, to provide us and the sanctions committee with documents certifying the end-users and to explain how the weapons fell into the hands of those who subvert legitimacy and violate Security Council resolutions. In addition, we request all countries whose nationals are involved as mercenaries to take immediate action to pull them out of Libya and to hold all those involved in their recruitment accountable, rather than simply claiming that they are not responsible. Talking about developments in Libya leads me to resolution 2292 (2016), on granting authorizations to Member States and international or regional organizations to carry out ship inspections as part of the implementation of the arms embargo. Here we would like to put the following facts in the record. Resolution 2292 (2016) stipulates that implementation should be done in coordination with the Libyan Government, a message that is reiterated in paragraph 11 of the recent report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2473 (2019) (S/2020/393). Therefore, any international operation carried out without proper coordination with the Libyan Government is considered illegal and not founded on relevant Security Council resolutions. For that reason, we have announced our rejection of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI in its current form because we were only being notified of a fait accompli rather than being consulted and properly engaged, as we were under Operation SOPHIA. Operation IRINI is insufficient to implement resolutions banning the provision of arms to illegal entities. The operation is not comprehensive and excludes the land and air borders of eastern Libya, which is the main hub of support for the aggressor militias that operate outside the law. When the arms embargo was put in place, it was supposed to be in my country's interest and applied to individuals or groups attempting to smuggle weapons. But what is the logic in imposing such an embargo on a sovereign legitimate Government that has supposedly been backed by the Council from day one? In the same context, we categorically reject the statements made a few days ago by some countries directly involved in supporting the aggressor and in the killing of Libyans, casting doubt on the legitimacy and legality of our sovereign agreements and alliances, which constitutes blatant interference in our internal affairs. We therefore condemn and reject those statements. Moreover, if those countries do not recognize the legitimacy of our agreements, they should review the ongoing agreements we have reached with them, as we might reconsider their feasibility. Our advice to those countries is to find satisfactory answers for their people when they ask why their country's name is listed in reports of the United Nations sanctions committee and why their country is spending billions to support militias and mercenaries and provide them with weapons to kill and displace thousands of Libyans. Without a doubt, my country welcomes and appreciates all sincere initiatives and efforts aimed at ending the ongoing conflict and all attempts, such as those made in Moscow, Berlin and elsewhere, to reach the humanitarian ceasefire that we have always sought. We all agree that preventing bloodshed and sitting down for dialogue is the only way out of this crisis. However, this is true only of those who seek a peaceful solution, understand the meaning of democracy and aspire to a civil State, and not of someone who has sent our youth to perish, turned his back on everyone and appointed himself ultimate ruler and tyrant of the country, ignoring the will of the people and their right to self-determination. Therefore, we reiterate our categorical refusal to sit down with those whose hands are stained with the blood of the innocent. The Council should know that no political solution should be reduced to a single person or group and that eastern Libya and its people are part of the core of our nation and are much bigger than this dictator who represents only himself. The east has been hijacked and is living in fear. Council members are witness to the number of violations committed there, and the arrests, torture, forced disappearances and extrajudicial killings committed by his criminal takfiri militias under the slogan of "national army, safety and security". Finally, the Council has witnessed the victories of our Libyan National Army and military forces as they have liberated most of the aggressor's strongholds, revealed the truth and laid bare the weakness of the militias, which have started to demonstrate their defeat under the guise of tactical withdrawals, despite all the support they have been receiving for years. As much as we appreciate the change of position on the part of a number of States that have finally sided with the truth now that it has become clear, we no longer pay much attention to empty statements or words of condemnation. We assure the Council that our efforts to defeat the aggressor will continue with all our might, by all means and with the alliances we see fit in order to extend the State's authority throughout the country. It should now be clear to all that the war criminal's project has come to an end and now belongs to the past and that those who have been betting on him have lost their wager. He is the one who pulled out of dialogue and peaceful solutions. That is why we call on all those who have been involved with him to put down their weapons and surrender and to side with our nation so that we can end the cycle of conflict, sit down for a dialogue and reconciliation and discuss the post-Haftar days. To that end, we would like the United Nations, in coordination with the African Union, to play a more effective role in the coming period and to adopt new methods to deal with the Libyan issue and learn from the mistakes of the past. Through that new role, those obstructing peace will be held accountable in order to deter their authoritarian tendencies, the free will of the people will be ensured and solutions will not be dictated so that we can work towards a united civil State free from any intervention and inclusive of all.
