Mr. Tomka (Slovakia): I wish to express the
appreciation of my delegation at the convening of this
second open Security Council debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The fact that the Council is
about to adopt a draft resolution on this occasion attests to
the importance of the topic. Slovakia has aligned itself with
the statement of the representative of Finland delivered on
behalf of the European Union. Nevertheless, allow me to
make some additional comments.

Only three weeks ago, the Security Council held an
open debate on children and armed conflict, an issue of
equal importance and actually of the same nature. The
delegation of Slovakia participated in that debate,
underlining the necessity of a comprehensive approach to
an issue which has humanitarian, as well as ethical,
political, legal, military and socio-economic aspects.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(document S/1999/957) submitted to the Security Council
in response to its presidential statement (document S/PRST/1999/6) of 12 February 1999. My delegation
appreciates the comprehensive and integrated way in
which the Secretariat has been dealing with the issue, as
well as the 40 recommendations by the Secretary-General
on how the Security Council could act to improve both
the physical and the legal protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict. We are confident that these
recommendations deserve the full attention of the Security
Council in its further deliberations.

The plight of civilians in armed conflict is of great
concern to the international community. While in the
Second World War civilians accounted for 48 per cent of
the casualties, today up to 90 per cent of conflict
casualties around the world are civilians, and increasingly
large numbers of these are children and women. Those
figures are shocking, and we simply cannot ignore them.

As I pointed out in my statement on 25 August, the
situation is much more complicated due to a profound
shift in the pattern of today's conflicts. Many of them
have taken the form of intra-State factional violence, civil
strife and ethnic clashes, often marked by the collapse of
State institutions and a breakdown of law and order. Most
of today's conflicts are fought not only by regular armies
but also by irregular armed groups, militias, foreign
mercenaries, criminals and other disparate groups that
have little knowledge of or respect for the rules of
international law. The deliberate obstruction of
humanitarian assistance to civilians and refugees by the
combatants, using civilians as living shields and
employing organized violence against humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel is, in many cases, a major
element of their military strategy. According to estimates,
civilians are suffering from the effects of conflict and its
aftermath in approximately 50 countries around the world.
In recent years, United Nations staff and other
humanitarian workers have lost their lives or have been
abducted in 19 countries.

The Security Council has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. Most
important - and this is to be welcomed - it has
recognized in its resolutions adopted in recent years that
repression of the civilian population, ethnic cleansing,
genocide, large-scale forced displacement and relocation

 

of civilians and other flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law constitute a threat to international peace
and security.

A major problem has been the failure of States to
bring to justice those who violate international humanitarian
law and human rights. There are a number of relevant
international treaties in this respect, such as the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the two Protocols Additional, the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide and the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, just to mention a few.
The setting up of ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and last year's decision to
establish a permanent International Criminal Court have
been other major steps in combating the culture of
impunity.

However, the mere existence of these legal instruments
without an effective enforcement mechanism does not
automatically ensure their implementation. Furthermore, not
all States have ratified or acceded to the Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions or to basic
international human rights instruments and conventions
concerning refugees. Only four States have ratified the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court so far.
Slovakia is a party to all major instruments of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. We were among the first to ratify the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, and we signed the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court last year; we are determined to
complete the ratification process next year. We support the
work of the working group of the Commission on Human
Rights on a draft protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, regarding the involvement of children in
armed conflict, as well as the extension of the scope of the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel to all categories of United Nations and associated
personnel, including locally recruited staff.

In order to push forward a culture of compliance, the
Security Council should urge Member States to ratify
relevant international treaties, as well as to incorporate them
into national law and, in particular, to ensure their full
implementation. There should also be a concerted effort to
coerce non-State actors into compliance with international
law, mainly through the principle of individual criminal
responsibility.

The Security Council should more actively
concentrate on preventing conflicts at an early stage. An
early warning system should be further enhanced, and
preventive diplomacy should play a more active role in
potential conflict situations. The violation of human rights
has almost always been the prelude to a conflict which
eventually brings about disastrous humanitarian
consequences. We fully concur with the Secretary-General
that the Security Council should make use of human
rights information and analysis originating from experts
and mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights as
an indicator for potential preventive action by the United
Nations.

As recent experience has shown, the effort of
combatants to push away the international presence,
including humanitarian personnel, from the area of
conflict is another ominous sign of impending
humanitarian catastrophe. The reason is simple: to avoid
or eliminate any potential witnesses of intended or
committed atrocities or acts of genocide. Within the
context of early warning, the Security Council should be
able to react promptly and ensure a preventive monitoring
presence in the area or, if necessary, to authorize the
deployment of a preventive peacekeeping force.

Situations of total war have exposed the most
vulnerable sectors of civilian populations, women and
children, to horrendous violence. The disintegration of
families and the breakdown of the social structure during
times of armed conflict leave women and girls especially
vulnerable to gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation. Women also constitute the majority of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Since contact
between United Nations peacekeeping personnel and local
populations during peacekeeping operations has been
increasingly close and direct, it is important that
participants in peacekeeping operations be given specific
training prior to deployment that addresses local cultural
sensitivities, as well as gender-sensitivity issues. The
Secretariat and Member States should be further
encouraged to provide United Nations peacekeeping
missions with more women personnel, including women
military and civilian police officers, who could play a
very useful role in tackling gender-sensitivity aspects of
humanitarian emergencies.

