Mr. Kim Hyun Chong (Republic of Korea):
Since the adoption of the Bonn Agreement, in
December 2001, and despite many continuing
challenges, Afghanistan has achieved important
political progress, culminating in the first-ever direct
presidential election, in October 2004, and the
parliamentary elections of 2005. The international
community must continue to work closely with
Afghanistan to ensure that those successes have a
lasting impact. While much has been accomplished,
many challenges still lie ahead of us. It would be
presumptuous to believe that our work is nearing
completion. My delegation feels that 2008 is a critical
year for achieving comprehensive peace and security in
Afghanistan.

The Republic of Korea acknowledges that the
deteriorating security situation, compounded by a
resurgence of the Taliban and other extremist groups as
well as an increase in terror attacks and criminal drug
trafficking, hampers not only the reconstruction
process but also the implementation of Afghanistan's
National Development Strategy as a whole.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the
continuing instability in certain areas of the country.
The gravity of the situation is underlined by cases of
abduction and murder of Afghan and foreign civilians,
including the Taliban's 2007 kidnapping of 23 citizens
of the Republic of Korea, two of whom were
subsequently killed. In addition, we strongly condemn
the recent spate of terror attacks, including those near
Kandahar last month and in Kabul in January, which
were directed against civilians, including many women
and children.
That overall lack of security is also hindering the
return of Afghan refugees to their homeland. Because
of this, only 5,000 Afghan refugees returned home in
all of 2007. That can be compared with the 5,000
refugees returning daily during the peak of refugee
returns in 2004.
In taking note of the Secretary-General's report
on the situation in Afghanistan, we agree that
re-establishing lasting security requires a
multidimensional strategy coordinating military,
police, political and economic and social activities.
Essential to the success of that strategy are the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), working in close
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. Another
important factor will be enhanced coordination and
cooperation between the central and provincial
governments, so that security policies at the local level
will be more effective.

We are also concerned about the increasing threat
that drug trafficking poses to the national security,
social development and overall governance of
Afghanistan. Poppy cultivation reached yet another
record high in 2007 - up more than a third from 2006.
Until the Afghan people can find other sources of
income, many will continue to engage in that criminal
business, which also breeds corruption at the highest
levels. The Republic of Korea expects that Afghanistan
will continue to work towards fully implementing the
National Drug Control Strategy presented by its
Government at the London Conference. We stand ready
to join international support for the Strategy, as
evidenced by our contribution of $200,000 to the
Counter-Narcotics Trust Fund last year.

The Republic of Korea is encouraged by the
recent efforts of the United Nations and the Afghan
Ministry of Education to build nearly 300 new schools
and train 48,000 teachers in preparation for the
upcoming school year. Nearly 6.2 million children are
expected to attend school this year - up from
5.7 million in 2007. However, challenges remain with
regard to gender disparity and the number of students
who complete primary school.

The Republic of Korea has strongly supported the
reconstruction process in Afghanistan. Building upon
our contribution of approximately $60 million in grant
aid to Afghanistan between 2001 and 2005, we have set
aside $20 million for the subsequent three-year period
for projects focusing on human resource development,
agricultural and rural area development and public
administration efficiency. In addition, reconstruction
and medical units from my country have been
contributing to the Afghan reconstruction process since

their deployment in February 2002. We pledge to
continue our commitment to the reconstruction,
development and stabilization of Afghanistan in the
years ahead.

