Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank Special
Representative Helen La Lime for her efforts on behalf
of Haiti and for her first briefing to the Council.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

We are following the situation in Haiti with
particular attention. Three of the four countries that
make up our Kingdom are located in the Caribbean,
including Sint Maarten, a neighbour of Haiti, and the
Prime Minister of Sint Maarten, Ms. Marlin-Romeo,
addressed the Council during our September meeting
on Haiti (see S/PV.8342). We have been encouraged by
the positive path that Haiti has taken with the support of
the United Nations and the international community in
the past few years. It is now at a crossroads where it is
essential to consolidate and develop the gains made so
far. Today I would like to address three issues - threats
to political stability, the establishment of the rule of law
and prospects for the future.

In recent months, many Haitians have protested
about the Government authorities' lack of control and
accountability. The Government must take its citizens'
grievances seriously. At the same time, it is important
that all political stakeholders engage constructively
and act in the interests of the Haitian people, while
respecting democratic institutions. We are concerned
about the violence that has occurred during some of
the demonstrations, partly provoked and committed by
armed gangs. Such acts are unacceptable and undermine
the fragile political situation in Haiti.

Those developments underscore the importance of
improving the efforts to achieve the benchmarks outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1054)
for consolidating the rule of law. In the past few years
Haiti has made significant progress in establishing
the rule of law in a challenging environment. The
progress of the national police in terms of its capacity
and professionalism, which has been reflected in its
management of the recent mass demonstrations and
in the increase in its numbers of female officers, is
a positive example in that regard. The achievement
of several of the established goals therefore seems
within reach. We also welcome the recent appointment
of a delegate minister for human rights, who will be
responsible for the speedy development of a national
human rights action plan.

Despite the progress in those areas, it is clear that
we have to step on the gas. In that regard, we welcomed
the establishment of the joint commission. In order to
meet the goals of MINUJUSTH's exit strategy, it will
be vital to adopt and implement legislative reforms
in a number of key areas quickly and effectively.
The country must redouble its efforts to address the
major problems of overcrowded prisons, prolonged
pretrial detention, corruption and the lack of control
and accountability in the public sector, including the
police. That requires a total political commitment and
the allocation of adequate financial resources.

That brings me to my last point, on prospects for the
future. The rule of law must be consolidated in order
to strengthen the people's trust in the justice system
and promote sustainable peace and development. The
efforts in that regard must be redoubled to enable the
transition from MINUJUSTH to another form of United
Nations presence to take place next year. Developments
in the coming months will inform the debate on the
form that such a presence might take. To that end, it
will be necessary to assess the risk of destabilization,
with a view to ensuring the peaceful holding of
elections in October. We look forward to the strategic
assessment that should guide that debate. Whatever
form the transition eventually takes, it will be crucial
for the Haitian Government, the Mission and the United
Nations country team to maintain close cooperation.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
firmly supports the aspirations of the Haitian people to
achieve peace, justice and development. The conditions
necessary for achieving that goal are clear. They are
the strengthening of the rule of law, including through
increased police, judicial and prison capacity, the rapid
implementation of priority measures and respect for
human rights. The Haitian Government must take full
advantage of the presence of MINUJUSTH to make
progress along that path. For its part, the Kingdom ofthe
Netherlands will continue to support the engagement of
the United Nations in Haiti.

