Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased, Madam, to congratulate you on France's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and I thank you for the initiative to
discuss the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. I also thank Mr. Miroslav Jenca,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his valuable briefing on the issue.

Palestine witnessed a positive development with
the reconciliation among Palestinian factions and the
exercise by the Palestinian Authority of its authority
over the Palestinian territories. This will serve the
interests of the Palestinian people and allow them to
achieve their aspiration of establishing their own State
on Palestinian territory, within the 1967 borders.

We reiterate that, regrettably, the Palestinian
question remains at an impasse, without any possible
opening or detente that would allow the parties to sit
at the negotiating table, because the international
community is preoccupied with events in the region and
in the international arena. This negative state of affairs
is reflected in the deteriorating Palestinian situation
and the deadlock that has characterized it since 2014.

Israel, regrettably, continues to pursue a policy
of settlement in the territories occupied since 1967.
This runs counter to international law, including
resolution 2334 (2016). The 50 years of occupation of
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the policy of
Judaization and the settlement policy have given rise
to a sense of failure among the Palestinian people, who
feel that the international community has betrayed
them. This has had many negative repercussions,
including an increase in the level of violence and the
resort to terrorism by some who believe that they have
no other option.

Jerusalem is a symbol of coexistence. It has a
special status not only among the people of Jerusalem
but also for adherents to the three faiths. It is the Qibla
of more than 3 billion Muslims, and any attempt to
compromise the legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
will only foment hatred and push people to embrace
terrorism and encourage it in the region as a whole.

The Kingdom of Morocco and His Highness the
King of Morocco, who presides over the Jerusalem
Committee, call for the establishment of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, because
His Highness believes that this is the only way to
achieve peace and end conflict in the Middle East and
to promote international peace and security. His Royal
Highness has stressed on more than one occasion and
through different means, including a letter addressed to
the Secretary-General in June, the violations by Israel of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the danger of the Judaization
of Jerusalem, as well as the unilateral decisions
taken and the need to end settlement activities. His
Royal Highness stressed the support of the Kingdom
of Morocco for all initiatives aimed at arriving at
a settlement that guarantees the establishment of a
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the 1967 borders, living side by side in peace
and security with Israel.

In conclusion, the position of Morocco continues to
be based on the tenets of the Arab Peace Initiative and
the terms of reference that call for the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, within the June 1967 borders.

