Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to say how pleased my delegation is, Sir, to see
you presiding over the work of the Security Council
this month. We also wish to congratulate you very
warmly on your commendable initiative to hold an
open debate on the subject of small arms. We would
also like to thank Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-Secretary-
General for Disarmament Affairs, for his very relevant
presentation this morning.

Never in the history of humankind has the world
suffered so much from the horrors of the proliferation
of, and illicit trafficking in, small arms and light
weapons. Easy to use, durable and easily available on
the black market, such weapons - whose number is
now estimated to be over 500 million - due to the
lack of an adequate constraint mechanism, easily make
their way into illicit trafficking, fuelling conflict,
perpetuating crime and fostering mercenary activities.
It has been estimated that, from 1990 to 2001 alone,
such weapons resulted in the deaths of more than
4 million innocent people, mostly women and children,
and caused massive population displacements,
condemning people to live in itinerant poverty, in grave
violation of international humanitarian law.

The lethal character of these weapons has sadly
been proved in West Africa, where they have been
recycled from conflict to conflict by death merchants
whose activities have increased the fragility of the
economic and social fabric of the States in which they
operate. It is for that reason that the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) deems
the fight against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons to be one of the fundamental priorities of its
common policy. That is also the reason why we
established a moratorium on the manufacture, import
and export of small arms. As mentioned in the report
(S/2005/69) of the Secretary-General, with the
cooperation of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development, the States of
the subregion have mobilized themselves to transform
the moratorium into a legally binding instrument. In
that connection, I continue to believe that ECOWAS
will be able to count on the ongoing support of all its
partners, foremost among which is the United Nations.

My delegation believes that, once adopted by
ECOWAS, such an instrument will serve as a strong
subregional pillar in the legal architecture on small
arms that the international community must establish.
Senegal therefore voices the ardent desire, shared by
the majority of States, for a successful conclusion, as
soon as possible, to the international negotiations on
two binding legal instruments in the sensitive areas of
the tracing of, and brokering in, small arms and light
weapons. Were they to be concluded, those two
instruments would address the concerns underlying
several of the Secretary-General's 12 recommendations.
Here, I would mention recommendations 1 and 2, on
tracing; recommendation 6, on the links between the
illicit trafficking in weapons and the illegal
exploitation of resources; recommendation 9, on the
export and transfer of small arms; and recommendation
12, on transparency in armaments.

Beyond those, my country supports all the
relevant proposals made in the report of the Secretary-
General, which include two proposals that have
particularly drawn Senegal's interest. The first, which
pertains to the regional and subregional aspect of the
problem, entails the establishment and implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes while at the same time ensuring
that doing so does not suffer as a result of insufficient
resources. My country would therefore like to see a
line item on DDR programmes as part of the
peacekeeping operations budget. The second point
pertains to scrupulously observing Security Council
arms embargoes. However, my delegation believes that
here there must be a clear mechanism to detect
violations and punish violators.

Furthermore, my delegation would have been
even more satisfied with the excellent report
introduced today if its recommendations had included
an item on cooperation to strengthen capacity-building
in combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in countries and regions suffering from this
scourge, as well as to address the limited financial and
human resources available for that task.

The proposals for action to which I have referred
should be implemented as soon as possible, in order to
quickly defeat this multinational criminal enterprise
that has been wiping out innocent lives and to hasten
the dawn of a world that is more prosperous by virtue
of being safer and more peaceful.

