The Secretary-General: Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Council on such an
important subject. I welcome this open debate on
implementation of measures intended to make the
Council more efficient and transparent, and I am
grateful to you, Mr. President, for bringing us together.
Let me also express my appreciation for the tireless
efforts of the delegations of Japan, Slovakia and
Panama, as successive Chairs of the Council's
revitalized Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.

Over the past years, the Security Council has
faced increasingly complex responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security. At the
same time, we have experienced a surge in the demand
for United Nations conflict prevention and
management, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities.

This makes it essential for the Council to keep
addressing issues related to its working methods,
including by implementing the measures set out in the
note of the President of the Council two years ago.
These measures are a key step in making the United
Nations more efficient, effective and accountable in the
face of a growing array of new challenges.

I commend the Council for its efforts so far.
Consider what progress has been made in
implementing the measures since the adoption of the
note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/507) in July 2006. The Secretariat has also
taken steps to make the recommendations in the note a
reality, including those related to the timeliness and
content of my reports to the Council, those on the
familiarization of duly elected Council members, and
the main technical points regarding wider and more
user-friendly dissemination of information on the
Council's programme and activities to non-Council
members.

Since taking office, I have stressed the
importance of full accountability as a fundamental
organizing principle and operational guideline for the
08-49188
work of the Organization. As a Secretariat, we must
ensure that we work and deliver as one to meet the
mandates that the Security Council gives us and, at the
same time, hold ourselves accountable for our
behaviour and for outcomes. I am confident that the
Security Council, which carries out its responsibilities
on behalf of all Member States, is also guided by this
principle. I appreciate that the members of the Council
are committed to interacting with the wider United
Nations membership through greater transparency,
openness in decision-making and inclusiveness. I
consider this to be pivotal to the way the Council
works and is perceived by the international community.

Since 1994, when the Security Council held its
first debate on this issue, it has come a long way. I trust
that the Council will consolidate the gains that have
been made and keep moving forward. I look forward to
working with the Council in strengthening even further
the cooperation between it and the Secretariat. I shall
keep extending my full support to the Security Council
and its members for their tireless efforts to make this
indispensable organ more efficient, transparent and
inclusive.

