Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing and for the presentation
the seventeenth report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, submitted to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Let me start by saying that Rwanda strongly
condemns the continued fighting in the Sudan. We
remain deeply concerned about the continued violations
of human rights in Darfur, particularly targeted attacks
against civilians and sexual and gender-based violence.
We acknowledge the efforts made by the Government
of the Sudan to improve the security situation in Darfur,
which include the establishment of several institutions
provided for in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
in particular the Darfur Regional Authority and its
associated parties.
The nomination of a special prosecutor by the
Government of the Sudan to investigate alleged war
crimes in Darfur and the establishment of branch
judicial offices in the five states of Darfur, as stipulated
in the Doha Document, is a significant step towards
justice and accountability in Darfur. However, while
recognizing the progress made, we believe that much
remains to be done. We encourage the Government of
the Sudan, including through the special prosecutor, to
make additional efforts towards the prosecution and
trial of the perpetrators of the most serious crimes in
Darfur.

Rwanda believes that only a political solution
through the Doha Document for Peace will bring
peace to Darfur. We therefore urge all the parties to
join that process. However, despite recent progress,
the Doha Document has yet to be fully implemented.
The progress against critical benchmarks - namely,
a comprehensive and inclusive settlement to the
conflict, the restoration of stable peace and a secure
environment, the strengthening of the rule of law and
human rights and the stabilization of the humanitarian
situation and facilitation of aid delivery - has been
hindered, and even set back, owing to the failure to
achieve, or commit to, a comprehensive and inclusive
ceasefire among the parties to the conflict.

Inthat light, we urge the Government of the Sudan and

all the signatories to commit to the full implementation
of the provisions of the Doha Document, particularly
the ceasefire and final security arrangements. We hope
that will encourage other armed groups to follow suit.
Allow me to stress our continued support for the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the African Union
(AU) High-level Implementation Panel. The success
of the Doha Document will ultimately depend upon
the willingness of the signatory parties to abide by its
provisions.

Turning to the ICC, our position is well known.
Rwanda, like several other members of the Council, is
not a signatory to the Rome Statute. We have had an
opportunity in the Council to elaborate our position on
the Court; I hope we will have more opportunities to
further exchange views, including in the framework of
informal interactive dialogues with the Prosecutor.

Regarding the indictment issued against President
Omer Hassan A. Al-Bashir, we recall that, at seven
different Summits of the African Union, starting with
that of February 2009, African Heads of State adopted
decisions to request that the proceeding be deferred in
accordance with article 16 of the Rome Statute. As the
lates AU Summit stated, "The search for justice should
be pursued in a way that does not impede orjeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace."

In the same vein, we believe that all African
countries that have received President Al-Bashir since
his indictment were in conformity with the decisions
of the African Union Summits and were pursuing the
same goal of peace in the region. It would therefore be
unfortunate if they were sanctioned for their efforts
towards that end.

In that regard, let me once again underscore the
importance ofgenuine cooperation between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations.
That cooperation goes along with respect for decisions
taken by Heads of State of member States of those
regional organizations, particularly the African Union
and the League of Arab States, both of which are
organizations to which the Sudan belongs.

Let me conclude by stating that Rwanda, as a member
of the Security Council, a member State of the African
Union and the major troop- and police-contributing
country to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, will continue to work towards
sustainable peace, genuine reconciliation and
accountability for the most serious crimes in Darfur,
while promoting complementarity and the equal
sovereignty of nations.

