Mr. Akram (Pakistan): When the Syrian
presidency commenced, we were promised that this
would be a slow month, enabling us to take vacations.
Unfortunately, Mr. President, it has been anything but
slow. We, of course, know that this is not your
responsibility. But I would like to congratulate the
Syrian presidency, as well as you yourself and
Mr. Mekdad, for the effective and efficient way in
which you have guided the Council through some very
difficult issues.

The news that you, Mr. President, will soon be
moving to Geneva can be received with mixed feelings.
We will be sad because you have been a colleague who

has demonstrated both firm convictions and complete
integrity in our every exchange. We will certainly miss
you. But you are going to a place that is not only
beautiful and serene; it will also require the
deployment of your great energies and vigour when
addressing issues pertaining to disarmament, trade and
human rights. We wish you well and look forward to
seeing you often at that location.

At the outset, I would like to convey the
sympathies of the Government and the people of
Pakistan over the tragic incident of 19 August that
claimed the lives of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and his
colleagues, the servants of the United Nations. Pakistan
deplores such attacks carried out against United
Nations peacekeeping and humanitarian officials, in
Baghdad and elsewhere.

We would like to welcome the recent adoption of
resolution 1502 (2003), initiated by Mexico, on the
protection of humanitarian personnel in armed
conflicts. It is a timely resolution, given the backdrop
of the recent events in Baghdad and the threats faced
by humanitarian personnel in various war zones all
over the world.

Peacekeeping is an essential tool for maintaining
international peace and security. While the recent
history of peacekeeping has not been without anguish
and pain, we must not forget our successes. United
Nations peacekeepers have successfully assisted in the
transition of both Cambodia and East Timor from war-
torn societies to viable States, as well as in restoring a
semblance of order and stability in various parts of the
world, such as the Balkans. Most recently, Sierra Leone
has become an encouraging success story of United
Nations peacekeeping, despite initial setbacks. Pakistan
is proud to have been associated with each one of those
peacekeeping missions.

There has been a greater tendency of late to
authorize peacekeeping missions in intra-State, rather
than inter-State, conflicts. The question we must ask is,
why? - especially when inter-State conflicts pose a
greater threat to international peace and security than
inter-State conflicts do. We believe that the Security
Council has a responsibility to address all threats to
international peace and security and, at the very least,
to prevent potential armed conflicts from turning into
actual ones. Traditionally, peacekeeping has meant the
insertion of a military force to separate warring parties
and to create the necessary political space for peace to
emerge. While ceasefires remain central to any
peacekeeping operation, imposing them has been
difficult - as we saw in Sierra Leone, cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia - especially without the intervention of
major and regional Powers. Enforcing ceasefires
requires a robust and sustained peacekeeping presence
on the ground. Experience has shown that it is essential
that a robust posture be accompanied by equally robust
rules of engagement that are uniformly applicable
across the mission. Those are the best deterrents
against any spoilers or would-be attackers, and the key
to maintaining security.

However, peacekeeping in many parts of the
world is becoming more complex and broader in scope.
The military aspects of peacekeeping, as crucial as they
are, need to be augmented by a host of tasks aimed at
ensuring that a fragile peace becomes a permanent one.
Those include not just peace-enforcement but also the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance, disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, support for the rule of
law, electoral assistance and even the monitoring of
human rights violations and the creation of the
necessary environment for economic reconstruction.
The role of civilian police and civilian expertise in
many of those fields is also becoming essential in such
operations.

The transition from conflict to peace and from
peace to stability - encompassing peacekeeping,
peace-building, political and socio-economic recovery,
rehabilitation and reconstruction - is a task that the
Security Council cannot accomplish alone, and one that
requires a more composite and comprehensive
approach. The Security Council therefore needs to
explore how it can work with other organs of the
United Nations, especially the Economic and Social
Council, to develop composite mechanisms for the
purpose of ensuring that the initial steps taken towards
peace when peacekeepers are deployed will eventually
lead to permanent peace.

Peacekeeping is also an expensive task requiring
resources as well as manpower. While the requirements
of peacekeeping, along with its complexity, are ever
increasing, the will to provide the necessary resources
is, unfortunately, on the decline. Yet the success of any
peacekeeping operation depends as much on the quality
of troops as on the amount of resources available to it.
The international community therefore needs to ensure
that a peacekeeping mission is provided with adequate
financial and other necessary resources to complete its
assigned tasks.

We need to improve the triangular cooperation
between the Council, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries. The troop-contributing
countries are an essential element of any peacekeeping
operation. It is they who put their sons and daughters in
harm's way and it is they who need to be heard at all
stages - planning, implementation, modification or
termination - of peacekeeping mandates.

In authorizing a peacekeeping mandate, the
Security Council needs to provide a clear, realistic and
achievable mandate. This mandate must be fulfilled
before the deployment of any peacekeeping mission.
My delegation has consistently cautioned, both inside
this Council and outside, against any premature
withdrawal of any peacekeeping mission, regardless of
any political or financial considerations, such as in the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor. We will continue to emphasize the principle
that, once deployed, no peacekeeping operation should
be disbanded without completing the tasks assigned to
it.

The Council needs to carry out a cost-benefit
analysis as to where and how political attention,
resources and forces should be deployed among the
series of conflicts across the world. The Council's
response needs to be more symmetrical and
commensurate with the threat posed to international
peace and security. In Bosnia and Kosovo, with a
combined population of less than 6 million people, the
Security Council authorized the deployment of
multinational forces, each of which was originally
30,000 strong. In contrast, it took the United Nations
three years to deploy 10,800 of its own peacekeepers in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a country of
over 52 million people with an area the size of Western
Europe. In Liberia, the Council had to wait two weeks
to deploy a few thousand troops, while hundreds of
people died in the streets of Monrovia. Only 45
military observers are deployed in Jammu and
Kashmir, which has been called the most dangerous
place on Earth.

The Council, in authorizing peacekeeping
mandates, must also be consistent in upholding
cardinal principles for which this Organization stands,
such as human rights, addressing the root causes of
conflicts and the implementation of the resolutions of
the Security Council. Some peacekeeping operations
encompass this comprehensive and integrated
approach - for example in East Timor, where self-
determination was promoted, and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where human rights violations are
investigated. In other operations, such endeavours to
address the root causes of conflict and to create
conditions for political solutions are, however,
studiously avoided.

While upholding general principles, the Security
Council must also show flexibility in its operational
approaches to peacekeeping missions. Each operation
must be tailored according to its requirements, in
accordance with the nature of the crisis and its political
and security context. In Afghanistan, for example, the
requirement is one of stabilization, not traditional
peacekeeping. Security in Afghanistan is not
achievable in the immediate future without the
geographic extension of the mandate of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). There
can be no extension of the ISAF effect without the
expansion of ISAF itself. The troops required would be
far fewer than those currently deployed by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization in either Bosnia or
Kosovo and less than the number in UNAMSIL at its
peak.

Similarly, Iraq also requires a stabilization force.
However, such a force obviously will have to be based
on the consent of the Iraqi people. It must be visibly
seen to be promoting the interests of the Iraqi people.
The force must also have the support and consent of
regional States, as well as of those that have affiliations
with Iraq and a legitimate national interest in ensuring
stabilization and improvement in the security of Iraq.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is one of
the most complex peacekeeping operations. In fact,
many have likened it to three peacekeeping

operations - in Kinshasa, in Ituri and in the Kivus.
Here, the key element is flexibility - not just
operational, but also political and structural - to

address the complex issues and rapidly emerging
developments in different parts of the Congo.

Liberia is a new mission which has its own
requirements. It is essential that the operation in
Liberia be carefully planned and executed. It needs to
benefit from the lessons learned from past missions.
The ghosts of Somalia, Bosnia and Rwanda still haunt
us today. We must not repeat Liberian history, in which
two periods of chronic instability were punctuated by a
brief period of peacekeeping in-between.

The asymmetry in the way the Security Council
approaches peacekeeping could not be more vivid than
it is in Kashmir. Only 45 observers, as I have pointed
out, are expected to maintain the most tenuous of
ceasefires in that dangerous flashpoint. The observance
of Security Council resolutions is an obligation on all
Member States, including the obligation to accept
United Nations peacekeeping missions authorized by
those resolutions and to cooperate with them. It is also
a duty of the Council to carefully consider the reports
submitted to it by the peacekeeping missions. These
requirements are not fulfilled in the case of the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
(UNMOGIP).

Nor can the mandate of United Nations
peacekeeping missions be reduced to the bare
minimum. UNMOGIP's mandate is, no doubt, to
observe the implementation of the ceasefire in
Kashmir, but the larger purpose of the operation and
the larger purpose of the Security Council are to ensure
conflict prevention and to promote conflict resolution.
A strengthened UNMOGIP operating on both sides of
the Line of Control in Kashmir can and should be
utilized not only to observe and report on the ceasefire
along the Line of Control, but also to monitor
allegations of cross-Line movement which are often
advanced by one party; to observe and report on the
implementation of confidence-building measures which
may be agreed by the two sides; to report on the
massive violations of human rights which are taking
place in Jammu and Kashmir; and to address the root
cause of the conflict - that is, the demand of the right
of self-determination by the people of Kashmir, which
has been promised to them by the Security Council in
several of its own resolutions.

Pakistan is one of the oldest, largest and most
consistent contributors of United Nations peacekeeping
troops. Pakistan has participated in over 25 United
Nations peacekeeping operations in the past four
decades, including the most dangerous missions in
Somalia, Bosnia and Sierra Leone. Thousands of
Pakistani troops have donned blue helmets and 64 of
them have made the ultimate sacrifice for peace. When
we speak on peacekeeping, we speak not only as a
member of this Council, but also as a major
stakeholder with a considerable peacekeeping interest
and experience. Pakistan will continue to contribute as
it has always done, both inside and outside the Security
Council, to supporting United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to making them more effective.

