Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): I join other
speakers, Sir, in congratulating you and the other
members of your delegation on Namibia's very effective
presidency, two thirds of which have already passed in
the seclusion of our consultations room, but which has
now entered its visible stage. I understand that for a large
part of the remainder of your presidency the entire United
Nations will have the benefit of seeing you at work in
this Chamber.

My delegation shares the fervent hopes of all those
who see the implementation of the Lome Peace
Agreement as the only way forward for Sierra Leone. Our

 

contributions thus far, of $4 million for the operations in
Sierra Leone of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) plus
$2 million for humanitarian assistance, are tangible proof of
the importance we attach to the promotion of peace in that
country. By the same token, it would in our View be
inconceivable for the draft resolution to be adopted today
to be seen in isolation from its legal context.

We commend the wisdom of the Secretary-General in
insisting that his Special Representative enter a reservation
regarding the amnesty provisions contained in the Lome
accord. As one of the moral guarantors of that accord, our
Organization should clearly note the limits of impunity, as
defined in international law, which apply to Sierra Leone as
they do to any other part of the world. There can be no
doubt that the atrocities committed against the civilian
population of Sierra Leone, including widespread systematic
killings, rapes and amputations, constitute massive
violations of international human rights and humanitarian
law. As noted by Mr. Okelo in the reservation attached to
his signature on the Lome accord, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law cannot be covered by the amnesty
provisions of the accord.

The Security Council itself has gone on record
unequivocally on this issue. To quote just two examples, in
a presidential statement of 29 June 1998 (S/PRST / 1998/ 18)
it stressed the obligation of all States to prosecute those
responsible for grave breaches of international humanitarian
law, and in a presidential statement of 12 February 1999
(S/PRST/ 1999/6) it affirmed the need to bring to justice, in
an appropriate manner, individuals who incite or cause
violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict or
who otherwise violate international humanitarian and human
rights law. Furthermore, in its resolution 1231 (1999) of ll
March 1999 the Council urged the appropriate authorities
to investigate all allegations of human rights violations in
Sierra Leone with a View to bringing the perpetrators to
justice.

We note that in paragraph 54 of his report
(S/ 1999/836) the Secretary-General places his reservations
in the wider context of the goal of ending the culture of
impunity. International tribunals have been set up or are
being set up precisely to remedy this culture of impunity,
and we owe it to the people of Sierra Leone to allow them
recourse to the same remedies now open to victims of
similar crimes in other countries and on other continents.

There is no peace without justice, and without
accountability for the heinous crimes committed in Sierra
Leone there will be no lasting peace for that country. For
that reason, we welcome the fact that a commission of
enquiry, as recommended by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, is currently being established. We hope
that that commission, and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission foreseen in the Lorne accord, will help bring
forward the day when the people of Sierra Leone can
confidently expect peace with justice.

