Mr. Egeland: I sincerely want to thank Council
members for all their expressions of support and the
reaffirmation of the commitment to the protection of
civilians that we have heard today.

I think the Security Council has truly made great
progress in its work to protect civilian populations in
the past couple of years. The Council has probably
done more than any Security Council before you ever
in this regard. Peacekeeping missions are better, their
mandates are better, there is more support for the work
of protecting civilians, and there is more response in
the Security Council to our proposals, our ideas and
our appeals as humanitarian workers on the frontlines
of humanity.

There has also been a rich selection of proposals
from Council members and from other Member States.
Ambassador Allan Rock again made a number of
valuable points on behalf of Canada, as he has in many
of his previous presentations. And so have all the
others. We have taken careful note of them and they
will be important for us as we develop and draft further
reports to the Secretary-General and come back to the
Council with more proposals.

I think the Council can be proud of what has
happened in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi, South
Sudan, Angola, and of the progress that we are making
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). What
I have tried to do today, and what we have tried to do
in our drafting the Secretary-General's report, is to say
that we need to be more predictable, because I have
also mentioned a number of countries' situations where
we are not seeing the same progress. We should be
equally predictable in our solidarity and in our
protection of women, children and civilians under
threat everywhere.

It comes at a critically important time, and it
comes at a time where there is a new Security Council
resolution. That is a new opportunity for us. It also
comes at a time when force commanders, more than
ever before, want and are asking for help to protect
civilian populations. Force commanders need more
resources, more tailor-made resources and clear
guidance on how to actually undertake protection when
facing threats of imminent violence. We owe them our
help so as to enable them to protect civilians under
attack around them.

I am grateful today for the recognition by many
speakers of the need for Security Council mandates and
the United Nations peacekeeping missions to reflect
more realistically protection needs on the ground. I
look forward to working more closely with Security
Council members and with my colleagues in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
in the Department of Political Affairs (DPA) to achieve
this fine-tuning of our responses to the various
countries' situations. Importantly, speakers have today
also proposed that reporting on the implementation of
the provisions of resolution 1674 (2006) should be
included in the reports of the Secretary-General in
reference to concrete country situations. That will
indeed be a very important reality check for all of us.

The representatives of Japan and Argentina,
among others, also proposed that a matrix be prepared
clarifying roles, responsibilities and timelines for
carrying out protection activities in peacekeeping
missions. I believe that that would serve as a valuable
tool in clarifying what actions should be taken, by
whom and when, so that we all can be accountable.
32

I thank delegations who have reiterated today the
grave concerns of the international community over the
failure to adequately protect civilians who continue to
suffer in Darfur and elsewhere. We need to have
significant breakthroughs in Darfur; we need to have
breakthroughs in Eastern Chad and elsewhere.

As humanitarian workers, we have probably gone
further than ever before into dangerous terrain, and that
was gratefully acknowledged by members of the
Council. If we are left alone in Darfur or elsewhere,
our personnel would be in impossible situations and it
would immediately lead to a paralysis of life-saving
operations. The next weeks and months will be crucial
in deciding whether we go from the present situation of
totally inadequate protection or whether we can move
on to a more predictable peacekeeping situation in
Darfur and elsewhere.

For our part, I would like to reiterate that OCHA
will give all possible support to Council members as
they take the protection agenda further forward. Our
collective hope must be that we find new, more
creative ways to place civilians at the heart of our
actions as the United Nations, in more coherent and
comprehensive planning, in activating our good offices
and in ensuring effective political mediation
everywhere.

It is our collective responsibility to provide
protection to civilians, who continue to bear the brunt
of conflict, and I hope that the next time we come back
we can report further progress. But all of us must work
very hard in the coming months.

