The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Georgia,
Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Peter Mauer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of
the Center for Civilians in Conflict.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special
Representative of the NATO Secretary-General for
Women, Peace and Security.

I propose that the Council invite the observer ofthe
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

It is so decided.

I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules ofprocedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2019/373, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2019/385, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 May 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.

