Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption by a very large majority -
indeed, by near unanimity - of resolution 1803
(2008). The resolution is the outcome of a collective
approach that led its three authors - France, the
United Kingdom and Germany - as well as China, the
Russian Federation, the United States and ultimately
the Council as a whole, to deem it necessary to send a
clear and firm message to Iran.

Why are we here? The Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) establishes a
regime based on confidence, to which the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is the keystone. That
confidence is necessary to guarantee our security. It is
also the condition allowing all to enjoy the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. It is not arbitrary, but based on
concrete facts.

Iran concealed a clandestine nuclear programme
for 20 years, in violation of its Safeguards Agreement
and without a credible civilian use. It developed that
programme through a network that serviced military
programmes throughout the world. It has revealed no
information on its own initiative, and has cooperated

with the Agency only sporadically since it was
exposed. While the enrichment to make fissile material
was being undertaken, Iran was working on various
techniques that can be used to develop nuclear
weapons. In 1987, Iran also received and preserved a
document on the conversion of uranium hexafluoride
gas into metallic uranium and on the melding of
enriched metallic uranium into hemispherical forms,
which has no use other than the manufacture of a
nuclear weapon. Iran is also actively developing long-
range missiles.

Given that disturbing situation, the international
community's requests to restore confidence - requests
iterated by the Board of Governors of the IAEA and the
Security Council in its resolutions 1696 (2006), 1737
(2006) and 1747 (2007) - are simple and
understandable to all. Iran must suspend its sensitive
activities, offer full transparency under the Additional
Protocol to the IAEA, and shed full light on the
outstanding issues.

Bearing in mind the future of the NPT, if anyone
can violate its safeguards agreements, refuse to
implement the resolutions of the IAEA Board of
Governors and the Security Council, and engage in
dangerous activities on that basis, the entire regime
will be under threat. We cannot afford that while the
demand for nuclear energy is greater than ever because
global development requires it.

Of course, there is no question of refusing Iran
the right to use nuclear energy peacefully when it
meets its international obligations. France, which is
committed to distributing such energy, is particularly
sensitive to that matter, but we must bear in mind the
dangers that would arise with respect to Iran's
implementation of a policy of fait accompli. In that
volatile region, it would raise the risk of confrontation,
and that is what we wish to avoid above all else.

The Security Council is meeting today for the
fourth time on this issue because it has noted that Iran
has yet to respect its obligations. The most recent
report of the IAEA Director General has once again
sharpened our concern. The Director General has
concluded that the IAEA cannot yet take a position on
the nature and scope of the Iranian nuclear programme,
and has called on Iran once again to build confidence
in the peaceful nature of its programme and to act on
the Security Council's requests.
A new and disturbing aspect that is developed at
length in the report is that of Iran's presumed
militarization activities. The Director General calls
them a matter of serious concern. If we are to maintain
confidence in the NPT, we have no choice but to adopt
sanctions against that country. In that respect, I express
the position of the Federal Republic of Germany as
well.

Today's resolution adds names to the list of
people or entities subject to assets freezes due to their
connection with Iran's proliferation activities. It
imposes a travel ban on those most closely involved
and prevents the provision to Iran of dual-use material.
It calls for vigilance in transactions with Iranian banks,
in particular the Mali and Sadat banks. For the same
reason, it calls for limiting the granting of export
credits to Iran. Lastly, it encourages States to ensure
that air or maritime cargo transported by two Iranian
companies involved in trafficking does not include
prohibited material.

Despite all this, our approach is not punitive. The
sanctions aim at ensuring the credibility of our
approach, but our priority is to find a diplomatic
solution. The Security Council has indicated that
sanctions will be suspended if Iran suspends its
sensitive activities, and repealed if Iran fully respects
its obligations. In June 2006, along with our German,
British, American, Russian and Chinese partners, we
offered Iran a proposal for political, economic and
nuclear cooperation. Iran did not wish to consider that
offer. We urgently ask it once again to do so. That is
also the message sent to Iran by the ministers for
foreign affairs of Germany, China, the United States,
France, the United Kingdom and the Russian
Federation, which was read out earlier by the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom.

We therefore once again extend a hand to the
Iranian people in the hope that its leaders will accept it.

