Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to thank
Ambassador Arias, as did other delegations, for his
cooperation and his friendship in the past. My
delegation would also join others in wishing him well
for the future.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later in this debate by
Ambassador Ryan of Ireland, representing the
presidency of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Pakistani presidency of
the Council for having convened this very timely
debate on a key topic. We would like to welcome you,
Mr. Foreign Minister, in the chair, since your presence
here testifies to the importance that you attach to this
subject, especially as Pakistan is one of the main troop-
contributors in peacekeeping operations.

Since last August's public debate on
peacekeeping, a whole series of new peacekeeping
operations have been or are in the process of being
decided upon. The number of new peacekeeping
operations is growing faster than the number of
missions accomplished. Soon, we will have reached an
all-time peak number of peacekeeping personnel. The
ongoing debate on peacekeeping and related policies
has made it clear that Member States see a need to
respond to this surge in peacekeeping operations.
However, as the last session of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations has shown, we need to
discuss the conclusions that should be drawn from this
and whether and how peacekeeping policies need to be
reshaped.

Obviously, resources are the key issue. The
Secretariat is in an increasingly difficult situation,
having to staff new missions on short notice and
depending entirely on the willingness of Member
States to help out. Rapid response capacities are
exhausted, the arsenals in Brindisi empty. Many
Member States, Germany among them, already have
sizeable numbers of troops in the field. Some
countries - and again, Germany is among them - are
in a process of restructuring their forces, reducing their
sizes due to tighter budgetary restraints.

Clearly we must recognize that our resources are
limited. Mentioning this is not an attempt to dodge
solidarity with those in need: solidarity must remain
our guiding principle. Solidarity is a necessity if we
want to preserve the institution of peacekeeping
altogether. But every mission must be subject, on a
regular basis, to scrutiny with regard to the cost-benefit
ratio. Along with this goes the difficult question of
how long and at what size a peacekeeping operation
must stay in order to prevent a resurgence of violence
and armed conflict. There are no easy answers to this.
But we must develop policies in that regard and be
more flexible than in the past, in order to match the
demand for peacekeeping operations with available
capacities and resources. One solution may be a
gradual transfer of peacekeeping responsibilities to
regional organizations.

Increasingly, it is accepted that a division of
labour may improve resource allocation. In the initial
phase of a peacekeeping mission, especially when a
rapid response is called for, the strength of an approach
in which operations are led by one or a few nations has
been proven. Also, the inclusion of regional
organizations in peacekeeping operations has proven to
be an asset. By involving organizations located in a
region in which a peacekeeping operation is under way,
a feeling of ownership is created. This, in turn, serves
as an important motivating factor. Therefore, helping to
build regional capacities and transferring know-how
through training programmes are important
contributions that Member States can make to
strengthen regional capacities. Germany tries to make
its own contribution through its Centre for
International Peace Operations, located in Berlin.

The ever-increasing complexity of peacekeeping
operations results from the experience showing that
military operations alone cannot provide sustainable
peace. A whole range of humanitarian and peace-
building elements has been included in the more recent
mandates. The list of such activities seems to grow
with each new mandate. Certain peace-building
elements are indispensable, from the outset of a
mission, to guarantee its success. Basic preconditions
of civilian life need to be restored, and combatants
need to be taken off the streets through effective
measures of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). The funding for such elements
needs to be secured for the sake of the whole mission's
success, regardless of whether they fall under assessed
or voluntary budgets. Mid- to long-term peace-
building, however, will have to remain under voluntary
funding. By holding an open debate on the role of the
private sector in peace-building, the Council has heard
proposals on new strata in peace-building. New models
for the structure, organization and conduct of
peacekeeping operations deserve our consideration.
The concept of Provincial Reconstruction Teams, now
being tested in Afghanistan, could open up new
avenues for how to make the best use of limited
resources.

One area in which we cannot make compromises
is the security of mission personnel. The horrible
events of August last year made it clear once more that
peacekeepers live a dangerous existence. Clearly, all
means of gathering and analysing the necessary
information in the field, within the chain of command
and at United Nations Headquarters here in New York,
that help to correct assessments about the security
situation in the areas of operation must be provided.
Also, means of safe transport, especially air transport,
must be furnished. Health care for peacekeepers must
always meet the necessary standards.

We need to be more inclusive in making our
decisions on peacekeeping. The motivation of Member
States to participate in peacekeeping operations should
not be taken for granted. Member States need to be
motivated to contribute and, if necessary, to make
sacrifices. Member States may have different ways of
participating in a peacekeeping operation.
The engagement of troop contributors has
traditionally been honoured by their inclusion in the
planning of a mission. However, Member States
contributing to peacekeeping through means other than
troop contributions should likewise participate in the
planning and debate preceding a mission. Procedural
regulations such as those contained in resolution 1353
(2001) and in the note of January 2002 provide for that
possibility, but it is not yet sufficiently established in
the practice of the United Nations.

At the beginning of this year, the Security
Council received a letter - signed by a number of
countries from around the world, all of them associated
with peacekeeping - requesting greater participation.
In our view, it is in the best interest of peacekeeping to
heed that call and to give all major stakeholders a
forum to express their views. The Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations could and
should provide such a forum.

Let me conclude by expressing the notion that
preventing armed conflict is better than quelling it.
How many human lives could have been saved had the
international community reacted in time to clear signs
of imminent unrest and Violence? Conflict prevention
is a difficult task. Germany therefore welcomes the
Secretary-General's step of appointing a special
representative on genocide. A next logical step could
and should be to institutionalize an office dealing with
early warning and conflict prevention. Improving our
activities on prevention is not only a way to save lives,
but also an important tool to keep peacekeeping
manageable in the future.

