Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to thank your predecessor, the
representative of France. Through you, I also wish to
express our great appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to address the Lebanese crisis. In
addition, I should like to thank Mr. Gambari for his
briefing today.

I am addressing the Security Council more than
10 days after its adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), a
resolution that the Council sought with a view to
achieving a cessation of hostilities, not a ceasefire; a
resolution that did not respond to all the requirements
of the Lebanese Government, but nonetheless
addressed Lebanese issues and concerns with great
seriousness; a resolution that emphasized Israeli
withdrawal and international commitment to Lebanese
sovereignty, support for Lebanon and respect for its
national decisions.
We therefore accepted the resolution, in the hope
that it would deter the Israeli war machine and bring an
end to its aggression, which has lasted for 33
consecutive days. In that time, Israel has wreaked
havoc, killed, displaced and destroyed. In 33 days,
Israel has set Lebanon back 30 years, in fulfilment of a
promise made by Israel's Minister for Defence. The
aggression has also had an enormous cost in terms of
the thousands of persons killed and injured, the
imposition of a land, sea and air blockade, the
displacement of around 1 million people and the
destruction of hundreds of bridges, vital institutions
and infrastructure amounting to a loss of between $4
billion and $9 billion.

Despite all of that, the Government of Lebanon
has shaken off the dust of war and agreed to the
resolution, which called for a cessation of hostilities, to
which it has been committed since 14 August 2006.
Our Government has continued to take a series of
fundamental measures and decisions, including the
Cabinet's 16 August decision to deploy the Lebanese
army in southern Lebanon, with a mandate to maintain
security in the area, defend our country's territory and
secure the property of our citizens, while reaffirming
full respect for the Blue Line and the implementation
of all laws regarding any weapons outside the authority
of the Lebanese State, in cooperation and coordination
with international forces, in accordance with resolution
1701 (2006).

My country, gravely wounded but determined to
rise again to restore its sovereignty and security and
the safety of its citizens, has committed itself, despite
being the victim, to that international resolution and
taken courageous and unprecedented measures to act
upon that commitment. However, what has Israel, the
executioner, done? How has it responded to those
efforts? Today, more than 10 days after the cessation of
hostilities was declared, we are once again here in the
Council to inform its members that Israel is continuing
its aggression and its daily violations of resolutions
1701 (2006) and 425 (1978). There were 82 violations
of our airspace between 14 and 20 August. Moreover,
Israel has maintained its presence in many border areas
within Lebanese territory. It has set up checkpoints and
has fired bursts of gun and sniper fire against civilians,
to say nothing of the explosion of cluster bombs and
landmines, which kill civilians, including women and
children, and members of the Lebanese army. Such
ordnance has been used and planted by Israel since the
beginning of its aggression on 12 July - all on the
pretext of self-defence and combating terrorism. I
should therefore like to stress the following points.

Regardless of the justifications it puts forth,
Israel's acts are offensive acts. Regardless of the
pretexts offered, Israel's acts are acts of aggression.
Regardless of the reasons and justifications, what Israel

is doing contravenes international law. Were that not
enough, on 19 August, Israel added to its violations
with a land operation deep in Lebanon, close to the city
of Baalbek in eastern Lebanon, thereby subjecting this
fragile calm to great instability and committing an act
of aggression against the sovereignty of the Lebanese
State. This has prompted the Secretary-General to
express his deep concern for the fragile calm that has
been achieved, and about the danger that it might entail
in terms of undermining the authority of the Lebanese
Government.

In pursuing their efforts to block the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), Israeli
officials have informed us of conditions and have
vetoed the participation of a number of countries that
have declared their readiness to contribute to an
enhanced United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). Israel has also very clearly procrastinated in
committing itself to the three phases of withdrawal
from Lebanon, namely, by increasing the number of
phases to 16. Its Minister for Defence has also
threatened us many times with a return to war.

All of that has led us to reiterate over and again
that Lebanon, which believes in the principles of the
United Nations and looks to the Organization as the
basic framework for extricating itself from the current
crisis, appeals to the Security Council to work
diligently to bring about the following: the
establishment and strengthening of a permanent
ceasefire through a UNIFIL strengthened with
additional international troops, and the immediate and
unconditional lifting of the air, sea and land blockade
imposed by Israel. The root causes of the crisis should
be addressed, including by ending the occupation of
the Sheba'a farms, securing the release of all Lebanese
prisoners in Israeli prisons and convincing Israel to
turn over maps of the landmines it has planted on our
territory. Finally, we appeal to the international
community to continue its vital humanitarian
assistance to the many Lebanese in need and to
contribute effectively to the reconstruction of Lebanon,
a country rich in its capabilities, unique in its diversity
and distinguished by its democracy.

Wounded Lebanon today would like to salute the
heroic struggle and steadfastness of the Palestinian
people. We openly condemn the continuous acts of
aggression committed by Israel against that people,
including its kidnapping of Palestinian officials, its
hindrance of everyday life, its settlements on
Palestinian territory and its construction of the barrier
wall.

With all due respect, what is required today is
Israel's full commitment to the provisions of resolution
1701 (2006) and all other relevant international
resolutions, so as to achieve a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East.

