Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me begin by
conveying our heartfelt condolences and sympathy to
the Government and people of Haiti, as well as the
United Nations, on the tragic loss of life, casualties and
destruction following the devastating earthquake in
Haiti. Our prayers and solidarity go to the families of
the victims.

I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important and timely debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his statement and to welcome
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Migiro, who is
with us in this debate. I also wish to thank the heads
and representatives of the regional and subregional
organizations for their statements.

This debate gives the Security Council and
participating regional and subregional organizations an
opportunity to exchange views and focus on how to
strengthen their cooperation in maintaining
international peace and security. The primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security is vested in the Security Council, but the
complexity of the threats to peace and security in
various regions of the world is increasing, and the
capacity of the United Nations is becoming
overstretched. It is therefore necessary to strengthen
the partnership in which the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations all have critical
roles to play in maintaining international peace and
security.
We are convinced that building an effective and
strategic relationship has immense benefits. Regional
and subregional organizations have a significant
contribution to make. They have advantages of local
knowledge, proximity and the capability to mobilize
and respond quickly. However, some need financial
resources and technical capacity to carry out that
mission.

The United Nations and other international
partners must provide effective, predictable and timely
support to regional organizations when they undertake
activities and operations mandated by the United
Nations, aimed at maintaining international peace and
security. The African Union, for instance, has shown its
resolve, commitment and capability in conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution on the continent.
It is working on the comprehensive peace and security
architecture, and has underscored the need for its
member States to adhere to constitutionalism,
democratic governance and the rule of law.

Conflict prevention, mediation and resolution, as
well as peacekeeping and peacebuilding, are essential
and indispensable tools in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The effectiveness of
these tools is enhanced through closer cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Uganda therefore considers this debate
as part of an ongoing process. We recall the
constructive debates on strengthening African Union-
United Nations cooperation held in March and October
last year. It is essential that the Security Council
continue to engage and exchange views with regional
and subregional organizations on practical ways to
strengthen these useful partnerships. We also call for
enhancement of regular interaction, coordination and
consultation on matters of common interest between
the United Nations Secretariat and the respective
regional and subregional organizations' secretariats and
commissions. This approach will enhance
complementarity and minimize the duplication of
efforts.

Finally, we thank the delegation of China for
preparing the draft presidential statement, which
Uganda supports.

