Mr. Alasania (Georgia): Today, for the second
time, the Council is holding a special meeting to
discuss the issue related to my country. Only 12 hours
ago, in this Chamber, I stated that there were disturbing
signs that Georgia is facing a well-calculated
provocation to escalate the situation in order to justify
a premeditated military intervention from the Russian
Federation. That evaluation has been transformed into
a brutal reality.
2
Allow me to update the members of the Security
Council on the extremely alarming developments that
are taking place in Georgia now.

This morning, the Russian Federation started a
full-scale military invasion of Georgia. Here is an
outline of the events that took place today, and we have
provided a map for members, to vividly illustrate the
places on sovereign Georgian territory that were
bombed by the Russian Federation.

At 5.30 a.m., the first Russian troops entered
South Ossetia through the Roki tunnel, passed Java,
crossed the Gufta bridge and moved towards
Tskhinvali.

At 9.45 a.m., according to witnesses from the
local population, a military fighter plane dropped
approximately three to five bombs near the village of
Shayshvebi, 300 or 500 metres from Georgian military
radar.

At 10.30 a.m., Russian Su-24 bombers bombed
the village of Variani, in the Kareli district; seven
civilians were injured.

At 10.50 a.m., six Su-24 bombers entered
Georgian territory from the Roki pass. At 10.57 a.m.,
two of them dropped three bombs in Gori. One of them
fell near a stadium, the second near the other slope, and
the third near an artillery brigade.

At 11.45 a.m., four Su-24s entered from the
direction of the Russian Federation, Kazbegi region, on
the Georgian side. Two of them passed Tbilisi and
made two circles around Marneuli. The other two made
a circle above Gudauri.

At 11.45 a.m., the civil aviation emergency
service reported that they had received signals from a
crashed flying object - presumably a Russian fighter
plane - near the luri range, 17 kilometres south of
Gori.

By 12 noon, eight Georgians - six military and
two civilians - had died, and 87 were injured. One
military truck with ammunition was destroyed.

At 12.05 p.m., one Su-24 entered Georgian air
space from Russia and remained over Tskhinvali until
12.15.

At 3.05 p.m., a Russian military plane entered
Georgia from the direction of Tedzami, dropped two
bombs at the Vaziani military airport and turned back.
08-45515
Russian aviation also bombed the Marneuli and Bolnisi
military bases. Two aircraft were destroyed on the
ground. Several buildings were also destroyed, and
there were casualties. At 5 p.m., the Marneuli military
base was bombed for the second time, causing
fatalities. At 5.35 p.m., the Marneuli military base was
bombed for the third time, resulting in one dead and
four injured. As a result of the three bombings, three
An-2 planes and military vehicles stationed there were
destroyed.

It became known to the Government of Georgia
that, on 8 August 2008, a large amount of heavy
military equipment and personnel belonging to the
Russian Federation illegally entered the territory of
Georgia through the Roki tunnel. The Russian side
openly declared that the task of those military units
was to support the criminal regime of Tskhinvali in the
fight against the Government of Georgia. In order to
justify its actions, the Russian Federation is
speculating that Georgian authorities are targeting the
positions of Russian peacekeepers. Nothing could be
further from the truth. I can say with full responsibility
that Georgian troops are not targeting peacekeepers. I
want to stress that the Government's actions were
taken in self-defence after repeated armed provocations
and with the sole goal of protecting the civilian
population and preventing further loss of life among
the region's residents, who are of various ethnic
backgrounds.

The world is witnessing a direct and open
violation of universally recognized norms and
principles of international law. Russia is openly
challenging the international community and
jeopardizing established international order and
stability in the wider trans-Caucasus. The Russian
military aggression is intended to subdue Georgia and
make it give up its Euro-Atlantic aspirations, to make
Georgia and the region succumb to Russian political
influence and to destroy all the democratic
achievements accomplished by our country and the
international community in recent years.

We demand that the Russian Federation
immediately terminate the aerial bombardments,
immediately pull out the occupying forces and,
together with the relevant international actors,
negotiate a ceasefire and mechanisms to ensure lasting
peace and stability in this part of Georgia. President
Saakashvili is offering direct dialogue with the Russian
Federation and other interested parties to seek a

negotiated solution to this tragic conflict. We are
grateful to the European Union, to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and to other
international actors for their readiness to engage.

As we are having this discussion, the city of
Tskhinvali is under heavy shelling and air
bombardment from Russian military forces.

