Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the French initiative to convene today's
open debate on the protection of Middle East minorities
and welcomes Foreign Minister Fabius to New York
to preside over the meeting. I would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad
Al Hussein for their briefings. My thanks also go to
Patriarch Sako and Iraqi parliamentarian Dakhil for
their statements.

Over the recent period, terrorism and Violent
extremism in the Middle East have been rampant.
Massive human rights Violations, in particular
violations against ethnic and religious minorities,
have been frequent, leading to huge casualties and the
destruction of some significant cultural sites, which has
drawn great concern from the international community.
China supports the measures that the international
community has taken in that regard.

First, the utmost effort should be made to promote
peace and stability in the Middle East. Turbulence
breeds terrorism and extremism. As long as there is no
peace in the world, terrorists and extremist force will
take advantage of the situation. History and reality have
repeatedly proven that the resort to force or Violence
against violence will not bring about peace. Political
dialogue and national reconciliation are the only
solution. China hopes that the parties concerned in the
Middle East will base their actions on the well-being
of their people, iron out their differences and settle
their disputes. The international community, on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned, should
provide effective assistance and stabilize the situation
in the Middle East as soon as possible.

Secondly, concerted efforts should be made to
combat terrorism and extremism. Terrorism is the
common enemy of mankind. Combating terrorism
requires the solidarity, synergy and coordination of the
international community. China is firmly opposed to all
forms of terrorism and actively supports international
counter-terrorism cooperation. There should be no
double standard in counter-terrorism. Furthermore,
there should be no linkage posited between terrorism
and specific ethnic or religious communities.

In a context in which the forces of international
terrorism keep changing their tactics and use the
Internet and other new media to conduct terrorist
activities, the international community should
strengthen cooperation and take effective measures to
firmly combat terrorist organizations that are using the
Internet to carry out recruitment, incitement, planning
and funding. The international community should pay
close attention to the ripple effect caused by terrorists.
While strengthening efforts to combat terrorism and
extremist in the Middle East, measures must be taken
to effectively prevent them from spreading to other
regions or areas.

Thirdly, it is vital to eradicate ideologies
supporting terrorism and extremism and advocate for
dialogue among civilizations. The Middle East has a
long history and a wide range of ethnic communities
and is one of the regions with the greatest diversity of
human civilizations. When it comes to civilizations,
one cannot speak of superiority or inferiority.
Inclusiveness brings about coexistence; exclusiveness
brings about hatred. The international community,
including the relevant United Nations agencies
working in the Middle East, should promote respect,
openness and inclusiveness, which embody the spirit of
dialogue among civilizations. It should also advocate
for exchanges and mutual learning and should work
to create a sound social atmosphere for people with
different ethnic, cultural or religious backgroundsso
that they can coexist in equality and harmony and no
opening is left for terrorism and extremism.

Fourthly, it is important to speed up development
and eradicate the breeding ground for terrorism, which
is poverty and underdevelopment. They are the major
root causes for conflicts and terrorism. The international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
should strengthen their efforts on the international
development agenda, actively assist the Middle Eastern
countries in developing their economies, creating job
opportunities, eradicating poverty, improving people's
livelihoods, enhancing youth education and women's
empowerment, improving governance and building
capacity for self-development, so that people can enjoy
peace and prosperity, thus removing the breeding
ground for terrorism.

Protecting the people of the Middle East from
terrorism and extremism is the common responsibility
of the international community and requires greater
efforts, inputs and measures from all States. China
is ready to join hands with the parties concerned and
make constant efforts to remove the real threat facing
the Middle East, in particular their minorities, so as to
create a sound and peaceful environment for them.

