Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Iraq, a
founding Member of the United Nations, is being
subjected to criminal, tyrannical, barbaric American-
British military aggression. This aggression is killing
women, children and the elderly, and it is destroying
the lives and future of the people of Iraq, who are the
people of civilization - of Sumer, Babylon and
Akkad.

Previously, they tried to kill our civilization
through a weapon known as sanctions. These sanctions
lasted more than 13 years, during which a whole
generation of children and youth was destroyed.
Condolences here are extended to you all - the entire
world community - and to all those who love peace
and security in the world.

The American-British full-scale military
aggression commenced at dawn on 20 March 2003.
United States President Bush declared at that time that
the goal of this aggression was the occupation of Iraq
and the change of its political regime. As his Secretary
of State, Colin Powell, previously stated, the goal of
the aggression was to change the political map of the
Middle East region to ensure the interests of the United
States and Israel. This constitutes a blatant violation of
international law and of the United Nations Charter; it
defies the international community and deviates from
international legality.

The aggression has targeted, among other things,
civilian installations - economic infrastructures,
homes, schools, hospitals, mosques and churches in
Iraq's cities and villages. It has led to thousands of
casualties, including women, children and the elderly.
For example, the water and electric facilities in the city
of Basra were destroyed. This will lead to a health
disaster and to a real crime of genocide.

The Moustansiriya Mosque in Baghdad was
bombed, and a popular bazaar in the same city was also
bombed today. On 20 and 21 March, the American-
British invaders and aggressors dropped more than
2,000 long-range guided missiles. They conducted
more than 1,000 daily aerial sorties over all of Iraq's
cities and villages, during which they used cluster
bombs and prohibited new weaponry, much bragged
about, to terrorize Iraq.

It is known that the American and British troops
penetrated the demilitarized zone between Iraq and
Kuwait after the United Nations Secretariat withdrew
the monitors of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission (UNIKOM), in blatant violation
of Security Council resolution 687 (1991), which
provided for the inviolability of borders between Iraq
and Kuwait. The Security Council must react to ensure
that these borders are respected.

The United States and Britain have deployed in
the south and west of Iraq in order to launch their
forces against Iraqi cities and villages. However, the
Iraqi armed forces and armed civilian units, made up of
the great Iraqi people, are fighting honourable and
fierce battles against this foul aggression and are
confronting it with heroism.

The invaders and aggressors say that the goal of
their aggression is the disarmament of Iraq. However,
the whole world knows that the task of verifying Iraq's
compliance in disarmament was entrusted not to the
United States and Britain but to the United Nations
itself, through the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
In their report to the Security Council on 7 March,
these two agencies stated that the inspections
conducted during three and a half months did not find
any evidence contradicting Iraq's declarations and no
evidence of the existence of proscribed activities or
items in Iraq. Yet today the whole world is well aware
that the real reason for this aggression and invasion is
the occupation of Iraq, to recolonize it and control its
oil wealth.

The international community is also well aware
that the Security Council has not authorized the use of
force by the United States and Britain. The
international community is aware that resolution 1441
(2002) did not allow the use of force at all. Both
Britain and the United States confirmed when
resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted that it did not
contain a hidden agenda, trigger or automatic use of
force. Nevertheless, despite the opposition to war of
the majority of Council members, and despite Iraq's
cooperation with UNMOVIC - according to its
Executive Chairman's declaration - these two
countries launched their criminal war against Iraq.

The full-scale Anglo-Saxon military invasion and
the hostile, aggressive war against the Republic of Iraq
constitute a blatant material breach of international law
and the of United Nations Charter, particularly Article
2, paragraphs 4 and 7. It is also a material breach of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. All of these
resolutions, without exception, oblige United Nations
Member States to respect Iraq's sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity.

This colonial Anglo-American aggression is a
blatant defiance of the will of the international
community and its organizations, all of which have
expressed their total rejection of the unilateral use of
force, their adherence to international legal instruments
and their emphasis on the essential role that the United
Nations has to play in maintaining international peace
and security and in suppressing acts of aggression.

This barbaric, colonial military aggression against
Iraq constitutes a dangerous violation of regional and
international peace and security. The United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, are called upon
to condemn this invasion and aggression. They are
called upon to work to put an end to it immediately,
without conditions. The Council must demand that the
American-British aggressors and others withdraw their
attacking forces immediately outside the borders of the
Republic of Iraq. It must hold them fully responsible
for this act of aggression, in accordance with
international law. It must impose respect for Security
Council resolutions and their implementation,
particularly those relating to the lifting of the unjust
sanctions against Iraq.

While we thank all the countries, peoples and
personalities who have called for peace and for the
removal of the spectre of war, we are still hopeful that
the international community will be able to impose its
will on those who have broken international law. We
hope it will find a peaceful solution to spare the world
the dire consequences that will come out of that
aggression and to prevent that aggression from giving
rise to a new era of colonialism. The signs of that are
becoming evident through the domination of one Power
over the destiny of the world, with its dependent other
Power. This will mean the collapse of the United
Nations and the current international system.

Allow me before concluding my statement to
point out that in the past few days during the period of
aggression the Council has been busy considering the
humanitarian aspect rather than the act of aggression
itself. Is it not strange that humanitarian questions,
however important they are, are being discussed before
the war and aggression, which are the main cause for
the need to consider the humanitarian aspects? Should
not the Council pay attention first and foremost to the
cessation of the war of aggression and pay attention to
the lives of the Iraqi people, who are subjected to
killing and destruction every day in barbaric, evil acts
of aggression, which cannot be ignored? Is this not an
attempt to put the cart before the horse and distract the
Council from its main role in the maintenance of
international peace and security?

Who stopped the oil for food programme? Who
withdrew the inspectors from Iraq? Who withdrew the
monitors from the Iraq? Was this not done with the
agreement and the blessing of the Council? How could
the Council allow itself to be manipulated - and it
bears repeating, manipulated - in a matter regarding
which the United States and United Kingdom could not
obtain a resolution that legitimized the act of
aggression.

We hope that the Council will be able to stand up
to the machinations that have originated with the
United Kingdom and are being implemented by the
United States, which can only deceive those who
blindly follow those two countries.

