Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour
to deliver my statement on behalf of the member States
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Dominican Republic on its assumption ofthe presidency
of the Security Council for this month and welcome the
new members of the Council. I also wish to express the
OIC Group's full support as they strive to uphold their

responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.

This meeting takes place at a time overshadowed
by a series of unfortunate developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, that are
deepening the suffering of the Palestinian people and
further undermining the peace prospects. The limitless
aggression of Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people and the intensification of colonial
settlement policies, along with ongoing assaults
on Islamic and Christian holy places, particularly
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, are creating an ever-more
unsustainable and volatile situation and exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis of the Palestinian people,
especially in the besieged Gaza Strip.
The prevailing crises and challenges cannot
be seen in isolation from measures, statements and
provocations by Israel, the occupying Power, or other
parties aimed at forcibly and unlawfully altering
the legal status of Jerusalem, including attempts to
relocate some diplomatic missions thereto, in defiance
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. Such irresponsible acts threaten to weaken
the international system, strengthen the Israeli policy
of imposing a fait accompli and contribute to further
deepening the current political impasse andjeopardizing
opportunities for actualizing the two-State solution.

The dire situation on the ground is deteriorating and
becoming more dangerous as a result ofthe illegal Israeli
blockade and the escalation of military aggression and
raids being carried out all over the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, which have resulted
in the tragic loss of civilian lives and a high level of
casualties among Palestinian civilians, including many
innocent children. We reiterate, in that regard, the
responsibility of this organ to act appropriately so as to
bring an end to such lawlessness and impunity for Israel,
the occupying Power. The international community,
with the Security Council at the forefront, must act to
ensure accountability for all Israeli violations, in line
with international law, including humanitarian law,
human rights law and criminal law, and to provide
protection to the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in the Gaza Strip.

Despite the hopes that the start of each new year
ushers in, we once again regrettably observe that Israel,
the occupying Power, has persisted with a further
illegal policy of colonial settlement construction
in order to further entrench its illegal occupation,
facilitate the exploitation of Palestinian land and
natural resources, foreclose all prospects for peace and
irreversibly undermine the two-State solution. As the
Israeli colonial settlement policy constitutes blatant
contempt for, and systematic violations of, numerous
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), we reiterate that the Security Council, the
International Criminal Court and all key actors should
fulfil their responsibilities in ensuring accountability,
upholding the rule of international law and halting
those illegal acts.

We reaffirm our support for the accession of the
State of Palestine to international organizations and
treaties that would establish its legal personality at the
international level, which is an inherent right of the
State of Palestine. That could facilitate strengthening
the legal tools that provide protection for the Palestinian
people. We reiterate our call upon the Security Council
to positively consider and recommend the admission of
the State of Palestine as a full-fledged Member of the
United Nations. We therefore invite the States that have
not yet recognized the State of Palestine to do so to
promote the chances for peace and establish political
and legal measures to protect and support the two-
State solution.

The OIC Group remains deeply worried by
the instability and insufficiency of funding for
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). While
the impressive mobilization and solidarity of the
international community, including OIC countries as
well as traditional and new donors, helped the Agency
to address its unprecedented financial crisis in 2018,
the start of the new year serves to renew concerns
about sustainable funding to ensure the uninterrupted
provision of its vital services. We urge the international
community to come forward generously and responsibly
to ensure more predictable and sustained funding for
UNRWA so that it may effectively carry out its General
Assembly mandate in support of Palestinian refugees,
pending a just solution to their plight, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation urges
the Security Council to uphold its commitment and
act responsibly to revive hope and opportunities
for real progress on the stalled peace process. The
engagement of international actors in constructively
and effectively sponsoring multilateral political peace
efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative carries decisive moral and political weight
with a View to enabling the Palestinian people to live
in freedom and dignity in their Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

