Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me too
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on assuming the presidency and assure you, Sir, of our
full support during the month of December. Let me also
take this opportunity to thank China for an impeccably
run presidency in November.

I would like to thank Special Adviser Khan for
his informative briefing. No doubt, he has a very
challenging set of tasks ahead, but he can certainly count
on Sweden's continued full support in his endeavour.

I also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Nadia Murad on having been awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize for her efforts to end sexual violence in conflict.
This is an important recognition on behalf of all the
victims of Da'esh, giving impetus to the efforts of
holding those responsible to account.

Advancing accountability for the violations and
abuses of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in the conflicts on the Council's agenda has
proven extremely difficult. The unanimous support
for the decision to establish the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant is therefore particularly significant
and a major achievement. We now need to stay united
in actively supporting the implementation of this
important mandate.

In this regard, we welcome the strategic vision
and priorities set out by the Special Adviser today, in
particular the victims-based approach, putting at the
centre those most impacted by the crimes. The many
examples in reports of the Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten remind
us again and again why this victims-based approach
is so important. In this context, we also underline that
children with perceived or actual association with
Da'esh are i first and foremost f victims and must be
treated as such. Collective support for and trust in the
mechanism on the part ofthose affected will be crucial.
The establishment of a specialized victim and witness
protection unit is therefore important.

It is crucial to ensure that the Team is adequately
equipped with the expertise and resources needed.
The Team must be able to effectively gather evidence
for the crimes that have been committed against men,
women and children, including sexual and gender-
based violence. We are pleased that the Team foresees
close cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The operational and security environment in Iraq
is very complex. We agree with Mr. Khan's conclusion
that innovative logistical and operational solutions will
be necessary. Strong Iraqi support and buy-in will be
decisive to the success of the Team's work. Mr. Khan's
recent meeting with Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi was
a positive step in this regard. We welcome regular
interaction and coordination between Mr. Khan's
team and the Steering Committee designated by the
Iraqi Government. As an independent and impartial
institution, the Team can also play a key role in
supporting the Iraqi Government in building capacity
in the legal sector. The cooperation between the Team
and the Iraqi Government can be mutually reinforcing.

We welcome the Team's intention to achieve
geographical diversity, as well as gender, ethnic and
religious balance, among its Iraqi members. The Team's
development of trusting relationships with religious
and ethnic minority groups, non-governmental
organizations and other national stakeholders will be
central. The support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the wider United Nations system
is also important.

Accountability for all atrocity crimes committed
in Iraq is crucial. The quest for accountability will
contribute to reconciliation and long-term peace. In this
regard, the rule of law and the Iraqi legal system must
be strengthened, both in the long term and with respect
to legal processes against suspected Da'esh members
currently being pursued by Iraqi courts. We encourage
Iraqi authorities to put in place national legislation that
ensures that perpetrators of international crimes are
tried in Iraq, in full accordance with the principles of
rule of law and due process. United Nations support will
be vital in that regard, and we remain strongly opposed
to the death penalty. In accordance with United Nations
policies and best practices, evidence gathered by the
Investigative Team will not be used in trials that may
lead to capital punishment. That issue must continue to
be closely followed.

Sweden was among the first countries to prosecute
suspected perpetrators of alleged war crimes in Iraq, as
well as in Syria. We look forward to the Team's support
for universal jurisdiction, including the exchange of
information and potential support for the prosecution
of Da'esh crimes in other nationaljurisdictions through
mutual legal assistance.

In conclusion, promoting accountability for
crimes committed by Da'esh is a matter of urgency. It
requires political courage, as well as continued, united
international support. Iraq can rely on Sweden as a
committed partner in that moving forward.

