Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to express a warm welcome to
our good friend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis, who today spoke for the
first time in the Security Council. In a short period of
time, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has gained much confidence and admiration
from the Afghan people. We look forward to
continuing our close cooperation. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive report (S/2012/ 133) on
Afghanistan.

We meet today at a critical juncture in
Afghanistan's history. It is a time in which the
culmination of the efforts of my country and of the
nations involved in the stabilization process in the past
10 years has reached a moment of truth. Today's debate
falls within a series of important events that will shape
the contours of the international community's work
during the transition and beyond: from the Bonn
Conference in December 2011 to the Tokyo ministerial
conference next July. After a decade, today we are also
looking into a new framework for the United Nations
mandate and work, in a situation characterized by
transition, followed by the transformation decade.

The transition process, which started with the
transfer of responsibilities to Afghan security forces a
year ago, is continuing apace. With the second tranche
completed, we are nearing the launch of the third phase
of transition, at the conclusion of which the majority of
Afghan territory will come under full Afghan security
control. By end of the transition in 2014, Afghanistan
12-26920
will assume full responsibility for security and
ownership and leadership of governance and
development. A paradigm shift is under way. The aim
is sovereignty and empowering Afghanistan to take
charge of its own destiny and turn the direct military
and civilian function of the international community
into a support and enabling role.

A successful transition requires renewed
parameters of partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community, with the guaranteed
commitment of the continuation of military, political
and financial support during the transition and the
decade of transformation from 2015 to 2024. That is
what we, Afghanistan and the international community,
set out to do last December at Bonn. That commitment
will be supported concretely in July in Tokyo.

At this stage, we hope that the assistance of the
international community, as manifested in the
commitments of the Kabul Conference in 2010 and the
Bonn Conference in 2011, will help to meet the
requisite needs of our security forces. That is crucial
for the building up, training and equipping of our
national security forces, which have proved themselves
in recent weeks to be increasingly capable of
protecting their fellow Afghans. Furthermore, the
transition dividend, channelled into Afghanistan's
political stability, economic growth and social
advancement, will have a direct effect on fostering
sustainable peace in the country, and bring about real
change in the lives of people.

In the long term, what matters is the
establishment and strengthening of an enduring
strategic partnership that will provide us with a solid
base of mutual cooperation. Thus far, we have signed
or are negotiating long-term strategic partnerships with
our international partners, including those in the
region. In that connection, Afghanistan and the United
States are working to finalize all parts of the strategic
partnership agreement, which will ensure our combined
commitment to the future of a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. On 9 March we signed a memorandum of
understanding with the United States on the handover
of control of the Parwan Detention Facility to the
Afghan Government, and we are working to finalize
another memorandum relating to special operations in
the very near future.

An effective transition is also contingent upon the
successful outcome of the Afghan-led peace and
5
reconciliation, outreach and reintegration process. The
dynamics of the peace talks shifted with the
announcement of the opening of the Taliban office in
Qatar, which we believe will provide fresh impetus to
our peace efforts. We welcome recent measures taken
by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), which have
enhanced confidence building and will help expedite
our reconciliation efforts.

On the national level, outreach and reintegration
efforts remain essential to bringing members of the
armed opposition back into mainstream society. Nearly
3,500 anti-Government elements have been enrolled in
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Program. In
the coming months, we expect to see many more
joining the Programme and returning to normal life.

At the same time, we will continue to work with
all relevant regional and international partners to move
the peace process forward, including the United
Nations, the United States, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and
Pakistan. We are pleased that the peace process has
garnered the support it needs from all countries in the
region. Our desire for multifaceted cooperation is
embodied in the Istanbul Process, which began in
November 2011. It is a visionary step forward to
achieving a benevolent regional order, characterized by
cooperation, collaboration and shared goals. We look
forward to furthering our progress at the follow-up to
the Istanbul process this June in Kabul.

For the success of transition, we must redouble
our efforts towards a more effective, accountable and
transparent Government that is ready to deliver
services and safeguard national interests as set out in
the Kabul process. Afghanistan continues its fight to
strengthen good governance; end corruption; promote
human rights, including gender equality; combat illegal
narcotics and foster greater economic opportunities.

For Afghans, a successful transition is the key for
peace and stability. We are well aware of the
challenges, but the bitter memories of war and conflict
only strengthen our determination to work together to
secure a peaceful future. However, our confidence
needs to be deepened through real cooperation, trust
and mutual respect between Afghanistan and the
international community. The recent incidents - such
as the brutal killing of 16 innocent civilians, mostly
children and women, in the Panjwayi district of
Kandahar province, the burning of the Holy Koran
6
north of Kabul and similar atrocities - could
undermine our trust and cooperation by inciting deep
sorrow, anger and frustration among Afghan people. It
is imperative that such incidents cease immediately and
that the perpetrators be held accountable.

Over the past 10 years, the United Nations has
been in the forefront of helping the Afghan people. The
United Nations has supported the efforts of the Afghan
Government to build a more peaceful future for the
country.

While Afghanistan continues its transition, it will
still benefit broadly from the support of the United
Nations. We are thankful to the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
mandated activities, for United Nations support in
Afghanistan and for the work of the review team. The
Afghan Government fully agrees with the findings of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/l33) that
UNAMA should use its good offices to continue to
support Afghan-led political processes and capacity-
building for Afghan institutions. We appreciate the
report's emphasis on the United Nations work to
protect the human rights of all Afghans, and we share
the report's assertion that aid coherence in support of
Afghanistan's development agenda is crucial.

We are satisfied with the work of the
comprehensive review. Of course, plenty of work for
us all lies on the road ahead. The size and
configuration of the United Nations presence needs to
be considered in the coming months, as well as the
application of a one-United Nations approach to
streamlining United Nations activities, based on the
evolving realities on the ground and the needs of
transition. The Government of Afghanistan looks
forward to close cooperation in that regard.

A long-term, strategic examination of the
renewed posture of the United Nations in Afghanistan
will be needed in order to answer some of the bigger
questions about the Organization's political role, the
necessary steps towards reinforcing integration and
delivery as one, and questions about bringing more
transparency and accountability into the management
of resources and the coordination of aid during the
transition and transformation decade. I am confident
that with our strong, ongoing partnership, Afghanistan
and the United Nations are well-equipped to address all
future challenges.
12-26920

In the past 10 years, Afghanistan and the
international community have been together in fighting
terrorism and working to bring stability and peace to
the country. The fight is not yet finished. We still have
a long way to go, and we continue to struggle to
normalize the situation in the country. That is the aim
of the transition. But the transition we agreed upon
must be a responsible, unhurried and coordinated
process. Afghanistan and its people count on both the
conscience and the commitment of the international
community to remain steadfast to the many and oft-
repeated assurances for a stable, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan.

