Mr. Ben Sliman (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Mr. President, allow me to express our
warmest congratulations on Azerbaijan's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. Let me also express my gratitude for the
convening of today's open debate on the agenda item
entitled "The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question" - a new opportunity to consider
the latest developments in the region, particularly those
pertaining to the question of Palestine. Allow me also
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the subject this
morning.

In my country's opinion, the question of Palestine
is one of the core issues in the Middle East, particularly
in the light of the latest developments in the region,
the grave challenges entailed and the need to find
urgent solutions. We therefore believe that this issue
must remain central on the United Nations agenda as
well as on those of all its bodies. The issue requires
the continuing effective attention by all Member States
until a final, just settlement is achieved. Undoubtedly,
that will be one of the fundamental keys to stability and
comprehensive peace in the region.

In that context, it is our belief that there is no
alternative but peace in order to achieve stability and to
open new horizons for the peoples of the entire region.
My country expresses its support and encouragement
for the resumption of direct talks between the Israeli
and Palestinian sides, under the aegis of the United
States of America. We thank the United States for its
efforts. We look forward to the talks culminating in
a comprehensive final settlement of the question of
Palestine in all its aspects. Such an outcome should
include a clear and well-defined timetable that enables
the Palestinian people to regain the right to establish
their independent sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, thereby
allowing peaceful coexistence among all parties in the
region on the basis of durable peace and security.

The Council has before it today a historic opportunity
to provide conditions for a just, balanced and durable
solution that allows all parties an opportunity that
cannot be squandered, particularly in the light of the
current situation in the Middle East, which cannot afford
further setbacks. However, most regrettably, what we
see on the ground are the practices and policies by the
occupying forces. We see unconstructive statements
by its officials that do not reflect awareness or the
necessary seriousness to achieve the desired peace.
We believe that to be a serious threat to the current
negotiations and a settlement between the two sides.

In that context, Tunisia condemns the continuing
illegal Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory - including the West Bank,
East Jerusalem and surrounding areas - which, as
indicated in the latest report by Peace Now, the Israeli
peace organization, increased by 70 per cent in the first
half of 2013, as compared with the same period last
year. My country calls on the international community
to act urgently to put an end to such practices, which
the international community agrees are a flagrant
breach of the norms of international law, resolutions
of international legitimacy and the fundamental
framework for a peace process.

Tunisia also condemns the attacks by the occupying
forces and Israeli settlers against Palestinians and their
properties, the confiscation oftheir lands and farms, and
the harassment, humiliation and violation of their most
fundamental rights, including the rights of detainees
and prisoners. Those, in the opinion of the international
community, are a clear challenge to the principles of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

My country strongly condemns the attempts to
Judaize the city of Jerusalem, to eradicate its Islamic
sites and to change its demographic and geographic
character, in addition to the daily campaigns of attacks
against Muslim and Christian shrines, particularly the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Palestinian faithful therein.
We call for the stifling embargo imposed on the Gaza
Strip since 2007 to be fully lifted in order to put an
end to its serious and tragic economic repercussions,
under which Palestinian citizens, including women and
children, are deprived of the simplest and most basic
elements of decent living. We also call for an end to
Israel's occupation of Lebanese and Syrian territories.

My delegation would like to express its deep
concern concerning the situation in Syria and the
continuing acts of killing, destruction and terror in all
parts of the country. That has the potential for grave
consequences for Syria and its future, and indeed the
entire region, particularly on the humanitarian level.

Tunisia reiterates its support for the aspirations of
the Syrian people for freedom, dignity and democracy.
We also stress the need to step up efforts to achieve
a political settlement to the crisis, which has become
unbearable. We also emphasize the importance of
Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
cohesiveness of its society. In that regard, my country
supports the current efforts towards the holding of the
"Geneva II" conference to achieve a political settlement
that is agreed upon and supported by all Syrian parties
that desire peace. Such a settlement should put an end
to the more than two years of strife that has had tragic
consequences for Syria and the countries of the region.

We also reiterate our strong condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict. We
believe that to be a criminal act against the Syrian
people - indeed, against humanity. In that regard,
we very much appreciate both the United States-
Russian agreement and resolution 2118 (2013), on the
destruction of Syria's stockpile of chemical weapons.
Those weapons are indeed a threat to the peace,
security and stability of the region and to international
peace and security. We hope that development will be a
positive step towards a political settlement ofthe Syrian
crisis and the holding, at the earliest possible date, of
an international conference on a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruciton in the
Middle East.

