Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes your initiative,
Madam, to convene this open debate of the Security
Council to consider the question of post-conflict
peacebuilding.

One result of the 2005 World Summit was that
our heads of State and Government agreed on the
importance of overcoming the lack of coherence in the
global vision that comprises the various phases of
action taken by the international community to
promote peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the
transition towards development. Thus, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office are today the
core elements of the new United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

During the past two years of the Commission's
existence, El Salvador has made every effort to
contribute, in its capacity as Vice-Chair and in the
coordination of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned, to strengthening the Commission as an
advisory body to the Security Council and the General
Assembly in the field of post-conflict peacebuilding.
That new architecture has generated great expectations
among the various players in the international
community, in particular among countries in and
emerging from conflict, since the Commission offers
hope for better understanding of the goals and targets
that underpin peacebuilding activities in each specific
case.

We acknowledge with satisfaction that the
Peacebuilding Commission is exercising solid and
significant leadership in the field, motivating the
participation and inclusion of national actors,
particularly those that play a key role in the
peacebuilding decision-making process, thereby
supporting the formulation of strategic frameworks for
peacebuilding in each specific case. In that respect, we
stress the Commission's active and responsible
position in promoting the pillars that anchor collective
security and well-being: peace, security, development
and human rights.

In view of the foregoing, the Commission should
be allowed to continue developing a comprehensive
vision that will strengthen the coherence of the United
Nations system on the ground while contributing to a
better understanding by the Member States of the
complex multidimensional factors involved in
peacekeeping. El Salvador believes it essential for the
Commission to continue to deepen its experiences in a
comprehensive manner.

We welcome the fact that an inclusive agreement
was reached on the peacebuilding strategies for
Burundi and Sierra Leone and that progress continues
in the exchange of experiences on factors that have
contributed to conflicts in other parts of the world,
through the study and assimilation of lessons learned
and the thematic debates that we have held.

In that regard, allow me to recall the importance
of strengthening cohesion among the peacebuilding
goals and strategies, with the available resources for
the attainment of those goals. From that perspective,
the added value generated by the Commission is to be
found in its very composition.

El Salvador agrees on the importance of
recognizing that the raison d'etre of the Commission
must not be limited to the mobilization of financial
resources for peacebuilding processes. It is also
essential to go beyond that perspective to understand
that the complexity of conflicts requires
multidisciplinary action and a comprehensive medium-
and long-term vision that will motivate the
participation of all stakeholders in those processes.

The proposed quick-impact programmes must not
lead us to lose sight of the fact that what truly matters
is that the social fabric of a country emerging from
conflict is repaired in a climate of reconciliation and
peace, while taking the first steps towards
development. As we have said, institution-building is
the basic responsibility of national stakeholders, and it
must be one of the main long-term achievements of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

El Salvador, as a country that has made the
transition from conflict to development, has sought,
since it joined the Commission, to share its
experiences, to understand the new realities and to seek
innovative mechanisms that will help the countries
under consideration: Burundi, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau. Allow me to reiterate that El Salvador
is prepared to share the practices and experiences of
those who contributed to the transition to peace and
allowed us to lay the foundations for good governance
and the rule of law in our country.

In conclusion, in our view, the Commission has
made a difference in the countries under consideration.
Other countries, such as my own, were not able,
15 years ago, to benefit from the existence of the
Commission and had to deal with a great many
challenges in the transition from conflict to
peacebuilding and development. That is why we are
immensely pleased with the holding of this debate. We
urge the Security Council to continue to support the
work of the Commission and to strengthen the new
peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations.

