Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011), of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 22 May
to 29 July, during which time the Committee held two
informal consultations.

In informal consultations on 31 May, the
Committee received a briefing from the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Political
Affairs in Libya, United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, on issues relevant to the work of the Committee,
particularly relating to the arms embargo. That was
followed by an exchange of views. Thereafter, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator
of the Panel of Experts on the Panel's interim report,
as well as information gathered by the Panel since the
submission of that report to the Committee on 2 May.
The members of the Committee also discussed the
recommendations contained in the interim report. Of
the six recommendations addressed to the Committee,
they subsequently agreed to take action on four.
Three of the four agreed follow-up actions aim at
more effective sanctions implementation, whereas one
focuses specifically on more effective implementation
of the measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of
petroleum, including crude oil and refined petroleum
products, from Libya.

I will not summarize the findings of the
recommendations of the Panel, as the interim report
was submitted to the Security Council on 12 June. As
an agreed follow-up action, on 17 July the Committee
dispatched a note verbale to all Member States,
reminding them of their obligation to implement all
sanctions measures of the sanctions regime established
by the Security Council in relation to Libya.

Since the submission of its interim report, the Panel
of Experts has also submitted updates to the Committee
on its investigations concerning reported violations of
the arms embargo, the most recent of which contained
a preliminary case study on the air strike in Tajoura on
2 and 3 July. One communication from the Panel drew
the Committee's attention to the future possibility of
non-compliance with the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum.

On 21 June the Committee held joint informal
consultations with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan to discuss the presence
of Darfuri armed groups in Libya and South Sudan, as
well as a common approach to address the issue. That
was the second such meeting, the first having been held
in November 2017. The three relevant Panels of Experts
also participated in the discussion.

The Committee has been dealing with guidance
requests from Member States - one on the scope of
the arms embargo, which is still under consideration,
and another on the applicability of the assets freeze
measures in relation to a particular entity.

With respect to the travel ban, the Committee
is considering an exemption request, pursuant to
paragraph 16 (a) ofresolution 1970 (2011), for Ms. Aisha
Qadhafi. Furthermore, the Committee determined that
the continued presence, beyond 23 May, of Mr. Qadhaf
Al-Dam in Egypt, in the absence of an approved
extension of the exemption by the Committee, was
in non-compliance with the travel ban measure.
Previously, Libya, as the country of nationality, had
sought such extensions from the Committee. The
Committee would like to highlight that for individuals
also subject to an assets freeze who seek to travel, the
Council has provided for exemptions in paragraph 19
of resolution 1970 (2011) and that the Committee has
elaborated corresponding exemption procedures in
its guidelines.

In connection with the sanctions list, I would like
to note that, as of3 July, the Committee is considering
proposals, submitted by a Member State, for the
designation of three individuals involved in a criminal
network that illicitly exploits crude oil and other natural
resources in Libya.

Finally, in my previous report to the Security
Council (see S/PV. 8530), I had referred to the arrest
and detention in Tunisia of a member of the Panel of
Experts, Mr. MoncefKartas, on 26 March. I am pleased
to note that, via an update of 22 May, the Secretariat
informed the Committee that a Tunisian appeals court
had decided to release Mr. Kartas from detention. The
Committee continues to follow the case, which has
legally not been concluded, and looks forward to a
further update from the Secretariat in due course on
the status of the legal proceedings in Tunisia against
Mr. Kartas, while recalling resolution 2441 (2018),
paragraph 16, which "urges all States to cooperate
fully with the Committee and the Panel", as well as the
1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations.

