Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month.

As usual, the twenty-eighth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
reveals nothing new. Like all previous ones, today's
report did not find anything new to taint its seven
pages except by referring to visits conducted by His
Excellency the President of the Republic of the Sudan
to various countries, as well as by using contradictory,
incomplete and inconsistent information with regard
to the situation in Darfur. The Council adopted two
resolutions on the progressive implementation of the
exit strategy pertaining to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The
report of the Prosecutor testifies to what was said by
certain permanent Council members, namely, that
the ICC - which the Sudan has nothing to do with
it, like any other State that is not party to the Rome
Statute - has turned its mission into a mechanism
to monitor and evaluate the situation in Darfur. For
example, paragraph 13 of the report before the Council
demonstrates that.

The Office of the Prosecutor has undoubtedly
received intelligence from States regarding the visit of
the President of the Republic of the Sudan to a number
of states in Darfur two weeks ago, and the way he
was greeted there as a peacemaker. The Court finds it
difficult to reflect that fact, knowing that it is driving a
wedge between peace and justice.
Given what the Council has heard, the proper
response to the Court is first to work harder in order
to entrench peace and transitional justice systems,
and, secondly, for all States Members of the United
Nations and non-members of the Court to ignore the
ICC. The Council saw that a response by a friendly and
peace-loving country like Jordan was met by attacks
against it and attempts to denounce it. If Jordan had
renounced the Court, it would not have been attacked
by the Court, as it continues to be up until now, as the
Council saw in the presentation by the Prosecutor.

Before 2007, the previous Prosecutor of the ICC,
Mr. Luis Moreno Ocampo, believed that article 53 of
the Court's statute made him committed to consider
peace and amnesty initiatives, as well as mechanisms
of transitional justice and reparations for the conflict
in Darfur. But after March 2007 he completely turned
against those conclusions and convictions. Why?
Because after March 2007 he was subject to extortion
by certain non-governmental organizations and States
that had established the Court, such as the Coalition for
the ICC. He totally gave in to the will of those groups
and threw the weight of the Court behind pressing
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and even genocide, against the Government of the
Sudan and its leaders.

As all Council members know, in March 2007
Mr. Ocampo was involved in the rape of an innocent
female journalist in South Africa. He tried to cover that
up by dismissing Mr. Christian Palme, who refused to
remain silent about that flagrant act. We would like to
remind the Council that the Prosecutor of the ICC, who
presented her report today, was the Deputy Prosecutor
of the ICC then. There are renewed accusations against
the Court ofcorruption, and that was revealed by a media
group called European Investigative Collaborations.
The Prosecutor is trying to halt comments on the
corruption ofthe Court by saying that she sees no added
value of a further independent inquiry.

What is important in that regard is that since
2005 the ICC, through its judges and prosecutors, and
because of its rampant corruption, has been trying to
make up charges and accusations that appeal to the
States and organizations that founded and finance the
Court. It is trying to mobilize them for its interests to
cover up its evident failures and continuous corruption.
That is what we what we are trying to clarify.

The Court achieved what it wanted through certain
vulnerable African States, but the way will not be paved
for it to totally attain that goal, which has nothing to do
with justice and its natural and legal concept. While
the Court does not have the courage ever to press
charges against a soldier from any of those influential
States, it has spared no effort to press charges against
the President of an African State. All members of the
Council are cognizant of the noble efforts, internally
and at the African level, that the Sudan is making to
consolidate peaceful settlements and enshrine the
peaceful coexistence principle internally and regionally.

What is important to demonstrate to the Council
is the institutional corruption within the ICC, which
transcends individuals. That is our purpose: to expose
the corruption of the ICC. It is a corruption that exceeds
individuals, affecting the institution itself, and it is one
that is underpinned by vote trading. Many examples
of that can be seen at the level of politics and sports.
However, we did not expect to see, even in our worst
nightmares, corruption within a judicial institution, as
is the case now within the ICC.

The Council heard here in the Chamber, on
5 December, His Excellency President Alassane
Ouattara of Cote d'Ivoire (see S/PV.8413) say that,
after 13 years of suffering, measures towards amnesty,
healing wounds and national reconciliation led to the
success in Cote d'Ivoire, something that the African
continent and the whole world are proud of. That
is exactly what we did in the Sudan concerning the
N'Djamena ceasefire agreement of 2004, the peace
accord signed in Nairobi in 2005, the peace agreement
signed in Abuja in 2006 and the 2011 Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. The only obstacle to peace now is
the Court, which pits parties to conflict against each
other under the guise ofjustice.

The core of resolution 1593 (2005) is a peaceful
settlement to the conflict in Darfur and the restoration of
lasting peace. However, the resolution falls short on that
objective. The twenty-eighth report of the Prosecutor
is now before the Council. It is pointless to read those
reports because they entrench the international divide,
as can be seen in the statements of Council members,
and they also fall short of the objective of achieving
peace in that important region of the world.

We therefore wonder, as some members of the
Council wonder too, about the significant progress
that has been made in the Prosecutor's investigations
in Darfur, according to the report of the ICC. Those
institutional contradictions between the principles
of peace and justice must be eliminated. We should
underscore the established principles of international
law regarding the immunity of States and their
representatives. We should also, in a practical manner,
emphasize the principle of equality among States, which
is a well-established and independent legal principle.

We further reiterate that no entity, including the
Security Council, can compel a State Member of the
United Nations to be committed to any treaty that it
has not joined pursuant to its free political will. We
should listen to the voice of the African Union which,
on behalf of all its members, unanimously and without
exception rejected the insult addressed to our continent
and its peoples, and the ruling on its leaders that they
are fugitives.

The delegation of my country stresses once again
the need to fight impunity and achieve justice through
our own national justice and judicial institutions,
which are capable and qualified, and through free
international cooperation. We are constitutionally,
legally, ethically and culturally committed to
prosecuting perpetrators of crimes and violations under
well-established international laws - including the
1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, the four Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their two Protocols, and other human rights
conventions - while committed to fight impunity.
Article 3 of the Additional Protocol II to the Geneva
Conventions provides for the following:

"Nothing in this Protocol shall be invoked
for the purpose of affecting the sovereignty of a
State or the responsibility of the government, by
all legitimate means, to maintain or re-establish
law and order in the State or to defend the national
unity and territorial integrity of the State."

(Spoke in English)

The way the Prosecutor's statement and a few
members of the Council referred to the President of the
Sudan is of course unacceptable. We are not trying to
point the finger at an individual, including the present
Prosecutor of the ICC. We are, rather, duty-bound to
prove beyond a doubt the institutional corruption of
the Court itself and, on the same scale, the underlying,
purely political considerations that drive the Court and
reduce it to a mere political tool and remnant of the
defunct polarization of the world.

In this connection, we have to showcase the extent
to which the Office of the Prosecutor and, in fact, the
entire body of the Court are misused and abused. For
example, on 17 October the German magazine Der
Spiegel and other media outlets accused the Chief
Prosecutor of lying with regard to her relationship with
a former Chief Prosecutor, Mr. Luis Moreno Ocampo,
after Ocampo left office in 2012. This is an account of
facts; it is not rhetoric. A series of articles in Der Spiegel
and other European media, partnered with European
investigative collaborators, revealed that Luis Moreno
Ocampo, the predecessor of the incumbent Prosecutor
of the ICC, had owned offshore companies in Caribbean
tax havens.

Lastly, it is evidently and naturally incompatible
with the duties of the Prosecutor to take or to be
seen taking sides in an investigation she is allegedly
performing. Article 42 of the Rome Statute provides
that "[t]he Prosecutor and the Deputy Prosecutors shall
be persons of high moral character". Regrettably, in
the wake of her report before the Security Council in
June (see S/PV.8290), the Prosecutor of the ICC came
forth with former rebels and abusers of refugee status
here in New York and displayed, together with them,
a t-shirt on which was written "Arrest Bashir". I have
with me a photograph of that event. Would it ever occur
in anybody's wildest imagination that any legal system
in the world would ever commit such an affront and
act of complete bias, prejudice and partiality? Again, I
say that the Court is riddled with corruption from head
to toe.

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.
