Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa thanks
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her briefing to the Council
today. We also appreciate the presence in this debate of
His Excellency Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste and thank him for
his statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2011/32).

In just over a decade since independence, Timor-
Leste has made significant progress towards long-term
stability, peace and development. The Government and
people of the country had to start afresh with the
creation of peace and stability after decades of
struggling for independence. The relative peace in
Timor-Leste has facilitated an enabling environment
for development goals and the establishment of State-
and institution-building. Those efforts should be
recognized. The international community, particularly
the United Nations, has played a crucial role in
partnering with the Timorese in addressing their
challenges. The Government of Timor-Leste should be
commended for its continuation of national dialogue
and unity, consolidation and building of sustainable
peace, and respect for constitutional principles and the
democratic rule of law.

Those processes will benefit significantly from
the Government's continued efforts to foster dialogue
and reconciliation through the hosting of the national
consensus conference involving a spectrum of national
actors, both from the Government and from civil
society, and through the seminars organized by the
Anti-Corruption Commission. These are indispensable
and important indications of serious efforts by the
Government of Timor-Leste to address the difficult
issues of justice, corruption and reconciliation. Those
efforts on the Government's part bode well for the
consolidation of democracy and are indicative of the
people's aspirations for a prosperous future.

South Africa firmly believes that the stable
security situation in Timor-Leste has laid a solid
foundation for its economic development. Its continued
peace and stability has translated into remarkable
progress, and the 2010 Human Development Report
ranked Timor-Leste 120th of 169 countries, signalling
a remarkable improvement since 2005. My delegation
also noted with great satisfaction that Timor-Leste is
now ranked among the 20 fastest-growing economies
in the world.

We further acknowledge the important progress
achieved by the Timor-Leste national police force in
resuming its primary policing responsibilities. The
Government of Timor-Leste continues to make
progress in developing an overarching legislative and
policy framework for the security sector, and we also
appreciate the progress made in meeting the objectives
of the medium-term strategy in the areas of the rule of
law, justice and human rights.

South Africa commends the Government of
Timor-Leste for introducing social welfare packages
for the aged and the vulnerable and the legislation
passed to establish social pensions for combatants, as
well as labour-intensive infrastructure projects at the
community level to inject income into poorer
households.

Despite the commendable progress achieved,
challenges remain, and the Government of Timor-Leste
will continue to rely on the support of the international

community. One important challenge is the need for
continued training and capacity-building for the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) in the five areas
defined by the national authorities: legislation,
training, administration, discipline and operations.

A further challenge relates to the issue of
unemployment, especially among young people, which,
as the Secretary-General's report indicates, has
"potential for disillusionment and social unrest". In
that regard, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's observation that "the challenge now is to
achieve inclusive and sustainable growth by promoting
rural development, the private sector and employment
generation, especially for youth" (5/2011/32), para. 65).
Continued efforts to address urban-rural disparities and
to support vulnerable groups must also be prioritized.

In its efforts to further deepen democracy and
stability, Timor-Leste is preparing to hold its national
elections in 2012. My delegation welcomes the
ongoing work of UNMIT and the United Nations
Development Programme to build the capacity of the
national institutions to run and administer these
elections and to provide them with logistical and
technical support. As we support State-building and
institution-building in Timor-Leste, we are reminded
that these efforts will be sustainable only if grounded
on the principle of national ownership and when
security and developmental needs are carefully
calibrated.

With regard to the future of UNMIT's mandate,
my delegation supports the extension of the mandate
by 12 months. We encourage careful calibration of a
drawdown after the 2012 elections, taking into
consideration the conditions on the ground and that the
future mandate reflects a priority of the national
Government, in particular focusing on its consolidation
of the peacebuilding efforts.

