Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation is happy to
participate in this debate, which marks the successful
completion of the international effort to create secure
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
Albania, as outlined in resolutions 1101 (1997) of 28
March 1997 and 1114 (1997) of 19 June 1997.

At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
Member States that contributed to the multinational
protection force in Albania. In addition, our appreciation
goes to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), the European Union and other
international organizations providing humanitarian
assistance to the people of Albania. In this connection,
my delegation would like to pay special tribute to the
Government and people of Italy for the pivotal role that
country played during the operation.

 

The importance of the force in creating a secure
environment for the delivery of much-needed humanitarian
assistance cannot be overemphasized. In addition to that
important role, the force was instrumental in facilitating the
holding of reasonably free and fair elections in Albania.
Without the force's timely presence, Albania might have
engaged in civil strife of untold magnitude. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the commitment by the OSCE to
maintain a presence in Albania.

While appreciating the positive role that the force has
played in bringing about a secure environment, my
delegation would like to stress that it is only the Albanian
people themselves who can bring about a lasting peace in
their country. In this regard, my delegation calls upon the
Albanian people, and in particular the leaders, to build on
the progress made so far in order to bring about peace and
prosperity in Albania. This will require a high degree of
commitment and political will, and we wish them well in
this endeavour. Having said that, my delegation would like
to underscore the need for international assistance in the
reconstruction phase as Albania strives to rebuild its
economic, political and social institutions.

The deployment of the multinational protection force
in Albania was done in a spirit of cooperation and
singleness of purpose. It is an example of a successful
regional effort, an approach that has recently gained
acceptance in conflict resolution in Africa. As mentioned in
the final report, the Steering Committee operated by
consensus. The report states:

"This mechanism proved to be a political asset, since
all countries shared responsibility for the Committee's
decisions, reinforcing cohesion and solidarity."
(5/1997/632, para. 17)

The Security Council had earlier demonstrated the
same degree of cooperation and consensus, considering the
speed with which it authorized the mandate - not to
mention the non-controversial manner in which that was
done.

Unfortunately, authorization of such operations in
other parts of the world, particularly in Africa, has not
enjoyed the kind of speed and cooperation that we observed
in the case of Albania. While we accept that all situations
are different, it is our sincere hope that the degree of
understanding that was evident in the Albanian case will be
a guiding principle for such operations and will not remain
a unique experience.

