The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of July, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Ambassador Jean-David Levitte, Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council during the
month of June. I am sure that I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Levitte for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business during June
2000.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone

Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(S/2000/455)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
fourth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, document
S/2000/455.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2000/635 , which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2000/64l, letter dated 29
June 2000, from the Permanent Representative of
Sierra Leone addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.


