Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their informative
briefings this morning.

We are seriously concerned about the security
situation in Somalia. The continuing attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government by opposition groups
are worsening security and the humanitarian situation.
Japan condemns the attack on the headquarters of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in
Mogadishu on 17 September and expresses its heartfelt
sympathy to the victims and their families. We also pay
tribute to AMISOM. for its dedicated efforts under very
difficult conditions.

We support the Secretary-General's incremental
approach to the implementation of Security Council

resolution 1872 (2009) on the basis of a three-stage
approach. The first stage is the reinforcement of
AMISOM. and the provision of the requisite field
support. We are very pleased that this effort is being
made to reach the authorized strength of the Mission
and achieve stability, and we commend in particular
the recent deployment of an additional battalion by
Burundi. We also welcome the pledges of additional
troops made by Burundi and Uganda, as well as the
new pledge by Djibouti. We hope that those pledges
will be fulfilled. The African Union has a key role in
coordination, including logistical support, for countries
that have pledged to deploy troops on the ground.

We appreciate the Secretariat's efforts, as
described by Mr. Boyd, in steadily implementing the
AMISOM. logistical support package. We welcome in
particular the establishment of a secure strategic
communications network with Headquarters, as well as
the deployment of various types of support.

As for the second stage, we note that the
Secretariat has begun its preparations for the
establishment of a "light footprint" in Mogadishu.
However, it should be stressed that, for the actual
implementation of the second stage, essential
measures-namely, security facilities and anti-
terrorism measures - must be taken to ensure the
security of staff, which is key.

Insecurity remains the most critical challenge for
Somalia, so enhancing security is a matter of the
highest priority. Bilateral and multilateral support has
been provided to strengthen the Somali National
Security Forces and the Somali Police Force, and a
meeting has been convened between the Joint Security
Committee, the United Nations and the African Union.
It is important that this support will be provided in a
coordinated manner.

Japan commends the Government for its efforts to
promote the Djibouti process and reach out to
opposition groups. At the same time, we condemn the
continuing flow of external support to opposition
groups and criminal activities. We are ready to
participate in the work of the Somalia Sanctions
Committee to effectively implement Security Council
resolution 1844 (2008).
Together with strengthening security institutions,
it is necessary to support the capacity-building of the
Government and regional authorities. Japan welcomes
the signing of the agreement between the Government
and Puntland to strengthen cooperation in such fields
as institution-building, security and anti-piracy
operations.

At the same time, we are concerned about the
political instability in Somaliland created by the
election process. We hope that the tension among
parties will be contained. The political and economic
situations in these areas are, of course, divergent from
those in south-central Somalia, but the international
community should continue to support the stability of
Somalia as a whole by providing assistance that
corresponds to the needs in its various areas.

Japan welcomes the commendable efforts of
many countries to address the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. The Security Council has adopted
relevant resolutions, and the maritime operations
conducted by various countries and organizations has
made indispensable contributions.

As part of its efforts, Japan chaired the fourth
plenary meeting of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, as referred to by the Under-
Secretary-General. The number of countries
participating in the Contact Group has increased
significantly, which is a clear sign that the engagement
of the international community is expanding. The
Contact Group agreed to establish a trust fund for the
prosecution of piracy and confirmed the need to
strengthen international organizations, such as the
International Maritime Organization, and the capacity
of States in the region. Such an effort would contribute
to the strengthening of regional and international
partnerships.

In conclusion, it is clear that the stability of
Somalia is essential to address the root causes of the
piracy issue. To that end, it is our hope that the Contact
Group on Piracy and the International Contact Group
on Somalia will promote information-sharing and
synergy for outreach activities.

