Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Australia, Ambassador Gary Quinlan, for his
presentation of the quarterly report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), and to congratulate him on the way he has
run that important Committee with the support of his
team.

The interim agreement on the Iranian nuclear
programme concluded in Geneva on 24 November
sets a new course. We welcome that development,
which seemed unthinkable less than a year ago. We
also commend the energy and efforts of the High
Representative of the European Union, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, who has played a central role in the conduct of
negotiations between Iran and the E3+3. The interim
agreement has two encouraging lessons for us. The first
is that every party involved has had to show courage.
The agreement is good and balanced, and in order to
reach it, concessions had to be made on both sides ofthe
negotiating table. That ability to compromise should be
welcomed. It bodes well.

The second lesson is that the dual approach has
borne fruit. That approach, one that Luxembourg and
its European partners have always advocated, favours
the path of diplomacy while taking a firm stand against
any refusal to hold a dialogue. The change we are
witnessing should encourage us to continue with the
dual approach in the various non-proliferation issues
before us.

Although it opens up considerable possibilities, the
Geneva interim agreement is only a first step. We have
seen enough false starts in the past to know that we
must remain vigilant. All the parties concerned must
now speedily implement the commitments made in
Geneva. The work of verifying the implementation of
the agreement, which will be done in close coordination
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
will be critical to proving Iran's good faith and its desire
to reach a definitive and comprehensive agreement.

With respect to the role of the IAEA, we welcome

the joint statement signed with Iran on 11 November,

prior to the Geneva interim agreement. The statement
creates a framework for cooperation for verification
activities to determine the exact nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme. That is an important development,
for although the right of Iran to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy is not in question, it must reassure the
international community by taking the necessary steps
to prove that its nuclear programme is strictly peaceful
in nature. In that context, we welcome the fact that, on
8 December, for the first time in more than two years
ago, IAEA inspectors had access to the Arak heavy
water production site.

Re-establishing the confidence of the international
community should also require Iran to meet its
international obligations under the terms of the
resolutions adopted since 2006 by the Board of
Governors of the IAEA and by the Security Council.
The action of the 1737 Committee and the proper
implementation of its mandate are crucial in that regard.
The interception of the carbon fibre cargo shipment
destined for the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas, which
the Panel of Experts recently found to be a violation
of the sanctions regime, must also have an appropriate
follow-up.

Ambassador Quinlan and other speakers also
recalled that, in recent months, the 1737 Committee
addressed two letters to the Iranian authorities, neither
of which has yet been answered. The first is about the
launches of Shahab-l and -3 missiles in July 2012 during
the Great Prophet VII exercises; the other concerns the
interception of an arms cargo shipment off the coast
of Yemen in January 2013. We call on the Iranian
authorities to answer those letters. It would be a simple
gesture that would lay the foundation for collaboration
with the Committee that has been unfortunately lacking
until now.

Finally, we welcome the success of the open
information session held on 18 November that brought
together the President of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF), Mr. Vladimir Nechaev, and the heads of
the Security Council Committees on Counter-Terrorism
and Non-Proliferation. The FATF is an important
partner that is providing useful assistance to Member
States so that they can apply the financial provisions of
Security Council resolutions more efficiently. We thank
Ambassador Quinlan for having taken the initiative to
convene that meeting.

