Mr. Mladenov: I report to the Security Council
today in the aftermath of the appalling truck-ramming
attack on 8 January that killed four Israelis and injured
17 others in Jerusalem. Such attacks can never be
justified and must be universally condemned. This act
of cowardice was neither courageous nor heroic. Such
terrorist attacks must be unequivocally condemned by
all. It is regrettable that some Palestinian factions and
leaders have chosen to praise the attack, to glorify it or
simply to ignore it.

Despite the relative tranquility of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict compared to developments in the
region, the spectre of Violence is always near. Leaders
on all sides have a responsibility to reduce tensions
and provide a political horizon to their people. Most
importantly, we all have a responsibility to prevent the
conflict from being engulfed in the nexus of violent
extremism and religious turmoil that is sweeping across
the Middle East.

In this first briefing to the Security Council in 2017,
I would like to begin by honouring the critical efforts
of the United Nations country team on the ground.
The United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
which work in a challenging security and political
environment, deserve our full support and recognition.
Every day, the United Nations provides free basic
education to over 300,000 students in 350 schools and
family health services to almost 1.7 million people in
64 health centres. Every month, we deliver an average
of 780,000 litres of fuel to sustain health, water and
sanitation, and municipal services. Every quarter, the
United Nations provides food assistance to 1 million
Palestinian refugees in Gaza and the West Bank.

Yet, we also plan for the future. The United
Nations in Palestine implements programmes that
will bring about sustainable solutions to the economic
challenges facing Palestinian households. United
Nations programmes have supported the Palestinian
Government in the creation of approximately 14,000
businesses and 45,000 jobs for people who were
previously reliant on humanitarian assistance. We
help strengthen Palestinian institutions and prepare
them for the future. The United Nations facilitates
emergency preparedness and regional disaster-risk
cooperation between Jordanian, Israeli and Palestinian
emergency authorities.

The services that we provide to Palestinians touch
thousands oflives across the West Bank and Gaza. This
vital work would have been impossible without the
cooperation and support of both Israeli and Palestinian
authorities and our counterparts. On behalf of the
teams on the ground, I would like to thank the Security
Council and all Member States for their invaluable and
continuing support.
In the Council, I have repeatedly warned that
the failure of leaders on both sides to reverse the
current negative trajectory will ensure that Israelis
and Palestinians continue to live as prisoners of
fear, trapped in a perpetual cycle of conflict. On
23 December, the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016). It reiterated some of the key obstacles to
achieving a negotiated two-State solution that were
also identified in the July 2016 report of the Middle
East Quartet, namely, the construction and expansion
of illegal settlements; continued acts of violence and
terrorism; and incitement.

The international community has clearly said that
both sides must do their part in creating the necessary
conditions to launch final status direct negotiations. It
has called on Israel to demonstrate its commitment to
the two-State solution by ceasing settlement activities
and by implementing policy shifts consistent with prior
agreements. It has called on the Palestinian leadership
to demonstrate its commitment to a peaceful two-State
future by clearly condemning all acts of terrorism
and taking significant steps to curb incitement. Such
steps by both sides would have a powerful and positive
impact on the prospects for peace. The Middle East
Quartet has been calling for such steps - a call that the
Security Council and the international community has
now welcomed. In the aftermath of the vote, emotions
on the ground have been heightened. Calls have been
made for the annexation of parts of or the whole of
Area C. Such divisive positions risk destroying the
prospects for peace. All stakeholders must avoid any
unilateral action that would prejudge a negotiated final
status solution.

Last weekend in Paris, France hosted over
70 countries and international organizations, not to
impose conditions on Israelis and Palestinians but
to reaffirm our collective support for the two-State
solution and our readiness to support both parties in
returning to meaningful negotiations. In particular, I
note and appreciate the participants' welcoming of the
Quartet recommendations.

While these political developments were unfolding
abroad, important events were taking place on the
ground. After a relative lull, during the reporting
period Israel conducted 24 demolitions, resulting in
the displacement of 167 persons in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Yesterday the Israel Defense
Forces fatally shot a 17-year-old Palestinian during
clashes near Bethlehem. I reiterate that live fire should
be used only as a last resort in situations of imminent
threat of death or serious injury. Such incidents where
use of force has resulted in death or injury must be
properly investigated.

Turning to internal Palestinian developments, the
reported revocation in December of the parliamentary
immunity of five Fatah-bloc members in the Palestinian
Legislative Council (PLC) renewed debate about the
legality of the decision to lift parliamentary immunity
in the absence of regular PLC meetings. Palestine
has come a long way on its path towards building
State institutions. Safeguarding their independence
and checks and balances is vital to maintaining the
public's trust.

Much-needed preparations have begun on holding
a regular session of the Palestinian National Council,
which was last convened some two decades ago. I
encourage all factions to seize this opportunity to
achieve genuine reconciliation on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization principles. Russia's
recent initiative in Moscow, which provided a forum for
Palestinian factions to hold open discussions, is also a
welcome effort in that direction.

In Gaza, I remain greatly concerned by increasing
tensions exacerbated by the continued closures and the
protracted humanitarian and development situation. I
am particularly concerned by Hamas' crackdown on
recent peaceful protests after 2 million Palestinians
were left with just a couple of hours of electricity per
day in the middle of winter. The right to freedom of
expression, peaceful protest and assembly in Gaza
must be respected fully by all. While the immediate
electricity crisis has been averted thanks to the
generous and timely support of the State of Qatar, the
responsible authorities must find a suitable, long-term
solution to resolve the chronic electricity shortage. The
United Nations is working to support such efforts.

Against that backdrop, there have also been some
positive developments. Israel has increased the entry
of critical construction materials into Gaza in recent
weeks, but donor funds for shelter remain critically
low. The current $300-million reconstruction gap is far
too large. Less than half of the $3.5 billion that were
committed two and a half years ago at the Cairo Gaza
pledging conference have been disbursed.

Turning to Lebanon, the formation of a Government
on 18 December 2016 was a positive development. It
sustained the momentum of the appointment of Saad
Hariri as Prime Minister on 3 November and the election
of President Aoun on 31 October. The President visited
Saudi Arabia in early January at the invitation of King
Salman. The visit paves the way for new engagement
and support for Lebanon's stability and security. Both
sides have described the meeting as successful and as
opening a new page.

The Government has outlined its priorities and
vision for the country, reflecting its determination to
tackle Lebanon's urgent challenges. These moves signal
cautious optimism and the potential for consolidating
Lebanese institutions. Meanwhile, the Lebanese Armed
Forces successfully foiled an attack and arrested
11 members of a terrorist cell in Tripoli that was linked
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and the
Al-Nusra Front.

On the Golan, the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic has continued to affect significantly the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
area of operation. The ceasefire between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic generally has been maintained,
albeit in a highly volatile security environment. The
Secretary-General calls on all parties to prevent
tensions or their escalation, and to strictly abide by
international law, particularly in respect of territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all countries of the region.
Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated
their continued commitment to the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. The full return of UNDOF to the
area of separation remains a priority for the Mission.

The long, bloody history of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has offered us many lessons, some of which
we have learned but too many that we have not. One
lesson that we should all have learned by now is that
opportunities to advance peace are rare and must be
seized. Making the necessary compromises will never
be easy. In recent weeks, the international community
has expressed its continued commitment to the two-
State solution, but resolutions and communique's
alone will not achieve a just and lasting peace. What
is required is action, first and foremost on the part of
the parties themselves. The United Nations remains
committed to supporting Israelis and Palestinians on
the difficult road ahead.

