Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the developments that have taken
place in Burundi since February, when Special Envoy
Michel Kafando last briefed members in the Chamber
(see S/PV.8465). I will also share some details on
his last visit to the East African subregion and to the
African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa. I take this
opportunity to acknowledge the important presence at
this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Smai'l Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
His Excellency Mr. Albert Shingiro, Permanent
Representative of Burundi, and His Excellency
Mr. Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

The following are some notable developments in
Burundi since February this year. The Government's
attention is focused on the conduct of the 2020 general
elections and it continues to mobilize its citizens to
contribute towards their preparation. The National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI) continues
its efforts to sensitize the population on democratic
values, in pursuit of peaceful and credible elections.
The meeting of CENI, initially scheduled for 14 June
to announce the calendar of the general elections,
has been postponed. On 20 March, the Congres
national pour la liberte, of Agathon Rwasa, after
great difficulty, was authorized to conduct its first
ordinary congress, which enabled the political party
to designate its national representatives. On 17 April,
the electoral code was adopted by a large majority of
the National Assembly and unanimously endorsed by
the Senate on 24 April. Some opposition members
denounced the process surrounding the adoption of
the electoral code. In their view, the process lacked
the widespread consultation and consensus that is
required for the legal framework for the organization
and conduct of the elections in 2020.

Against the backdrop of those developments, the
human rights situation remains worrying in view of
many violations of fundamental civic and political
freedoms, as reported by political actors, some
media and civil society organizations. Increases
in unemployment and the rise in prices of basic
commodities and services have negatively affected
economic and sociocultural rights.

The humanitarian situation has remained largely
unchanged since the most recent briefing of Special
Envoy Kafando. Despite relatively satisfactory
agricultural production this year, nearly 1.8 million
people remain at risk of food insecurity due to recurrent
and devastating climatic hazards.

As of 30 April, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimated the number
of refugees hosted in the subregion to be approximately
352,000. We encourage the Government of Burundi to
work closely with its partners to ensure that assistance
reaches those most in need in a timely manner. We
also encourage international partners to increase their
contributions, as the humanitarian response plan,
requiring $106.4 million, is currently only 24 per cent
funded, while the regional refugee response plan,
requiring $296 million, is only 17 per cent funded.

Council members will recall that the 20th Ordinary
Summit of Heads of State of the East African Community
(EAC), held on 1 February in Arusha, renewed the
mandate of the mediator, President Yoweri Museveni of
Uganda. The Summit also received the final report of
the facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa of the

United Republic of Tanzania. The report is a synthesis
of the five sessions of the inter-Burundian dialogue as
well as the facilitator's road map to support Burundi
ahead of the 2020 general elections. The Summit agreed
to continue to consult on the way forward.

In that context, from 10 to 22 May, Special Envoy
Kafando travelled to the African Union headquarters
and to the countries of the East African subregion
to consult with regional leaders. In Addis Ababa,
Special Envoy Kafando held consultations with His
Excellency Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, and His Excellency
Mr. Smai'l Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security. In Dar es Salaam, Special Envoy
Kafando held separate engagements with the former
facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, former
President Benjamin Mkapa, before meeting with His
Excellency Mr. Palamagamba Kabudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania.
On 16 May, Special Envoy Kafando was received by
His Excellency John Pombe Magufuli, President ofthe
United Republic of Tanzania.

The Special Envoy then travelled to Bujumbura but
did not meet with the Burundian authorities due to their
busy schedules. Nevertheless, he used the opportunity
to meet with some ambassadors accredited to Burundi
as well as the United Nations country team. In Kigali,
the Special Envoy met with Mr. Richard Sezibera,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, on 21 May.

During his interactions at the African Union
and in the subregion, with a view to stimulating
discussions,including ontheUnitedNations continued
partnership with the EAC and the African Union in
our collective efforts to support Burundi, Special
Envoy Kafando suggested three possible courses of
action for the consideration of stakeholders. Those
were: first, the possibility of convening a meeting of
the guarantors of the Arusha Agreement, with a view
to reaffirming its centrality to Burundi's political
stability; secondly, support to the African Union and
the subregion in the context of the elections in the
subregion; and thirdly, the continuation of the joint
technical working group, which comprises the EAC,
the African Union and the United Nations, in support
of region-led efforts on Burundi.

Throughout those consultations, the Special
Envoy's interlocutors underscored the need to respect
the sovereignty of Burundi. They also stressed the
importance of continued cooperation among the United
Nations, the East African Community and the African
Union in support of the country, especially in the
context of the upcoming 2020 elections. They thanked
the Special Envoy for the opportunity to reflect on
his suggestion to them. In that regard, Special Envoy
Kafando will return to the region to engage with the
mediator on how best the African Union and the United
Nations can support regional efforts.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank the
interlocutors of the Special Envoy for their constructive
engagement. The Secretariat encourages leaders of
the region to continue consultations with the Special
Envoy, especially during his upcoming trip to the
region. Once the consultations of the Special Envoy
are duly concluded, the outcomes will be the basis
upon which the Secretary-General could define and
recommend the way forward to the Security Council,
including options in support of the EAC-led and African
Union-endorsed inter-Burundian dialogue ahead of
2020 elections, as indicated in his latest report to the
Council (S/2018/1028).

