Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I welcome the
comments of the representatives of Sweden and Chile.

As we have heard today, sanctions are a vital
part of the Council's arsenal. Together with the other
tools at our disposal, they can help to prevent conflict,
slow the spread of weapons of mass destruction and
constrain the actions of terrorist groups. We have seen
them succeed across the world in response to all these
threats. In countries like Sierra Leone or Angola, they
played a part in establishing the peace and security
that endure to this day. In countries like Iran, they
helped restrict the development of nuclear weapons, an
important step towards bringing Iran in from the cold.
And against groups like Da'esh and Al-Qaeda, they are
choking off funding, disrupting activity and sending a
clear message that the Council will not stand idly by in
the face of their barbarism.

All these examples underscore the fact that
sanctions must be a tough measure - a measure that
we will not impose lightly or as a first resort. We do not
underestimate the unintended consequences that such
measures can sometimes bring, but let us recognize that
the United Nations has applied lessons from the past and
has worked hard to hone our approach, moving away
from broad trade embargoes to now target individuals
and specific sectors. We know our approach is working.
No third-party State has appealed to the United Nations
for assistance with the unintended consequences of
sanctions since 2003.

However, there is always more to be done to
improve the effectiveness of our sanctions work. I
note, Mr. President, the proposals you have made in
the concept note (8/2016/102, annex). We agree that
some improvements are needed to the machinery
underpinning United Nations sanctions. This morning
we have already heard several good ideas that we
support - for instance, on the earlier appointment of
new chairs of sanctions committees - and we welcome
those constructive contributions to this important
debate. There is certainly scope, too, for more openness
and transparency in the sanctions committees, while
respecting the confidentiality of their work, not least
because of the risk of asset flight by those being
targeted.

We also need to make sure that any proposals for
reform are in keeping with the high-level review of
United Nations sanctions. We should not duplicate
effort or try to reinvent the wheel. We welcome
and should use the work done by Sweden and other
sponsors on this issue. Their final compendium shows
that sanctions reform must be discussed in the round,
including looking again at the United Nations sanctions
machinery and how it works with other institutions,
and raising awareness of sanctions within and outside
the United Nations.

The compendium also found that

"effectively implemented Security Council

sanctions can and do play a critical role in promoting

peace and security" (S/2015/432, p. 11).
It is those crucial words "effectively implemented" that
we must not lose sight oftoday. Any effort to improve the
openness or efficiency of the United Nations sanctions
machinery will count for nothing if it does not address
how the sanctions are actually being implemented.
Sanctions regimes established by the Council under
Chapter VII impose legally binding obligations on
all Member States, and it is absolutely crucial that all
States implement them fully. This is the only way that
sanctions can be effective and achieve their objectives.
In particular, States that serve on sanctions committees
must abide by the provisions set out in resolutions that
govern regimes. Only through States faithfully abiding
by these will we see proper implementation.

But we do recognize that implementation is
often challenging, so we see scope for sharing best
practice and learning lessons across all regions and
all regimes. One way is by arranging meetings and
visits of experts from capitals. This can contribute to
the debate by developing networks and identifying
capacity gaps. Sharing information on challenges to
effective implementation and sharing best practice
will help Member States in their own implementation.
Assistance on implementation should be made available
to those currently unable to comply. In short, we should
make sanctions as easy to implement as possible.
This includes making it easier for businesses, and we
welcome the call in resolution 2253 (2015) to make
progress on an enhanced data model for the United
Nations Da'esh and Al-Qaeda sanctions list.

Ultimately, to ensure that sanctions remain an
effective long-term part of our toolbox, we need to
use them in the most appropriate and most effective
manner. Our mandate is clear - it comes from Article
41 of our Charter - but to succeed in this effort we
need better implementation. With the right information
at our disposal, with the right targeting and with the
right coordination, I believe sanctions will continue to
encourage actors towards peaceful ends, and in doing
so they will continue to support the maintenance of
international peace and security.

