Mr. Salame (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate France on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

I should have liked to be in New York and to have
the opportunity to brief Council members in person.
However, it is no exaggeration to say that the situation
in Libya has reached a crucial juncture. We are working
to prevent recent developments and tensions on the
ground from escalating, and instead to pivot to stability
and a political compact, which will enable an end to the
crisis in the country.

On 13 January, the forces of General Haftar
peacefully entered Sabha. While there were some minor
incidents, the arrival of Haftar's forces was generally
perceived as a positive and stabilizing development.
When those forces moved to take control of Murzuq
in the south-west, there was active opposition from
the Tebu community and affiliated armed groups. In
the fighting and in revenge attacks in the immediate
aftermath, at least 18 residents of Murzuq were killed
and a further 29 injured. Ninety homes were reported
burned in revenge attacks by tribal forces under the
command of the Libyan National Army.

While the Libyan National Army has brought a
large measure of security and stability to the south,
which enabled the parallel bank in the east to deliver
bank notes to Sabha, it is unclear how long the campaign
can be sustained, given the long resupply lines and the
limited financial resources of the parallel Government.
There has been some mobilization of Libyan National
Army forces in Jufra, as well as the conduct of patrols
towards Sirte. That has led to friction and a rise in
tensions, with forces from the town of Misrata who
remain positioned in Sirte after their operations
countering the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham there.

In the east, the fighting in Derna came to an end. I
am deeply concerned by reports of violations of human
rights and humanitarian law during the recent military
operations in Derna. The fighting reportedly resulted
in many civilian casualties.

In the west of the country, local forces have
mobilized in response to the current tensions. So far,
such local mobilizations appear to be shows of force
and no party appears imminently ready to launch
an attack against any other. But there is a real risk
of miscalculation or of extremist forces starting
skirmishes in the hope of drawing others into a larger
confrontation. The Tripoli ceasefire continues to hold,
but the Greater Tripoli security arrangements plan
remains only partially implemented

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya has
supported two rounds of preparatory talks between
the advisers of Prime Minister Al-Serraj and General
Haftar, which took place in our Tunis offices. As a
result of those talks, the two leaders met in Abu Dhabi
and agreed to a number of important principles. Libya
shall be a civilian and democratically governed State
that enjoys full civilian control of the military and a
peaceful transition of power. The parties also agreed
on the need to unify Libya's long-divided institutions
and for the scheduling of national elections before
the end of the year. Many of these principles are not
new. Indeed, these talks are the continuation of the
process that started in September 2017. What is new
is the sincerity to turn these words into the end of the
transitional period through elections.
Let me now brief the Council on other developments
and activities on the ground.

I am pleased to announce that the United Nations
hub in Benghazi is open. After many months ofits being
almost open, United Nations staff are being deployed to
Benghazi to better deliver across the east ofthe country.
Discussion is now under way concerning a further
hub in Sabha to support operations in the South of the
country and United Nations programmes have also now
visited Sabha for the first time since operations were
halted there in 2013.

In my previous briefings, I warned against the
consequences of the economy of predation. I am
encouraged by action taken to combat illegal smuggling.
On 7 February, the public prosecution issued over
100 arrest warrants against individuals accused of
involvement in smuggling and the illegal disposal of
fuel, and ordered the confiscation of 115 fuel stations.
This organized fuel smuggling amounts to more than
$750 million annually.

Overall, Libya's infrastructure continues to
deteriorate at an alarming rate. Basic services, including
in health care, water and electricity, are eroding. The
situation of water production is particularly fragile.
With nearly four wells being disabled every month, the
western branch of the Great Man-Made River, which
is the primary supplier of water to the north-west, is in
imminent danger of collapse.

The 2019 humanitarian response plan for Libya
was launched on 5 February, seeking $202 million
to continue providing health care, protection, water
and shelter to more than half a million of the most
vulnerable people in Libya. An estimated 823,000
people, including migrants and 248,000 children, need
humanitarian assistance in Libya.

The situation of the economy is mixed. The
reopening of the Sharara oil field, in which the United
Nations played a crucial role, resulted in increased oil
production, which is returning to 1.2 million barrels per
day. The foreign currency exchange fee, in combination
with the liberalization of the opportunity to purchase
foreign currency, continues to generate revenue and
strengthen the dinar. This has increased purchasing
power and reduced inflation and the profitability of
the black market for currency. While important, these
benefits may be short-lived without genuine economic
reforms. Such reforms require a direct devaluation of
the currency and the lifting of subsidies, which consume
nearly 10 per cent of the national budget. Working with
the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya, the
national audit review process will soon begin.

It is extremely positive that the Central Committee
for Municipal Council Elections will start a new round
of nine elections in the southern and western parts of
Libya on 30 March. In this context, it is essential that
there be only one body managing municipal elections.
The High National Election Commission is preparing
for national elections. We are pleased to see that the
Commission, with the help of the United Nations and
international partners, has finally now moved into
its secure new headquarters. It is now necessary for
the government to provide the necessary operational
funding for Commission to finalize preparations
for elections.

The Mission has been in steady contact with
a number of countries and regional organizations,
including the League of Arab States, the African Union
(AU) and the European Union. I joined the Secretary-
General at the African Union Summit and welcome the
AU's interest in supporting the United Nations action
plan. I am grateful for the support expressed for our
efforts during the visit of Commissioner Chergui and
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo on 12 and 13 March.

The national conference will be held from 14 to
16 April inside Libya. It represents a critical opportunity
to end the transitional period, which began eight years
ago. Ahead of the national conference, we are working
with many parties to ensure as broad a buy-in as possible
to the political process. What is clear is that the Libyan
people fervently desire that their institutions be united
as soon as possible. Unfortunately, they are up against
powerful forces, which have materially profited from
the country's chaos and division and are therefore loath
to work towards a unification.

There is much at stake. If the opportunity presented
by the national conference is not seized, then we will
be faced with only two possible options: prolonged
stalemate or conflict. This stalemate may also
ultimately lead to conflict or conflict may erupt much
sooner. A failure now to advance the political process
would demonstrate absolutely that the country is totally
controlled by force of arms. But today, we have the
ability to step back from the edge of this precipice.

The national conference offers a crucial
opportunity for all parties, without exception, to set
aside their differences for the good of the country, to
unite, to avoid war and to choose the path of peace
and prosperity. The national conference will choose
whether to endorse the national charter, which is the
product ofthe national conference consultative process.
It will also chart a road map to conclude the transitional
period, either through simultaneous parliamentary and
presidential elections or through phased elections. It
will provide recommendations on how to deal with
the draft constitution produced by the Constitution
Drafting Assembly.

The days ahead will prove to be foundational to
the years ahead for Libyans and the region writ large.
I call on Libyans to come together and to avoid acts of
obstruction and incitement. There has been a notable
uptick in the weaponization of media platforms as tools
of incitement. This is tearing at Libya's fragile but
vital social fabric and could well be used to instigate
violence. At this sensitive time, I call on all actors to
refrain from the use of inflammatory and alienating
rhetoric in the public sphere.

I also call on all in the international community
to put the interests of the Libyan people first and to
act committedly and sincerely to pressure all parties to
avoid conflict and conclude a peaceful formula to end
the transitional period in Libya, for the sake of all of the
Libyan people.

