Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
focus oftoday's debate on health care in armed conflict.
It also illustrates a deeper problem we are facing: the
erosion of the respect for international humanitarian
law. Article 24 of the First Geneva Convention states:

"Medical personnel exclusively engaged in the

search for, or the collection, transport or treatment

of the wounded or sick... shall be respected and
protected in all circumstances."

In practice, however, this norm is increasingly
violated in a systematic manner, as medical facilities
and personnel are targeted in various conflicts around
the world, often with the apparent intention to intensify
the suffering of the civilian population. Killing one
health-care worker can result in the lack of care for
hundreds of people.

As in other areas, the case of Syria is particularly
dramatic. Physicians for Human Rights has
documented - as the Secretary-General has indicated
in his opening remarks - over 400 attacks on medical
facilities since 2011, as well as the deaths of hundreds
of medical personnel. It is estimated that more than
three quarters of Syrian doctors have fled since 2011. In
Yemen, there have been 160 documented deadly attacks
on hospitals and health professionals over the past two
years alone.

One year ago, the Security Council strongly
condemned attacks against medical facilities and
personnel in conflict situations in its resolution 2286
(2016). However, this important text has had limited
impact on the ground, and the Council has been unable
to enforce its implementation in various conflict
situations.

In his recent report on the protection of civilians
(S/2017/4l4), the Secretary-General has called on States
to intensify efforts to tackle the root causes of forced
displacement. One such effort is the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes put forward
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group and currently supported by 112 States. The code
of conduct is a political commitment from these States
to take timely and decisive action aimed at preventing
or ending atrocity crimes and not to vote against
credible draft resolutions put forward to that end. The
code of conduct gives a very important role to the
Secretary-General in submitting relevant information
to the Council and is therefore complementary to his
prevention agenda.

Given the failure of other initiatives to enhance
compliance with international humanitarian law, a key
responsibility to do so falls on the Security Council. It
has several tools at its disposal, ranging from support
for national efforts to ensure accountability to referrals
to the International Criminal Court. Its overall record,
however, is unfortunately mixed, at best.

The people of Syria again have been at the
receiving end of the failure of the Council to act. This
has prompted the General Assembly to play a more
active role in the area of accountability by creating the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. This decision was a very important step
forward to ensure that the crimes committed in Syria
will not go unpunished and a landmark decision in
the accountability work of this Organization. We
look forward to the early appointment of the head of
the Mechanism by the Secretary-General and to its
financing from the regular budget of the United Nations.

Civilians will always suffer disproportionately
in armed conflict. The most effective way to protect
them is therefore avoiding armed conflict altogether.
We view the effort to criminalize illegal war-making
as an essential part of the conflict-prevention agenda
and are therefore working, with many other States,
towards ensuring the activation of the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court over the crime of
aggression at the end of this year. We encourage all
States to ratify the Kampala Amendments on the crime
of aggression and look forward to jointly writing a
chapter of history that is long overdue: criminalizing
and thereby deterring illegal war-making.

