Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Rafael, and your team for your outstanding
presidency. It is quite clear to me that we would be
nothing without our teams. I would also like to wish
every success to the presidency of Angola.

I shall concentrate on two aspects. As Elbio Rosselli
always says, it is difficult for the last speaker to say
something new. But I will try to do so.

First, I would like to refer to a practice that we have
seen this month, which is that of discussing matters
under the item "Any other business". My team has been
working intensively and, according to our calculations,
you, Sir, convened 12 such meetings - although, you,
Sir, say the number is 14. This practice seems to me to
be necessary and advisable because, in fact, that is the
work of the Security Council. The Council cannot limit
itself to meeting only when the schedules are set in
accordance with the reporting system. We have to meet
when there is a situation that demands the attention of
the Security Council. However, despite all the fondness
and trust that I have for you, Mr. President, 14 meetings
seem perhaps a bit too many. You, Mr. President, have
the great distinction of having created a new trend
or doctrine. However, in the light of the upcoming
presidencies - those of Angola, China and Egypt - I
would like to say to all members that we need to find
a balance between quality and quantity. The item "Any
other business" is good, but we need to reserve it for
true emergency situations. If we look to the past, we see
that previously this item was used in very exceptional
cases, but this month it has become frequent. That is
fine. You, Sir, have created a new school of thought, but
I call for prudence.

Secondly, Spain is a great defender of transparency,
which means that what we do in the Security Council
can be shared to some extent with the General Assembly.
I am very proud that during our presidency our team
decided to end the month with a wrap-up session - later
known as a Toledo style wrap-up - that allowed for

interaction between members of the Security Council
and members of the General Assembly.

I am a bit disappointed today at seeing the small
number of people who are listening to us. Why does
that trouble me? Because they cannot talk to us. We
are in this magnificent Chamber talking about what
we do in the Security Council, while they have to limit
themselves to simply listening and cannot ask any
questions. My request, and that of Spain's, is that, if it
is agreeable to them, the three upcoming presidencies I
mentioned, as well as other subsequent ones, agree that
the wrap-up session be held in the the Toledo format
-that is, to allow members of the General Assembly
to ask us questions. I will not go into any more details
on that point.

What I found very interesting in Ambassador
Rosselli's intervention was his mention of the
proliferation of meetings and, at the same time, the
lack of resolutions. I would add something else, which
is what most concerns me. It is true that we meet a lot
and produce little. However, I would change the words
a bit. I believe we talk too much and do not implement
enough: there is too much talk in Security Council
meetings. And while some resolutions are indeed
adopted, where we really fall short is on implementing
resolutions and presidential statements.

The second issue I want to mention is humanitarian
affairs. I believe that this is one ofthe greatest hallmarks
of the Venezuelan presidency, which I applaud.
There have been countless meetings on humanitarian
issues - on Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and other
places. At the end of the day, however, we are talking
about people in need. When we focus on humanitarian
concerns, Council meetings allow us to do three things:
first, to establish early-warning mechanisms; secondly,
to facilitate humanitarian access; and, thirdly, and most
important, to promote respect for humanitarian law.

To conclude, let me touch on two very timely issues
related to threats to international peace and security.

First, with regard to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, I would like to fully align myself
with the statement delivered by the Ambassador of
Japan. I believe that it is absolutely essential that the
Security Council adopt a draft resolution that marks a
qualitative leap forward in terms of sanctions against
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Why?
First, because previous resolutions have proved to be
insufficient; secondly - and I trust there will be support
from the 15 members of the Council for this - because
there is a need to send a signal of unity and a single
message; and, thirdly, because I think it is urgent to do
so, for we cannot allow there to be any delay on the part
of the members of the Council in the face of threats to
international peace and security.

With regard to Syria, I will be very brief: I trust
that we will adopt a draft resolution this afternoon. I
will therefore save my statement for the meeting that
will start some time after 3 pm.

