Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join in the words of appreciation
expressed at the holding of this meeting. We are
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding. We also welcome the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the President of the Economic and Social
Council, and we express our appreciation to all those
eminent guests who have come from their capitals to
participate in our discussion today.

Today's meeting is yet another reaffirmation of
the serious concern of the world community about the
state of affairs in the African continent and the desire
to develop an effective strategy for maintaining peace
and stability in Africa. It is impossible to have stable
and harmonious world development if the African
States, which are almost one third of the membership
of the international community, remain in a fault zone
of heightened political and socio-economic instability.

Sharing the conclusions of the United Nations
Secretary-General on the vital link between peace and
development, Russia favours developing a
comprehensive approach to the resolution and
prevention of conflicts, poverty eradication, ensuring
development and strengthening democracy on the
African continent. We need to break the vicious circle
of inadequate development, social and inter-ethnic
problems, political and military instability, conflicts
and the breakdown of development programmes.
Priority must be given to using political and diplomatic
methods and to neutralizing factors which enable the
emergence and the continuation of conflicts.

A key role in this regard belongs with the
Africans themselves. Peacekeeping efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Economic
Community of West African States, the Southern African
Development Community, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the mediation missions of
eminent African political figures have in many cases
made possible positive progress in the resolution of
conflicts, and much has been said in great detail about
this today. Russia favours the efforts of Africans
themselves being fully bolstered by the authority of the
Security Council, and through the logistical capability
of the United Nations.

We support the steps being taken by the Secretary-
General to expand links between the United Nations and
the OAU and with subregional African organizations on
issues such as the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Such links will help promote coordinated
implementation in the African region of specific peace
initiatives, including those relating to conflicts in the
Great Lakes region and in the Mano River Basin.
Russia supports the efforts being made by the
United Nations to enhance Africa's peacekeeping
potential, including those areas such personnel training,
the exchange of information, the holding of joint
exercises, the implementation of demining programmes,
and others. There is substantial potential in the United
Nations standby arrangements system. The United
Nations can make a significant contribution to the
mobilization of international donor support for African
peacekeeping efforts.

As a whole, the most logical approach is the one
in which the Africans themselves determine specific
goals and tasks of maintaining peace in their continent,
while using any peacekeeping force in strict
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
This implies that any preventive or coercive actions,
whether they be sanctions or even additional military
force, must be authorized by the Security Council.

In this respect, experience shows that the Council
is interested that, above all, the agreed views of the
Africans themselves be taken into account in the search
for ways to resolve the various problems in the
continent, including those linked to the need to halt the
illegal spread of small arms and light weapons and the
illegal mining of and traffic in diamonds, the revenue
from which finances and arms illegal anti-Government
groups.

Post-conflict rehabilitation and development
assistance must be an important component of the
international strategy for ensuring peace and
preventing conflicts on the African continent. The
socio-economic and humanitarian sectors of the United
Nations have significant preventive potential in this
area. To make use of this potential, we need agreed
actions of the various bodies and agencies of the
United Nations system, including, where necessary, by
using Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations,
on cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council.

We must strive for effective implementation in
Africa of integrated United Nations programmes,
combining, on one hand, mine clearance, confiscation
of firearms, and demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, and, on the other hand, support for
democratic institutions, social and economic reforms
and national mechanisms for governance and the
administration of justice.

In the post-conflict recovery stage, it is important
to focus on preventing the recurrence of crises, above
all through ensuring effective linkage between
emergency assistance and subsequent measures to
promote long-term sustainable development and social
integration of the most vulnerable groups of the
population. The Russian Federation is ready to
continue - on the basis of open, equal and mutually
advantageous partnership - to participate in
international efforts to strengthen Africa's peace-
building potential.

