Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
The European Union will shortly be making a statement
through its President. My delegation, which naturally
endorses the views expressed in that statement, now
proposes to emphasize the points to which we attach
particular importance.

I should like at the outset to congratulate the
Secretary-General on the excellent report he submitted on
the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations, a direct follow-up to "Agenda for Peace",
published two and a half years ago. The thinking it
contains is fortunately enriched by the experience derived
from peace-keeping operations during the interim.

I would like to discuss three subjects to which, in
the view of my delegation, special attention should be
given if we wish to improve the United Nations capacity
to maintain international peace and security. I am
referring to preventive diplomacy and peace-making, to
the rapid deployment of peace-keeping operations and to
the imposition of sanctions.

 

We attach particular importance to the use of
preventive diplomacy for peace-making efforts to forestall
the outbreak or aggravation of conflicts and to settle their
underlying disputes. It was to this end that we transmitted
last year, in coordination with the Government of the
United Kingdom, a list of individuals, experts and means to
help the Secretariat to carry out preventive diplomacy
missions. We are pleased that this example has been, or is
in the course of being, followed by other countries.
Furthermore, we support in principle the idea that stable
funding should be provided for the initiation and conduct of
preventive diplomacy missions and peace-making, including
long-term missions.

The preventive deployment of peace-keeping troops is
one way to prevent the outbreak or worsening of conflicts
and to help restore peace. My Government hopes that we
can have recourse to preventive deployment to help
stabilize tense situations whenever it is useful and possible,
including deployment on one side of the border when there
is a lack of consent by all the Governments concerned.

Peace-building activities are a necessary corollary to
preventive diplomacy and peace-making. They can occur
during or as a continuation of a peace-keeping operation in
order to ensure the lasting restoration of peace. They can
also be initiated independently of an operation, as a
consequence of a preventive diplomacy mission or a peace-
making mission. Actions to promote the creation of
diplomatic institutions and economic and social
development help to eliminate the underlying causes of
conflicts, particularly internal conflicts. My delegation
would like to see such measures implemented, particularly
after a peace-keeping operation, when they prove necessary
to promote the lasting restoration of peace.

We should follow up the major progress which has
been achieved in the last two years in strengthening the
ability of the Secretariat to plan, deploy and conduct peace-
keeping operations. As experience has shown on many
occasions, rapid deployment is essential for the success of
operations. In this connection, it should be noted that the
speed with which an operation is deployed depends not
only on the capacity of the Secretariat, but also to a large
extent Member States to respond to the demands made on
them.

The concept of stand-by forces, which was developed
by the Secretariat, is, if a sufficient number of Member
States commit themselves to it, an excellent way of
reducing the time required for deployment. My
Government, which put forward this concept and which has
advocated and supported its implementation, very much
hopes that the Secretariat will continue to develop and
promote it among Member States. In the current
circumstances, the only way to effectively initiate
planning for an operation and guarantee its rapid
deployment is to develop the data bank containing all the
commitments for the contribution of forces and keep it
up-to-date. By definition, these stand-by commitments,
since they are not automatic, cannot in all cases
necessarily ensure rapid deployment of an operation.
Nevertheless, we cannot understand why the system
developed by the Secretariat should fall into disuse due to
lack of attention, on the pretext that its effectiveness is
not guaranteed in all cases. We consider not only that
arrangements regarding stand-by forces should be
maintained, but that the inter-operational nature of the
forces, in terms of equipment, deployment timetables and
command structure, should be developed.
We took note with great interest of the proposal by
the Secretary-General regarding the creation of a United
Nations rapid reaction force, made up of national
battalions trained under the same procedures and with
integrated equipment which would constitute the strategic
reserve of the Security Council. This proposal will be
considered very closely by my Government. Its practical
implications, political consequences and financial aspects
raise issues. The main advantage of creating such a force,
compared with the existing system of stand-by forces,
would be the permanent availability of battalions in all
circumstances. We would note, however, that questions
concerning agreements between the Governments
concerned and the United Nations, the command of the
force and its financing have not been spelled out.

Implementing such a concept would obviously take
a long time. The careful study which it deserves and the
hopes it might arouse do not, in the opinion of my
Government, justify any delay in developing the system
of stand-by forces.

The measures outlined in Article 41 of the
Charter - the imposition of sanctions - are the only
enforcement instruments available to the Security Council
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security other from recourse to military force, which, as
we know, is very difficult to implement. This is why their
use is not subject to any restriction. The Charter only
refers to the ability of third States to consult the Council
over specific economic difficulties they may encounter.

 

On this subject, my Government does not entirely
agree with the Secretary-General's proposals. Indeed,
although experience teaches us that the imposition of
sanctions must have a specific aim and that the means and
criteria for lifting a sanctions regime and regular
consideration of that regime must be stipulated from the
outset, we also feel that it is necessary to preserve the
Security Council's autonomy in decision-making. It would
seem to us that the proposed establishment of a mechanism
whose primary function would be to evaluate, before any
decision is taken, the potential impact of the planned
sanctions on the country in question and on third countries,
of the planned sanctions and to measure the effects of those
sanctions during their implementation would, unfortunately,
lead to all sorts of pressures being exerted on the Council.
We would therefore be unable to endorse that suggestion at
this juncture.

Some of the questions I have raised, such as those
concerning sanctions, are substantive. Others, such as those
concerning the proposed rapid reaction force, address more
particularly the real possibility of implementing the
proposals before us in the near future. We believe that
emphasis and efforts should be focused on progress that can
be achieved now, allowing the development of existing
means to improve the rapid deployment of United Nations
operations.

In conclusion, I wish to recall that the basis of our
thinking, "An Agenda for Peace", continues to be valid.
The current inadequacy of the means available to the
United Nations should not lead us to abandon in principle
the goals which we may set ourselves for the future, and in
particular the United Nations capacity to enforce peace
when it is called upon to do so.

