Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too would like
to express our thanks to His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Poland for being here today to
conduct this debate. I join others in thanking all our
briefers, particularly Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan, for
sharing their very compelling testimonies with the
Security Council this morning.

I want to add my voice to those congratulating Peru
on a very successful presidency. I also welcome Poland's
assumption of the presidency and pledge the support of
the United Kingdom. I welcome our Chinese colleague,
whom we had the pleasure of seeing earlier, and I wish
to thank the Kuwaiti representative for drawing our
attention to that very important anniversary.

What we have heard today shows that everybody
has been deeply moved by the bleak picture of the
impact of armed conflict on children that is conveyed
in the report of the Secretary-General for the year
2018 (S/2019/509). I will not repeat many of the very
pertinent points that have been made around the table. It
is very clear that the issue of children in armed conflict
is something that unites the Council. I suspect that it
unites the whole membership. We ought to hold on to
that as we try to find a way to enhance all the measures
we have taken. IfI may, I will use this meeting to focus
on six ideas for further action to reverse some of the
incredibly worrying trends of 2018.

First, and at the heart of all the violations against
children set out in the report, is the widespread disregard
we are seeing for international law, not just by non-State
armed groups but also by Governments. We all know
the situation in Syria, in particular in Idlib. We need
to have an urgent conversation about the international
legal framework, how to strengthen adherence to
international humanitarian law, and accountability
for those who disregard it. In that connection, it is
very welcome that the Polish presidency will also be
conducting a debate on international humanitarian law
and another very important anniversary.

Secondly, levels of rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children in conflict remain prevalent
and too high. In Somalia for example, sexual violence
was committed against hundreds of girls and boys
by State and non-State actors alike. In South Sudan,
sexual violence continues to be used as a weapon of
war in concert with abductions, although we welcome
the willingness of the Government to engage with the
United Nations to develop a comprehensive action plan
on all six violations there.
In November, the United Kingdom will have the
pleasure ofhosting the Global Conference on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The Conference will focus
on addressing the root causes ofsexual violence, tackling
stigma, strengthening justice for survivors and holding
perpetrators to account. We also hope that it will be
able to launch a code ensuring that signatories uphold
international standards and best practice when dealing
with sexual violence. I hope many of the countries
represented in the Chamber and our colleagues from
the United Nations will be able to join us at that event.

Thirdly, and as was very clear from the testimony
of Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan, we need to improve
approaches to re-integrating children who have been
recruited and used by parties to conflict. In situations
such as that in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where more than 2,000 children were separated from the
parties to conflict in 2018, we need to increase funding
for reintegration programmes. It also means that we
need to improve the availability of psychosocial and
mental health support, education, vocational training,
jobs and support to the community. That came over
really clearly from both of our civil society briefers
today. For our part, we look forward to the outcomes of
the studies commissioned by the Global Coalition for
the Reintegration of Child Soldiers, of which we are a
member and financial supporter.

Fourthly, we should strengthen our response to the
denial of humanitarian access. The Secretary-General's
report states that the number of incidents of denial of
access decreased in 2018. It tells us little, however,
about the extent of the impact on children. In Yemen,
for example, the impact was clearly devastating and
in Myanmar, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about the lack of humanitarian access. I take
this opportunity to call on the authorities in Myanmar to
honour fully the memorandum of understanding signed
with the United Nations in June. As a first stage, we
would hope that children and armed conflict reporting
might be able to provide more information on impact in
that regard. Looking forward, we should look further
at how we make the denial of humanitarian access a
trigger for listing in the annual report.

Fifthly, Member States should do more to embed
child-protection mechanisms into their domestic
systems. I was very interested in what Mr. Awan
and the Executive Director had to say about that, in
particular. We urge Member States to join us in signing
and ratifying the Optional Protocol on the Involvement
of Children in Armed Conflict and in endorsing
initiatives, such as the Safe Schools Declaration,
the Paris Principles and Paris Commitments and the
Vancouver Principles.

We ourselves have provided an extra £23 billion-in
other words, more than $3 billion for mental health care
support, which includes extra funding for children. In
June this year, we were able to launch a child's mental
health prevention plan. In our royal family, Princes
Harry and William have launched a mental health line
called Shout. We take very seriously that aspect of
the problem.

Sixthly, we should remain vigilant in our
monitoring of ongoing conflict situations where there
have been unlawful attacks on education, including
in the Anglophone region of Cameroon and in
eastern Ukraine.

Finally, I would like to express our admiration and
respect for the United Nations own work; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; the monitoring
and reporting personnel and the child protection staff
and their partners on the ground for the tireless work
they do at great personal risk to themselves, and as we
heard today, in very harrowing circumstances. They
deserve our full support.

I would like to end by recalling what the Executive
Director said about looking after the children as they
are an investment in our global future. I do not think
there can be a truer word than that.

