Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): My
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his briefing on the activities of the Court pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005). We take note of all the
activities carried out by the Prosecutor and his Office,
as reflected in his eighth report to the Council.
Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the
continuing reports of serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur. We
condemn all attacks aimed at Darfurian civilians,
humanitarian personnel and peacekeeping forces. We
support the efforts to fully investigate these crimes and
bring the perpetrators to justice.

While stressing the need to implement resolution
1593 (2005) in its entirety, my delegation notes that the
Government of the Sudan had committed to exercise its
jurisdiction through the appointment of special
prosecutors, the establishment of special criminal
courts and the completion of criminal proceedings
against seven cases in 2005. We trust the Government
of the Sudan will sustain and step up such national
judicial efforts to ensure justice for Victims of gross
human rights violations in Darfur. We believe that such
an approach would enjoy the broad support of the
international community, including the ICC.

Viet Nam continues to believe that combating
impunity or violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law in Darfur is part of the
comprehensive endeavour for peace and national
reconciliation in the Sudan. We support the African
Union approach, as stipulated in that organization's
Peace and Security Council communique dated 21 July
2008, addressing the interlinked issues of combating
impunity and promoting peace and reconciliation in a
mutually reinforcing manner. We also share the view of
the Arab countries, as reflected in the solution package
agreed upon by the Arab League and the Government
of the Sudan in July 2008.

In this respect, we welcome the recent decision of
the Government of the Sudan to declare an immediate
ceasefire in Darfur; this was a constructive endeavour
to promote the peace process. We call on all other
parties concerned to join in the ceasefire and
participate with good will in the negotiations for a
political solution to the Darfur conflict. The United
Nations and the international community should
intensify assistance to facilitate and consolidate these
fragile developments. We would, therefore, caution
against the imposition of unduly coercive measures
which may further complicate the situation in Darfur.

By way of conclusion, we would like to call for
further cooperation between the Government of the
Sudan and other parties to the conflict in Darfur,
including the ICC, regional organizations and States
interested in the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005).

