Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica voted in favour of the draft resolution
because we feel that the situation prevailing in
Zimbabwe since March, fundamentally as concerns
respect for the will of the people, represents a threat to
international peace and security and obliges the
Council to respond and act accordingly.

In recent months, Costa Rica has stressed the
importance of the role of regional organizations and its
hope that the crisis in Zimbabwe could be resolved
satisfactorily through such channels. The alarming
humanitarian situation, the levels of violence and
intimidation - which, far from decreasing, are on the
rise - the dangerous implications for the region and
the unwillingness of Robert Mugabe's Government to
respect the views of this Council, the international
community and the will of its own people led us to
support the draft resolution.

In our view, free and fair elections are essential to
protecting and promoting human rights and the rule of
law. States have an obligation to secure the necessary
means to facilitate full and effective participation in
their electoral processes. However, in spite of the
appeals of the international community and this
Council, the Government of Mr. Mugabe decided to
proceed with the elections on 27 June, which failed to
meet even the most minimal requirements to be
considered free and fair. That is the view of such
regional bodies as the Southern Africa Development
Community that were present as observers to the so-
called elections of 27 June. They concluded that, given
the circumstances and conditions in which the voting
took place, the official results did not reflect the will of
the Zimbabwean people. That is why many
Governments throughout the world, including those of
Zimbabwe's neighbours, do not recognize the validity
of the elections or the legitimacy of the Government of
Mr. Mugabe.

Costa Rica believes that the demand conveyed by
the Security Council to the Government of Zimbabwe
in the draft resolution that has been rejected that it
fulfil its obligations towards the inhabitants of the
country should be backed up by tangible measures.
That is why we voted in favour of the imposition of
sanctions, as proposed in the draft resolution.

However, as we have stated on various occasions,
this Council should be especially disciplined with
respect to the imposition of sanctions and should
therefore consider and apply fair procedures and clear
parametres when it implements them. That would
facilitate their better implementation and result in their
greater efficacy. We were therefore pleased that certain
changes were incorporated into the draft resolution by
the sponsors, as requested by my country, notably in
paragraph 7 and concerning in particular the setting of
a start-up date.

However, although our country understands the
reasons for setting the start-up date at May 2005, we
would have preferred that the draft resolution provide
for the implementation of sanctions to be limited to the
specific events dating from March of this year. We say
that essentially for two reasons.

First, by limiting the sanctions in that manner it
would have added clarity to the parametres used to
establish sanctions. Secondly, however, and even more
importantly, such an approach would have identified
much more clearly the strongest motivation for the
action of this Council, which is, from the point of View
of our country, the lack of respect for the popular will
expressed in the elections.

Another point that Costa Rica wishes to highlight
is the importance of operative paragraph 12 in the draft
resolution, in which the Council clearly stated that it
would consider the measures imposed "if an
inclusive political settlement is agreed, which respects
the will of the Zimbabwean people and the results of
the 29 March 2008 elections" (5/2008/447, para. 12).
Those words are significant because, in our view, they
make it clear that the sanctions would be coercive and
not punitive measures. It is our hope that individuals
listed in the annex to the draft resolution will heed the
will of this Council, the international community and
their own people as early as possible and engage in
serious, substantial and inclusive negotiations in order
to achieve a political agreement that respects the
popular will, even in the knowledge that the draft
resolution has not been adopted.

There can be no doubt that the violations of other
human rights that are taking place in Zimbabwe are
serious and that the perpetrators should be brought to
justice in order to establish their responsibility. In that
regard, we particularly welcome the inclusion in the
draft resolution of language concerning the need to fix
responsibility for human rights abuses. The distinctive
nature of the Zimbabwean case is - let us be very
clear - that there has been a total lack of respect for
the will of an entire people expressed in free and fair
elections.

In article 21 (3) of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the United Nations recognized the
principle that

"[t]he will of the people shall be the basis of the
authority of government; this will shall be
expressed in periodic and genuine elections
which shall be by universal and equal suffrage
and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent
free voting procedures".
That principle has been developed in numerous
resolutions of the most democratic body of this
Organization, the General Assembly. Those include
resolution 45/150 of 1990 and, most recently,
resolution 62/150, adopted by an overwhelming
majority of 182 votes in favour, including all the
members of this Council, with no votes against and
only two abstentions.

Further, this Council, very early in its
consideration of the situation of the apartheid regime in
South Africa, and precisely also in the case of
Rhodesia, the Zimbabwe of apartheid, recognized the
importance for international peace and security that
States should be organized in keeping with the rule of
consultation, respecting the will of majorities as well
as the rights of minorities. Since 1993, with the case of
Somalia, the positive references to democratic
governance on the part of this Council have been oft
repeated. In that regard, perhaps the clearest cases in
which the Council has considered the lack or the
breakdown of democracy as an element justifying its
actions, even under Chapter VII of the Charter, have
been those of Haiti and Sierra Leone, in its resolutions
841 (1993), 940 (1994) and 1132 (1997), inter alia.

Now, given the particular characteristics of this
case vis-a-vis the others that I have mentioned, Costa
Rica believes that with this draft resolution the Council
would been undertaking something new and in some
ways would establishing a precedent. Costa Rica sees
in it the intention to strengthen democracies.

Finally, we regret the fact that the draft resolution
has been vetoed, but we welcome the fact that we have
had an explanation from those who exercised the
veto - something that we insisted upon. We certainly
hope that democracy will return soon to Zimbabwe and
that there will be an improvement in the human rights
situation and the general situation in humanitarian
terms of the citizens of that country.

