Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Ambassadors Tagliavini and Apakan
for their statements, and Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-
Frandzen, Assistant Secretary-General Ad Interim for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Chad remains concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in Ukraine, particularly in
the eastern part of the country. In the past few days
we have seen a resurgence in the fighting between
the Ukrainian army and the separatists. The city of
Donetsk is the scene of exchanges of artillery, mortar
and automatic weapon fire. Several sources also
confirm that the parties to conflict have been firing
fragmentation shells in urban areas. Chad condemns
such acts of violence and calls for an immediate end to
armed confrontations in accordance with the ceasefire
established by the Minsk agreement. Chad also
deplores the radicalization of the parties' positions,
with the announcement, on one hand, by Poroshenko's
Government that it has suspended all financial aid to
Donbas and frozen €2.6 million in salaries and various
forms of assistance, and, on the other, the separatists'
holding of elections on 2 November in Donetsk and
Luhansk, in flagrant violation of the Minsk agreement
and the Constitution of Ukraine. All of that chiefly
affects the civilian population, which has already paid
a heavy toll in the conflict. According to the United
Nations, since the start of the conflict in April more
than 4,000 people have died, many of them civilians,
and more than 5,000, whose situation will worsen as
winter approaches, have been internally displaced.

In the face of this escalating situation, we urge the
parties to the conflict to act calmly and with restraint.
Like other members of the Council, Chad believes
that finding a political solution is the only way to
emerge from the crisis. In that regard, we encourage
the Government of Ukraine to find a path to a direct
and inclusive national dialogue focused on national
reconciliation. Chad also urges the countries that have
the capacity to influence the parties to the conflict to
use that influence to help achieve peace in Ukraine,
with respect for its territorial integrity, sovereignty
and unity, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

