Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank Egypt for
organizing today's debate. It is extremely timely and
relevant.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and wishes to
add the following remarks in its national capacity.

Last week, we hosted in Rome the first-ever
ministerial conference between Italy and Africa.
With 36 ministers from African countries and 54
delegations, the conference aimed at renewing Italy's
natural partnership with Africa. Being a natural bridge
towards Africa, in Rome we proposed a sustainability
compact between Italy and Africa and between
Europe and Africa. The compact would address the
following issues.

The sustainability of peace and security, first and
foremost to avoid conflicts and relapse into conflicts
and to achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa;
socioeconomic sustainability to seize the immense
opportunities the continent provides; and sustainability
in managing migration, building upon the migration
compact that Italy has proposed to the European
Union to promote a strategic approach. In doing so,
Italy is moved by the idea that the solution to today's
challenges - terrorism, climate change, sustainable
development, migration - can be found in Africa and
with the contribution of our African partners. Italy is
committed to finding common solutions because we
share the same concerns and fate as our African partners.

Faced with such challenges, the United Nations
should act as an enabler for peace and work towards
a more effective multilateralism as the only viable
solution to today's borderless challenges. In this context,
the role of the African Union (AU) and a strengthened
cooperation with the United Nations under Chapter
VIII of the Charter are pivotal, as advocated by the
three review processes carried out last year in the field
of peace and security. A common theme of the reviews
is the need for the United Nations to build stronger
partnerships with regional and subregional actors.

Such a partnership is pivotal because it ensures
a more solid platform for the implementation of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. First and
foremost, it promotes greater ownership through the
principle of subsidiarity, actively involving in finding
solutions those organizations and countries that better
understand the root causes of the problems. Secondly,
it underscores the importance of conflict prevention,
early warning and preventive diplomacy by promoting
a paradigm shift from the current focus on conflict
management towards a more holistic approach that gives
primacy to political solutions. Thirdly, it underpins
the concept of sustaining peace, encompassing all
cycles of conflict, which is key to long-term, stable
and durable peace in Africa, a continent still hosting
the vast majority of United Nations peacekeepers and
at the centre of United Nations peacebuilding efforts.
Moreover, it promotes a fine tuning between the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the African Agenda
2063. Their implementation is essential to addressing
the root causes of conflicts and to promoting an holistic
approach to peace and security.

Of course, the partnership between the United
Nations and the AU needs to be effective and smooth
in order to address matters of common interest in a
pragmatic and cooperative fashion. The joint United
Nations-AU framework for an enhanced partnership in
peace and security can represent a blueprint for early and
continuous engagement between the two organizations
before, during and after conflicts, with a view to
finding political solutions to crises. Among the ways
to ensure an effective partnership, I wish to underscore
the importance of securing predictable, sustainable
and flexible resources for operations; promoting better
coordination and interaction between tUnited Nations
and AU envoys; involving more women and youth in
conflict-prevention and peacebuilding initiatives;
cooperating in electoral assistance, in particular this
year, when Africa will hold more than 20 elections;
addressing the root causes and socioeconomic causes
of terrorism and violent extremism in Africa; and
focusing on capacity-building and institution-building
to sustain peace.

In terms of the sustainable funding for African
Union operations, let me recall the findings of the
Prodi report of 2008 (see S/2008/813), which proposed
concrete recommendations to address the issue. In that
respect, we welcome the recent appointment of the
former President of the African Development Bank,
Mr. Donald Kaberuka, as the African Union High
Representative to the Peace Fund. It is an important sign
of the AU commitment to tackle financial challenges.

We believe in a stronger United Nations-AU
relationship, because Italy works with the African Union
and appreciates the value it can add. Our approach
is based on finding political solutions by involving
African partners, rather than military interventions.
Last week in Vienna, we sought to do so in the case
of Libya, by also inviting the African countries on the
southern border of that country.

Italy is committed to support the structures and
initiatives of the African Union Commission, in
particular its Peace and Security Department. We will
continue to offer such support within the partnerships
established by the African Union with the European
Union and the United Nations and by relying on bilateral
instruments, such as the Italian-African Peace Facility,
which has been operational since 2007 and represents
a clear example of sustainable and predictable funding.
Through the Facility, Italy has supported the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel for the Sudan, the African
Union Panel of the Wise and the Tana High-level
Forum on Security in Africa. We will contribute to
the further operationalization of the African Peace and
Security Architecture and through new joint initiatives
especially focused on the Horn of Africa. We reaffirm
our willingness to continue to cooperate on African
crisis scenarios and to promote effective cooperation
among the AU, African subregional organizations and
other international partners.

If elected, that is the approach that Italy will bring
to the Security Council starting next year.

