Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation too warmly thanks the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings today
on the implementation of their completion strategies
and, more generally, for their endeavours.

France supports both Tribunals. From the outset,
we have supported the concept of a completion strategy
for their work, which France feels is in the interest of
justice and of the victims and, hence, of peace and
reconciliation. We therefore, welcome the initial
measures taken, with the full respect for the Tribunals'
jurisdictions and the independence of their Prosecutors;
such respect is clearly essential.

We are also pleased the first requirement - the
completion of investigations by the end of the year -
can be met. We note with satisfaction that the pace of
trials and judgements has been more sustained in both
jurisdictions.

Finally, the renewal of the mandates of ICTY
judges, recently carried out by the General Assembly,
will contribute to the successful conclusion of cases
now under way before that Court.

We therefore have reason for satisfaction, and
reason to thank the officials of both Tribunals for the
efforts they have made since the adoption of Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
However, we must not overlook a number of
difficulties. It seems to us that the role of the Council
should be to help resolve those difficulties.

How can we do that? First of all, by reminding
States of their obligations. Here, I would like to refer
to two obligations, the first of which is quite simply
that States must respect their duty to finance the
Tribunals. Judge Meron underscored the devastating
effect of the recruitment freeze, decided on as a result
of the shortfall resulting from unpaid arrears. Judge
Mase too alerted us to the critical nature of the present
situation.

There is a paradox here: on the one hand, States
clearly support the completion strategy; and, on the
other hand, the implementation of that strategy has
been slowed as a result of delays in payment. We
believe that this situation must not continue. We take
note of the fact that the Secretary-General will address
this problem in the near future. We truly hope that he
will find a definitive solution that will halt the
departure of qualified officers to other institutions.

In passing, we like others, wonder about the
competition among international bodies that has
recently arisen, including within the United Nations,
with regard to the recruitment of experts. I believe that
Ms. Del Ponte referred to this matter. Unfortunately,
this competition is detrimental to international justice.

There is a second obligation that it is our duty to
recall and to underscore: the obligation of all States,
first and foremost Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia, to cooperate fully with the Tribunals.
Progress has been noted recently. There have been
arrests and surrenders, but assessments are still
disturbing, with respect to arresting fugitives and
transferring them to The Hague or to Arusha, access to
witnesses and the provision of documents.

In the view of France, I would say that, quite
simply, the lack of cooperation that has come to the
attention of the Security Council, particularly in the
case of Serbia and Montenegro and the Republika
Srpska of Bosnia and Herzegovina, must end as soon
as possible. I would like to clarify in that regard that
the Tribunals' missions cannot be completed until the
principal accused individuals - I am thinking in
particular of Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic, Mr. Gotovina
and Mr. Kabuga - have been tried. The timetable
established in resolution 1503 (2003) should in no way
facilitate impunity.

With respect to Rwanda and the States of the
region, resolution 1534 (2004), which must be
respected, provides for the enhanced cooperation of
those States with the ICTR in investigations related to
the Rwandese Patriotic Army in order to bring to
justice Mr. Kabuga and all others accused.

With respect to the former Yugoslavia, it is
disturbing to note that, 10 years later, effective and
well-placed networks continue to protect those
responsible for major crimes. It is also disturbing to
hear of grave acts of witness intimidation in some
regions, such as Kosovo.

I will conclude with two general observations.
First, the climate of intimidation to which I have just
referred and, in general, the climate in which the
Tribunals' authority is challenged oblige us to question
the environment in which certain national jurisdictions
must try cases involving the low- and mid-level
indictees that will be transferred to those jurisdictions
by the two Tribunals. We agree with those transfers,
but we cannot ignore the climate in which those trials
will take place. For transfers to take place in conditions
that comply with international norms, the international
community must further mobilize, provide more
assistance and undertake greater monitoring. Regional
legal cooperation in that context must be strongly
encouraged, as must be the establishment of witness
protection programmes.

One final comment: the establishment of the
ICTY and the ICTR has been a fundamental stage in
the history of justice and, in a way, in the history of
civilization. From day to day, the Tribunals may
encounter frustration and weariness, but we must
always bear in mind the ideal we have set for
ourselves: to see justice done for the victims and thus
contribute to peace-building and reconciliation in
regions afflicted by horrific wars and, ultimately, to
avoid the repetition of such atrocities. That ideal is
more alive and more important than ever. Therefore,
the Security Council must spare no effort to ensure that
the Tribunals, whose periodic assessment the Council
considered today, fully accomplish their mission and
thus contribute decisively, as they have done so far, to
the development of international criminal justice.

