Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The situation in Kosovo has
been giving rise to legitimate international concern for
quite some time now. Serious violations of human rights
have been reported for decades and the armed conflict in
recent months has triggered a wave of expressions of
concern from the neighbouring States and the
international community at large. During the summer
months this year, the situation in Kosovo deteriorated
severely. The number of refugees and internally displaced
persons has become alarming. Those who suffered most
were and continue to be innocent civilians. The
approaching winter could have devastating and
catastrophic effects.

Furthermore, the conflict in Kosovo constitutes a
serious threat to international peace and security and can
have a dangerous spillover effect in the region. As such,
it cannot be considered as an internal affair of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

We commend the tireless efforts of humanitarian
organizations to bring assistance to the people in need in
Kosovo, even at the risk of the lives of their own
personnel. At the same time, we share the views
expressed repeatedly by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, that
humanitarian assistance alone will not be an answer to the
conflict in Kosovo, but can only alleviate human suffering
until a political solution has been found.

Therefore, Slovenia welcomes the agreement reached
between Ambassador Richard Holbrooke and President of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Slobodan Milosevic
and agreements between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), respectively. We consider
those agreements as a possible first step towards a lasting
solution of the Kosovo question.

We expect that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and its authorities shall implement the accepted
commitments immediately and in full. Furthermore, there

 

is an urgent need for the authorities of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian leadership to enter
into a meaningful dialogue without preconditions and with
international involvement. This is the only way to devise a
political solution for the Kosovo question.

The draft resolution that we are about to take action
upon today not only endorses the agreements signed in
Belgrade on 16 October 1998, but also demands their full
implementation. The Security Council is thus assuming its
responsibility for international peace and security under the
Charter and reacting to a humanitarian catastrophe with
dangerous implications for international peace and stability.

Slovenia strongly supports all efforts of the
international community aimed at finding a peaceful and
political solution to the Kosovo problem. We will continue
to actively support those efforts. I am pleased to mention
that Slovenia will respond to the appeal of this draft
resolution and provide personnel and technical logistical
support for the OSCE Verification Mission in Kosovo.

It goes without saying that Slovenia, as a sponsor,
supports the draft resolution and will vote in its favour.

