Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her very clear and concise fifteenth report and her
briefing to the Security Council today. The work and
focus of the International Criminal Court on Libya is
extremely important in tackling impunity and making
accountable those responsible for serious crimes of
international concern. The Court's work has the full
support of the United Kingdom.

The most recent report of the Prosecutor makes
clear why the situation in Libya remains deeply
troubling. The continued political divisions in Libya
have benefited only certain armed groups intent on
criminality. Those groups have created an environment
of lawlessness, intimidation and fear. That situation
serves to underscore the urgent need to break the
political deadlock and bring peace to Libya and its
people. It is vital that all parties engage in good faith
with the United Nations-led political process.

We must ensure that those who have committed
and continue to commit human rights Violations and
abuses in Libya, including unlawful killings, do not
evade justice for their crimes. The United Kingdom has
strongly supported resolutions adopted by the Human
Rights Council aimed at increasing accountability.
We fully endorse the ICC's efforts in parallel. The
United Kingdom also reiterates its call for all parties to
cooperate with the ICC in relation to the arrest warrant
for Mahmoud Al-Werfalli, and for all those committing
acts amounting to war crimes and crimes against
humanity to be investigated and held accountable,
regardless of the side they support. The current cycle of
violence and impunity must be stopped.

The recent mission ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor to
Libya was an important step in strengthening the focus
of scrutiny on those who have acted with impunity. In
that regard, we welcomed the cooperation of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the
Prosecutor-General in Tripoli with the visiting mission.
In the wake of reports of the appalling mistreatment
and even enslavement of migrants, we also welcome
the Office of the Prosecutor's work with Member
States, national authorities and judiciaries, interested
European institutions and the Libyan Prosecutor-
General's Office to investigate and prosecute such
crimes. At the same time, we appreciate the resource
constraints under which the Prosecutor is operating in
relation to those investigations.

We are grateful for the Prosecutor's update on the
cases ofSaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah Al-Senussi
and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled. We fully support
the Court's call for cooperation from the members of
the Council, Libya and all States in connection with
the individuals who remain at large and are accused
of alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Libya in 2011. It is crucial that Member
States and the relevant international organizations work
to assist the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build
the rule of law in Libya. Together with our international
partners, we will continue to work with Libya to provide
it with the support that it needs to meet the challenges
it faces. At the same time, the United Kingdom, as a
strong principled supporter of the ICC, will continue to
provide its full support to the Prosecutor and her team.
