Mr. Tin (Myanmar): At the outset, my delegation
wishes to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this open debate focusing on
child victims of non-State armed groups. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon and
his Special Representative, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
all the other briefers for their insightful briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

The world today is confronting the complexities of
new challenges. The nature of conflicts and threats are
changing. We are now witnessing a growing magnitude
of new threats rooted in non-State armed groups.
The impacts on innocent children of the brutalities
committed by violent non-State actors are also quite
alarming. Therefore, the choice oftoday's theme is very
timely and relevant.

Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005), significant progress has been made in seeking
cooperation and compliance by national security
forces, as almost all of them already have their own
action plan to address this issue. Yet, it is discouraging
to learn that 2014 was marked by a multiplication of
conflicts, making children even more vulnerable.
Sharing this valid concern, Myanmar has lent its full
support to the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign,
which was launched a year ago. Myanmar fully shares
the common objective of the campaign to see national
security forces delisted by 2016.

In my own country, Myanmar, we have started
serious efforts with the Government army, or Tatmadaw,
to accelerate the implementation of its action plan in
close cooperation with the United Nations country
task force on monitoring and reporting since 2012.
Myanmar's armed forces have implemented virtually
all steps outlined in the action plan. Those include
the issuance of military directives prohibiting the
recruitment of minors under 18, the criminalization
of such recruitments, taking action against offenders,
the setting up of complaint mechanisms, the launching
of a nationwide awareness campaign, providing
human rights training for military personnel and the
granting of access to monitor the Government military
facilities, as well as some border guard forces. Every
complaint is thoroughly investigated and all underage
recruits identified were discharged and reintegrated.
The Government's efforts for rehabilitation and
reintegration need to be given enhanced support to
prevent them from falling victim again.

Myanmar has recently completed a review with
the United Nations team of the action plan and agreed
on the workplan and the remaining steps to move
forward. With the support of the United Nations, we
hope that the Government army will be able to meet
the target set by the campaign. The successful delisting
of the Government armed forces will have a positive
influence on the remaining parties of non-State armed
groups to follow suit.

As non-State actors constitute a large majority
among the parties listed in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/339), the Council must continue to
focus more on the behaviour of non-State actors. But
there are a number of constraints and challenges in
doing so. While nation States could be controlled by
the applicable international human rights instruments,
non-State actors cannot. There are also concerns over
the sensitive question of legitimacy that could arise
from the United Nations dealing directly with non-State
actors. Interaction between the United Nations and
non-State armed groups should be conducted through
consultations with concerned Governments, who bear
the primary responsibility to protect their own civilians,
including children. At the same time, the Governments
concerned find themselves in the difficult position of
being expected to influence non-State actors or allow
the United Nations team access to areas controlled by
non-State actors due to security problems.

The best way to end conflict-related violations
against children is none other than putting an end
to armed conflicts. Therefore, the Government is
accelerating its peace process with all non-State
ethnic armed groups in Myanmar to end the six-
decade-long conflict. The seventh round of peace
talks held in Yangon last week has made substantive
progress on remaining contentious issues, auguring
well for reaching the nationwide ceasefire agreement
and political dialogue. This is likely to present better
opportunities for encouraging non-State parties to
include political commitments for the protection
children and for addressing the issue of underage
recruits. With greater peace and stability in the country,
we believe that the conflict-related violence against
children will eventually come to an end.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Myanmar's
continued commitment to working closely with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF
and Council member States to enhance its efforts in
protecting children affected by armed conflicts.

