The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix, Lieutenant General Ngondi and Maj or
General Pearce for their briefings. We welcome their
presence with us in this meeting and the dialogue
currently under way. We express our deep gratitude for
the Force Commanders' efforts and endeavours in the
service of peace, and we honour their colleagues who
sacrificed their lives for peace.

We might not be one of the regular troop-
contributing countries. However, Kuwait hosted a
United Nations peacekeeping Mission for more than
10 years, and we are fully aware of the importance
of peacekeeping operations. I am of course referring
to the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission (UNIKOM), which was an example of the
successful missions.

I would like to thank Member States for agreeing
that this meeting would have the format of an interactive
dialogue with each other. In my statement today I
will focus on three basic points: first, best practices;
secondly, initiatives to enhance cooperation and,
thirdly, what is needed to enhance cooperation.

Ithas been more than 70 years since the establishment
of the first peacekeeping operation. We now have at our
disposal a wealth of best practices, foremost among
them the three peacekeeping principles, including the
primacy of political solutions and national ownership.

The first peacekeeping principle is the consent
and approval of the parties concerned. Continuous
communication between the mission and the host
country contributes to implementing the mission's
mandate and defusing any dispute before it erupts.
Moreover, designing missions based on the primacy
of political solutions contributes to promoting national
ownership through robust national institutions that host
countries can use to fulfil their primary responsibility
of protection. We have seen the success of that approach
in Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and Haiti.

On initiatives to enhance cooperation, we have
listened to the briefers about some examples of
cooperation. We recall our own national experience in
hosting UNIKOM. for more than 12 years, during which
we shared the burden. We would like to note some
commendable initiatives that need to be followed.

We thank Cote d'Ivoire for its interest in the topic
at hand, as illustrated by the holding a meeting of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations prior to
today's meeting. We also commend the Cairo road map,
which advanced the concept of trilateral cooperation
and turned it into quadripartite consultations by adding
the perspective of the host country.

Coordinating in advance with host countries and
ensuring their participation in drafting resolutions
to establish or modify a mission are not a periodic
requirement but a necessity, as those countries are
part of making peacekeeping a success. In addition,
peacekeepers must receive the necessary training,
including on discipline-related matters as well as
language training. That responsibility is not shouldered
only by a mission, but also by host countries through
continuously abiding by agreements - from the
establishing of a mission until its departure. We thank
the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of Cyprus
for their cooperation with the two missions.

Many questions have been directed to the briefers.
That is why, before I conclude, I will raise only a
general question. The Security Council designs
missions, while those in the field implement them.
This is an opportunity to ask the briefers about any
advice they could provide, especially when there is
disagreement between the parties during periods of
transition. What kind of advice could the briefers give
the Security Council on what action to take when there
is disagreement between the parties concerned and in
periods of transition?

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would now like to turn the floor over to the
briefers to respond to the questions posed or make
further comments.

I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.

