Mr. Adada (Congo) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the 11 member countries of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) -
Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Congo, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda and
Sao Tome and Principe - which my country is
currently chairing, I should like first of all to convey
my heartfelt congratulations to you, Sir, for the
dynamism with which you have been guiding the work

of the Council during this month. It is with justifiable
pride and great determination that the subregion
whence you hail is participating in this debate, to
which you were kind enough to invite the international
community today.

May I also, on behalf of all my colleagues,
commend the efforts that the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofl Annan, has been deploying towards peace and
sustainable development in Africa as a whole. We are
particularly grateful to him for the attention and
interest that he has consistently accorded to questions
of peace and security in our subregion.

We are therefore quite optimistic as to the
outcome of today's very timely debate, as very
favourable prospects are currently emerging in Central
Africa.

Less than two months ago, from 26 to 30 August
2002, the eighteenth ministerial meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa was held at Bangui, in the
Central African Republic. The Committee, an
instrument for preventive diplomacy, has just
celebrated its tenth anniversary.

Let me welcome here the existence of this
valuable forum for coordination, which has enabled our
States, in spite of the disputes that have sometimes
divided them, to maintain an ongoing dialogue with a
view to easing tensions. Thanks to this Committee, the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
(COPAX) was established, though it has not yet
become truly operational.

The Bangui meeting noted that there was a
generally positive trend in the geopolitical and security
situation in the subregion. This is due in particular to
the goodwill of the parties to the conflict and to various
mediation efforts, both subregional and international,
and especially to a genuine awareness on the part of the
majority of actors involved. In Angola, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic, to name just a few, real progress has
been made which must be consolidated. Hence the
importance of this meeting, which should help us
develop our peace-building capacities through specific
actions in the areas of disarmament, demobilization
and the social and vocational reintegration of the
former combatants.

Peacemaking efforts in Central Africa are a
priority today, since they are essential for peace,
political stability and, ultimately, the economic
recovery and development of post-conflict countries.
We all are well aware that demobilization and
reintegration processes, if poorly carried out or
incomplete, inevitably lead to continuing violence and
insecurity, as, for some former combatants, the use of
weapons represents an automatic solution for their
daily subsistence.

Therefore, directly following the cessation of
hostilities, national programmes must be crafted that
would allow us to rebuild the confidence of an entire
segment of the population which needs to be
reintegrated into civilian life. But this requires
resources that are not always available to countries that
have been bled dry by the trials of war - hence the
need for assistance from the international community.

To illustrate what I have just outlined, I should
like to recall my country's experience after the end of
the civil war, following the agreement on the cessation
of hostilities and the peace accords signed in 1999.

A programme was set up jointly with the United
Nations Development Programme whose results were
encouraging but limited: 8,009 ex-militia members
received assistance with reintegration, within the
framework of a process aimed at reaching 10,000
former combatants; 11,114 weapons and pieces of
ammunition were collected, and a "Flame of Peace"
weapons-burning ceremony was held to destroy them;
and almost 1.8 billion CFA francs were earmarked for
some 2,609 micro-projects.

The process is ongoing, because there are still
about 25,000 former militia members who wish to
benefit from those programmes. Steps have already
been taken in this regard with the United Nations and
other partners. The World Bank has agreed to provide
$5 million in funding.

Similar problems have arisen and will continue to
arise throughout the subregion, and it is important for
the United Nations to consider them urgently and
pragmatically. That is especially true in the case of
Angola, for which, on 15 August 2002, the Security
Council established a Mission - a timely and
appropriate response, since it is designed to, inter alia,
provide humanitarian assistance to vulnerable groups,
ensure the social and vocational reintegration of
demobilized soldiers, promote economic recovery,
prepare for elections and lead the demining effort.

We hope, therefore, that that Mission and other
initiatives undertaken by the international community
will constitute an adequate response to the appeal made
in Bangui by the Advisory Committee on Central
Africa Security Questions for peace-building activities
in Angola, such as the demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants and the promotion of
reconstruction and economic recovery in the country.

We would like to make a similar appeal with
regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where, as we have already emphasized, for the first
time in years, there is a glimmer of hope that peace will
return, particularly as a consequence of the withdrawal
of foreign troops and the negotiations for an inclusive
dialogue.

Now is an appropriate time to request the
strengthening of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) in terms of personnel and to ensure its
effective deployment so as to prevent any reversals.
Now is also the time for an important reintegration
component to be incorporated into the mandate of
peacekeeping operations and for a substantial budget to
be allocated for such missions.

Also with regard to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we called on the international community
as a matter of urgency to respond generously to the
global appeal for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for 2002, which was launched on 27 November
2001 by the United Nations and its partners for
humanitarian action.

An urgent appeal was also directed at the
international community, in particular at the bilateral
and multilateral donors for Burundi, in support of
peace and improved living conditions in that country,
as a follow-up to the commitments entered into at Paris
and Geneva during the donor conferences on Burundi.

We also call on the United Nations and the
bilateral partners to implement an essential component
of the Libreville communique of 2 October 2002,
issued at the conclusion of the summit meeting on the
situation between Chad and the Central African
Republic: the deployment of an inter-African observer
force on the border between those two countries, which
have decided to normalize their relations. I have no
doubt that the United Nations will view that initiative,
which we are undertaking on behalf of the subregion,
with great interest.

We would like in particular to focus the Council's
attention on the difficult problem of the weapons that
are circulating in our subregion. In this regard, with a
View to assessing the scope of the problem and seeking
an appropriate response, a subregional conference was
convened in Ndjamena, Chad, two years ago, where
recommendations were adopted that we are working to
implement.

In that context, next year we plan to organize a
workshop on the implementation by the countries of
Central Africa of the Programme of Action adopted at
the conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. We are seeking the help of the United
Nations in organizing that workshop and in
establishing a subregional policy on disarmament and
the monitoring of the traffic in weapons.

For all of those reasons, we support the initiative
of the President of the World Bank to give specific
consideration to the problems of the economic recovery
and development of post-conflict African countries -
an initiative launched recently at Dar Es Salaam,
Tanzania, during a meeting of the economic ministers
of those countries.

As Council members may have noted, the
problems of Central Africa require urgent measures to
be taken with a view to consolidating the process of
restoring peace as well as of establishing sustainable
peace through substantial accompanying efforts on the
part of the countries concerned. As we said earlier, we
need the Council to join with us in our determination to
escape once and for all the cycle of war and to help us
to enhance our local capacity for peace-building.

There is an urgent need for such an effort, but it
must also be a lasting one; the paths already exist, but
they must be cleared sufficiently, dug more deeply and
reinforced.

We have our own subregional structure for
cooperation - the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) - which our heads of State
decided to reactivate and which recently carried out
missions in support of peace and security. That must be
encouraged and helped.

The Advisory Committee has also demonstrated
its usefulness and effectiveness, and we call for it to be
maintained and for further financial assistance to be
provided to help it.

We have also expressed our desire for the holding
of a conference to bring together all the countries
neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo so
as to establish a legal and political framework to ensure
peace and security in our subregion.

Finally, an international conference on the Great
Lakes region - an idea that is often discussed -
needs to be convened with a view to guaranteeing
peace, stability and development in this part of the
continent, which has for too long been subjected to
violence and division.

On behalf of ECCAS, I appeal for the support of
the international community, represented by the
Security Council, for the implementation of all specific
initiatives to build peace and stability in a region that is
called upon to play a major role on the international
stage because of its enormous potential.

