Ms. Viljanen (Finland): Finland wishes to thank
the Republic of Togo for the concept note (S/2012/83, annex) and for convening this open debate. The
observer of the European Union has already spoken,
and I associate myself fully with that statement.

We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa (S/2011/811), which encourages the
countries of the region to continue to combat
transnational organized crime, including illicit drug
trafficking, and calls on international partners to
provide support for those countries.

We warmly welcome the consideration of this
topic at this venue. We share the deep concern over the
impact that transnational organized crime has on peace,
security, stability and on the wider development of this
region. The linkages between organized crime, the
trafficking of arms, drugs and human beings, and
terrorism are indisputable. Countering those challenges
requires strong determination and concerted action by
the countries of the region, as well as the efforts and
cooperation of the international community as a whole.
Regional and local ownership is absolutely essential if
our common efforts are to succeed.

We recognize that the challenges that the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel are struggling
with are multifaceted. Consequently, it is of the utmost
importance that a comprehensive approach be adopted
to counter those challenges. That approach includes the
strengthening of the overall social and economic
structures of those countries. To successfully and
efficiently combat different forms of transnational
organized crime requires determined efforts to enhance
and strengthen law enforcement and judicial
institutions.

Finland is involved in the international efforts to
combat the trafficking in drugs and human beings,
organized crime and illegal immigration. The
Government of Finland has taken a decision to recruit
an immigration liaison officer to our Embassy in
Nigeria. He will begin his work in some weeks and
will cover the whole region of West Africa, including
the countries of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). His work will include,
among other things, cooperation with local and
national authorities.

The United Nations is at the heart of the
international cooperation on the prevention of
transnational crime, as it is at the heart of the
maintenance of international peace and security. Due to
the global nature of the threat posed by organized
crime and terrorism, effective counter-measures require
continuous and consistent cooperation between
different actors, including civil society. Cooperation
between law enforcement and judicial authorities is an
essential element of preventing and combating drug
trafficking and terrorism. However, it is also important
that the actions of authorities be consistent and
appropriately transparent.

There is a clear link between development and
security. The consolidation of the entire security
situation should therefore be emphasized. That also
requires addressing development issues such as the
negative effects of climate change, which can lead to
social instability in the region, as stated in the
Secretary-General's report (see S/2012/42). Also,
strong commitment to the rule of law and to the
promotion and protection of the human rights is a
precondition for stability and peace.

High levels of youth unemployment and poverty
increase the appeal of terrorism and of joining
organized crime groups. That makes it crucial to
combat the social exclusion of minorities and other
groups and individuals in vulnerable situations. We
must ensure that they have equal opportunities to
participate in society.

Another major concern is the worsening
humanitarian situation in Sahel region. The looming
severe food crisis has put more 10 million people at
risk, especially more than 1 million children. The
international aid community should take anticipatory
measures without delay to respond to the crisis. While
providing humanitarian assistance, the root causes of
the crisis must also be addressed. That should be
followed up with long-term development efforts and
the strengthening of the resilience of the population to
tackle possible future droughts and food crises. Finland
is currently planning the funding for its humanitarian
assistance to the region for the beginning of the year.
In 2011, Finland provided €5.1 million in humanitarian
aid to Niger, Mali and Chad.

Finland strongly supports the countries of West
Africa and the Sahel in their efforts to overcome those
difficult challenges. In that regard, we would also like
to pay tribute to the important role of the African
Union and ECOWAS. We wish to encourage the
countries in the region to further intensify areas of
cooperation, not only among themselves but also with
international partners. As I said at the beginning,
countering those challenges requires the efforts and
cooperation of the international community as a whole.

