The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cote d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Ms. Irina Bokova, Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and
Brigadier General Fabrizio Parrulli, Commander of
the Italian Carabinieri Command for the Protection of
Cultural Heritage.

Mr. Fedotov is joining today's meeting via video
teleconference from Vienna.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/242, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, cote d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Senegal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
tormer Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2347 (2017).

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.


