Mr. Gift (Trinidad and Tobago): I wish to thank
the United Kingdom presidency of the Security
Council for holding this open debate on an issue of
such great relevance in current international relations.
It is not surprising that this initiative comes from a
country such as the United Kingdom, the source of one
of the major legal systems of the world, founded on the
principles of natural justice.

The United Nations was founded after the Second
World War with the objective of saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. However, that
goal of peace for all mankind cannot be assured
without strict observance by all members of the
international community of the fundamental principles
and purposes of the Charter upon which the
Organization is based. Observance of the fundamental
principles of international law enshrined in Article 2 of
the Charter is essential for creating and maintaining a
clearly defined and reliable international system to
govern inter-State relations. Where that system is
allowed to fragment, for example through the selective
application of international law and justice or through
the avoidance by States of their international
responsibilities, such deterioration lays the groundwork
for anarchy in international relations.

History has repeatedly shown that justice and
peace are inextricably linked and that one cannot exist
without the other, whether it be social justice,
economic justice, the recognition of fundamental
human rights and freedoms or respect for the rule of
law. Accordingly, the United Nations has a key role to
play in promoting the principles of international justice
and the rule of law. While the Security Council is
charged with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
ensuring justice and the rule of law is not the domain
solely of this organ. Every part of the United Nations
system has an important role to play in the quest for
international peace and justice, which cannot be
achieved in a vacuum and which cannot be imposed
externally without the participation of local actors.

The work of the many organs and bodies of the
United Nations system is intended to benefit the
ordinary man in the street, to improve his conditions of
life and to ensure a better world for him and future
generations. The General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Trusteeship Council, the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the International Court of
Justice in particular have all contributed significantly
to those goals, according to their distinct spheres of
influence, and, in doing so, have contributed to
creating the conditions that will lead to peace and
respect for the rule of law.

It is significant that the framers of the Charter
could not conceive of a permanent international
organization of States without a permanent judicial
body to adjudicate the disputes that might arise
between them. While the international community has
focused much attention in recent times on the
enforcement provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter,
the Security Council should pay more attention to the
provisions of Chapter VI and to the role that the
Security Council should play in encouraging parties to
any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, to resort to the peaceful means for dispute
settlement referred to in Article 33 of the Charter. In
that regard as well, particular attention should be paid
to the fact that parties should as a general rule refer
legal disputes to the International Court of Justice in
accordance with the provisions of the Statute of the
Court. Recourse to Chapter VI would therefore help to
strengthen the international rule of law in the
settlement of international disputes that could threaten
international peace and security.

The Security Council has had some notable
successes in the deployment of peacekeeping missions
in many conflict situations and peace-building efforts
aimed at restoring justice and the rule of law in post-
conflict situations. It is important to ensure the
participation of local actors, so that they can feel that
they are a part of the process of justice and
reconciliation. In that regard, much has been
accomplished in building up national systems of law
and order, such as the training of local police and law
enforcement officials and the strengthening of domestic
legal systems, including national courts.

The Security Council's establishment of ad hoc
tribunals to punish the perpetrators of grave crimes
against the peace and security of mankind committed in
specific conflict situations has proved successful, as in
the cases of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). More recently,
the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which has now
indicted a number of the individuals most responsible
for the atrocities committed there, has contributed
somewhat towards ensuring justice for the victims of
the crimes and their families. Those tribunals, together
with truth and reconciliation commissions in post-
conflict situations, have made a significant contribution
to the search for justice and the restoration of peace,
especially where individuals are able to participate in
re-establishing the rule of law in their own societies.

While noting the success of those tribunals, the
international community now has a permanent
International Criminal Court to bring to justice the
persons responsible for precisely the types of crimes
for which those ad hoc tribunals were created. In post-
conflict situations, the capacity of national authorities
to prosecute such crimes must be strengthened through
appropriate forms of international assistance. On the
other hand, the International Criminal Court (ICC) can
make a significant contribution to international peace
and security by requiring that justice be administered at
the national level. The ICC operates on the
fundamental principle of complementarity: the
obligation for the State to prosecute remains, and it is
only where national authorities are unwilling or unable
to prosecute that the Court may step in. The ICC
embodies an important principle first established by the
Nuremberg Tribunal and further recognized by the
Security Council through its inclusion in the statutes of
the ICTY and the ICTR: no one is above the law and
no one will escape punishment for such horrendous
crimes.

In conclusion, observance of the international
rule of law and justice for all peoples is the sine qua
non for a just and peaceful world. The strengthening of
the rule of law, both internationally and nationally, is
the guarantee of the peaceful coexistence of all States
and all peoples' enjoyment of those inalienable and
fundamental human rights and freedoms with which all
mankind is endowed.

