I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons, Ambassador Djani, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and Ms. Shkula Zadran for their insights on the situation in Afghanistan. Now that the people of Afghanistan have suffered two decades of conflict, there is a consensus that the time for peace has come. Afghanistan has taken significant steps in that regard, and we would like to reiterate our support for the intra-Afghan peace talks. Dialogue remains the best way to end this conflict. The way forward is clearly to enhance partnerships within Afghanistan, strengthen institutions and build trust among the population. An inclusive Afghan- led process, involving all sectors of society, will achieve a sustainable solution that includes guarantees for the protection and promotion of the human rights of all Afghans. Afghan women, including young women and those living in rural areas, must therefore be fully, equally and meaningfully engaged in all stages and dimensions of the peace process, while we reiterate that their rights are non-negotiable. We also agree with the concerns and calls expressed by Ms. Zadran. Young Afghans, including young women, feel excluded from the ongoing intra-Afghan peace talks despite the fact that 63 per cent of the population is under 25 years old. They not only represent the majority of the population but are a key element in a peaceful Afghanistan. Young peacebuilders and activists can no longer be ignored. However, at the same time, civilians, particularly women, young people and children, are paying the highest price in the conflict. As we witness the deadliest attack in more than a decade in Bamiyan, one of the places that had remained relatively safe in Afghanistan, it strikes at the heart of Afghan hopes, which are already slipping away. The Dominican Republic strongly condemns that and other recent attacks on civilians. They are unacceptable. The perpetrators must be held accountable. We call on all parties to put an immediate end to such suffering and to establish a humanitarian ceasefire. The parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law and in the context of human rights, such as facilitating safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance to civilians in dire need. The drafting of the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework for 2021-2025 is a significant step forward by the Government of Afghanistan to address State-building and peacebuilding. The 2020 Afghanistan Conference, held a few weeks ago, demonstrated the international community's political support for the country when pledges reached $3 billion for Afghanistan's development by 2021, including the implementation of the Framework, and a total of $12 billion over four years. Against that background, let me emphasize that child protection deserves greater attention. We call on the Government of Afghanistan to fully implement its 2011 action plan and 2014 road map to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children, strengthen the legal and operational framework for child protection and adopt a standardized benchmark for the reintegration of children. We also urge the Taliban to respect the commitments made under the 29 February agreement, in particular by severing ties with international terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and to prevent the country from again becoming a haven for international terrorism. The economic and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is currently at a critical juncture. Some 18.4 million people will need humanitarian assistance by 2021. That astonishing number is directly related to the high levels of ongoing conflict, severe drought and other natural disasters and the additional tension caused by the impact of the coronavirus disease. In that regard, Afghanistan continues to face alarming levels of food insecurity. According to the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/1182), 16.9 million people are at crisis and emergency levels - one of the highest figures in the world. Cooperation and coordination among the Government of Afghanistan, the United Nations, in particular the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and civil society are essential in order to improve that grave humanitarian situation. We remain optimistic that the funding gap in the 2020 humanitarian response plan can be addressed. It is our duty, as part of the international community, to fulfil the hopes of the new chapter that awaits the Afghan people. This is a time for collective efforts and increased commitment.
