Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing our gratitude to
Ambassador Kastrup of Germany, Ambassador
Staehelin of Switzerland and the State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Mr. Hans Dahlgren. We
would also like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for his
introductory statement.

Colombia would like raise five specific points.
The first relates to the effectiveness of sanctions. The
Bonn-Berlin process has prompted us to reflect on the
key importance of this issue for the work of the
Council, in three areas in particular, the first of which
is the Security Council's image and the way in which it
is perceived. If sanctions are not fair, if they do not
have the proper basis and support the Council's work
will be perceived as inappropriate and improper and its
relevance will be questioned. Secondly, if sanctions are
not effective, the image and the legitimacy of the
Council will be compromised. Sanctions must work; in
other words, they must produce the anticipated results.

Thirdly, the Bonn-Berlin and Interlaken processes
have prompted us to think about the need for the
Security Council to communicate with other actors -
not only with non-members of the Council but, in
particular, with protagonists that are relevant to the
implementation of such sanctions. I am referring
specifically to banks and other financial organizations,
private sector enterprises, academic institutions and
civil society organizations that have a relevant role to
play in the implementation and monitoring of
sanctions.

The second point that I would like to raise relates
to the effects of sanctions. The challenge is to produce
changes in the conduct of actors whose activities
represent a threat to international peace and security.
The difficulty for the Security Council, however, is
how to produce that change in behaviour without
affecting those who are not a threat to international
peace and security - the civilians.

Sanctions always have a negative effect, but they
should have multiple positive impacts on international
peace and security. The negative effect should be a
factor that can be controlled and for which contingency
measures can be put in place to provide appropriate
compensation for the anticipated negative effect. The
case of Liberia - a subject on which discussions have
already begun in the sanctions Committee, and which
we will continue to debate in the Security Council -
provides a concrete example that prompts us to
consider such consequences.

I do not want discuss that case in detail at this
time, but I would like to highlight it, because we will
have an opportunity to consider the regional
components of this issue: the role of other actors in
ensuring a positive development of the regional
situation, as well as the effects of sanctions - not just
expected effects, but also unexpected inputs relating to
humanitarian assistance for Liberia.

The third point relates to the concept of smart
sanctions. This is not a static concept; it is a dynamic
concept. New technologies, new ideas, new political
circumstances and new international challenges should
make us think dynamically about this aspect.
Therefore, the proposal to create a standing monitoring
mechanism deserves study to see if it or is not
compatible with the need for us to adjust ourselves to
specific circumstances. In this context, we recognize
the Stockholm process, since perhaps we can find,
among the objectives described by Secretary of the
State Dahlgren, an informal opportunity to discuss in
depth the benefits and the difficulties of this
mechanism before doing it in the Security Council.

The fourth point relates to the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). With the
implementation of Article 41 of the Charter, a new path
with great challenges has opened. Resolution 1373 has
not created sanctions, but its implementation and
monitoring could lead the Council to undertake
measures. In other words, we are creating a normative
structure that will allow this organ to adopt decisions
by means of smart sanctions. This could constitute an
additional vein of reflection for the Stockholm process,
as it involves substantively domestic legislative
processes and steps and actions taken at that level to
implement them.

Finally, I will conclude by echoing what other
members of the Council have said regarding the
importance of adopting the conclusions of the Working
Group on Sanctions.

