Mr. Frattini (Italy): We should discuss, as we are
doing, the many complex elements of the situation in
the Middle East. We all, I am sure, want to work
towards reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the region. On the peace process, I think we
must safeguard the momentum of the negotiations and
keep encouraging the parties to proceed with
negotiations. It is important indeed that these last
months of negotiations before the end of the year show
some concrete achievements. Unfortunately, I think the
clock is ticking against peace.

Italy will continue, together with other European
States, its determined efforts to build on the Annapolis
process. We consider the security of the State of Israel
as non-negotiable. We feel that Israeli security can only
be truly guaranteed if the Palestinian State has solid
institutions founded on the rule of law and good
governance. In that regard, I would like to sincerely
commend President Abbas for his constant engagement
and determination. It is, nevertheless, important that
the Arab countries also continue to provide robust
public, political and economic support for the efforts of
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.

The current Israeli settlement policies do not
seem to facilitate the fundamental understanding that is
needed on both sides to be able to continue the process
that was launched in Annapolis with the agreement of
both sides. That is why Italy firmly believes that
moderation is crucial to the peace process. We
understand the delicate nature of this issue for Israelis.
However, with the frankness that characterizes a true
friendship, we must exhort Israeli leaders to thoroughly
reflect on the issue, to come to a more satisfactory
solution, to restore international legality and, I would
say, to avoid undermining the credibility of Palestinian
negotiators before public opinion.

At the same time, the Palestinian Authority must
be encouraged in its endeavours to consolidate
security, particularly the control and repression of
terrorism. The situation in the Gaza Strip, a territory
that has suffered for too long, cannot be forgotten. The
further worsening of the humanitarian situation and the
progressive deterioration of respect for human rights is
cause for great concern. In particular, the permanent
threat posed by Hamas to Israel is not acceptable. We
must also achieve soon the liberation of Mr. Shalit.

In that perspective, intra-Palestinian
reconciliation remains fundamental. We welcome once
again the commitment of President Abbas, and we
support the efforts of the Arab League and Egypt for
the full restoration of constitutional legality and the
reopening of old crossing points.

Israel will be called upon to make difficult but
indispensable decisions in this process. It is, I have to
say, to the merit of former Prime Minister Olmert and
Foreign Minister Livni that they have publicly
recognized that it is in the best interest of Israel to have
a solid and democratic Palestinian State on its borders.
Our final goal is peace between Israelis and
Palestinians, but also between Israel and all the Arab
countries.

In the delicate transitional period, the leadership
of the Quartet will be crucial. I am confident of the
political commitment of all its members - and I
stress, all its members.

I would also like to say a brief word on Lebanon.
I welcome the Doha agreement and the important
political achievements of recent months. I am seriously
concerned, and Italy is concerned, about the resurgence
of violence with the assassination of Mr. Aridi, which
we strongly condemn. We believe in the determination
of the Lebanese population to reject any form of
provocation and in its will to progress towards
reconciliation. We hope that commitments undertaken
by Syria on the occasion of President Sleiman's visit to
Damascus will be promptly implemented.

We also believe that the negotiations between
Syria and Israel will contribute to the comprehensive
stabilization of the area. We hope that Syria will
become a leading and positive actor for peace and
stabilization.

Finally, we reaffirm our support for the
independence and sovereignty of Lebanon, and we will
continue to play our role in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, an important factor for the country's
stabilization.

In conclusion, when we talk about security in the
Middle East, our top priority is and should be to face
the very serious threat posed every day by Iran. We
should not forget this.

