Mr. Da Costa (Timor-Leste): First of all, allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Ambassador
Grauls, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council and to express my gratitude to you for
convening this meeting. It is an honour to be
addressing this eminent audience once again.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Atul Khare, has already mentioned, today
is a poignant day for Timor-Leste, the United Nations
and, of course, the Security Council. On this day, we
remember and pay tribute to the life and contribution
of former United Nations Transitional Administrator of
East Timor and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and a great friend of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, as well as of the United
Nations employees who lost their lives in Baghdad on
this very date five years ago.

Since my last intervention before this Council, a
number of obstacles and difficulties - some grave and
others of a different scale and nature - have arisen in
Timor-Leste, but I speak to the Council today knowing
that I have the resolute backing of the Timorese people
when I say that we are wholeheartedly committed to
the continued development of our young country as a
democratic, peaceful and successful nation.

Council members have all received the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2008/501). I now wish to
discuss in more detail the way in which the
Government plans to address the challenges that the
report identifies.

The assassination attempts made on our
President, His Excellency Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, and
on Prime Minister Mr. Xanana Gusmao presented a
serious challenge to the institutions of State. However,
the State responded positively by appointing an interim
President to serve until President Ramos-Horta was
able to resume the full responsibilities of office, which
occurred on 17 April. Following the attacks, the
Government and State institutions enacted two
measures to maintain stability and public security and
to allow for investigations to be undertaken. One
mechanism was the establishment of a Joint Command
led by the National Police Force of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and by the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-
Leste (F -F DTL) for the conduct of security operations
during a state of siege. The state of siege was a flexible
and responsive mechanism that allowed for the easing
of restrictions, such as curfew hours, during the period
from 11 February to 22 May. As the Secretary General
notes in his report, "encouragingly, and in contrast to
the events of 2006, the situation did not precipitate a
crisis destabilizing the entire society" (S/2008/50], para. 4).

The efforts of the Joint Command, together with
those of a range of political mediation initiatives,
resulted in the eventual surrender of the President's
attackers and their associates. It is important to note
two things. First, this operation was carried out without
notable violence. Secondly, it demonstrated a
remarkable level of institutional cooperation between
the political authorities, the defence force and the
08-4651]
police services, which illustrated the progress in the
rebuilding of the latter two institutions and their
interrelationship.

The Government is aware of the 44 cases of
alleged violations committed in areas of Joint
Command operations opened by the Provedor for
Human Rights and Justice and is committed to
determining responsibility and implementing corrective
and disciplinary measures to avoid a repetition of such
incidents in the future. As the Secretary-General also
notes in his report, the Government is indeed
committed to addressing these shortcomings.

The Secretaries of State for Defence and Security
will be specifying disciplinary actions for those found
guilty of violations. The Joint Command, while not
without its critics, was viewed positively by the
majority of the Timorese population. It was established
under exceptional circumstances, resulted in overall
success and has now been discontinued.

Allow me to now draw the Council's attention to
our humanitarian situation. The process of recovery
will necessarily be a complex and delicate one. In
December 2007, the Government presented its National
Recovery Strategy, entitled "Hamutuk Hari'i Futuru",
or "Building the Future Together". The Strategy offers
a framework by which the Government, communities,
civil society and the international community can
harmonize their efforts to address the many and varied
impacts of the 2006 crisis on Timorese society. The
Strategy is a comprehensive Governmental approach
led by the Vice Prime Minister and operating through a
process of interministerial cooperation between the
Ministries of Social Solidarity, Infrastructure, Justice,
Economy and Development, and Defence and Security.

Under the National Recovery Strategy, more than
14,450 internally displaced families have expressed
their desire for return or resettlement. I can report to
the Council that, with the assistance of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
United Nations agencies and other international
partners, the Government has facilitated the return of
large numbers of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
the past few months. Camps and shelters that have
existed for two years are now empty. A total of 20 IDP
camps have now been closed and more than 3,650
internally displaced families have received recovery
packages. That is evidence of the restoration of public
08-46511
faith in the improvement of the security situation and a
more stable political environment.

The implementation of the National Recovery
Strategy faces a number of challenges. The
Government recognizes that it is critical that the
remaining elements of the land and property laws be
enacted and that priority be given to the allocation of
transitional shelter and social housing for people who
are unable to return to their homes. The Government is
also alert of the need to address issues of food security
among returning IDPs and Timorese society as a
whole. It is also essential to manage conflict between
returning IDPs and receiving communities. Broader
community vulnerabilities need to be addressed, as
does the rehabilitation of community infrastructure.
The Government is committed to working with United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
civil society to ensure that IDP returns are durable and
that recovery is meaningful for all Timorese people.

The Government also concluded a dialogue
process with the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-
Leste (F-FDTL) "petitioners". It issued an invitation to
the petitioners to gather for a dialogue in Aitarak Laran
in early February. By the end of May, 709 petitioners
had accepted the invitation to enter into dialogue. All
of the petitioners have now accepted the financial
compensation package offered by the Government to
return to civilian life and Aitarak Laran is now
completely empty.

The Government of Timor-Leste is committed to
the notion that rebuilding the national police is a long-
term undertaking, requiring national ownership and
continued international assistance for the foreseeable
future. As the Secretary-General's report notes,
"Considerable progress has been made in the
registration, screening and certification programme for
the national police". (S/2008/50], para. 20)

We continue to appreciate the efforts of UNMIT
police not only in helping to guarantee public security,
but also in supporting efforts towards the reconstitution
of the national police. As indicated by the Prime
Minister in his report on the state of siege and state of
exception of 29 May, and in line with the language of
the Secretary-General's report, we envisage that the
resumption of policing responsibilities by the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) should be
complete within the first half of 2009. We are also
happy to note that the Secretary-General does not
propose any reduction in the strength of UNMIT police
during the current mandate, as its continued presence at
current levels is essential to the smooth implementation
of PNTL's resumption of responsibilities and its
maintenance of stability.

We hope that any discussion of a United Nations
police drawdown will be de-linked from the PNTL
resumption of responsibilities and that a robust United
Nations police presence will be maintained through
and beyond the current UNMIT mandate. The
Government of Timor-Leste realizes that the full
reconstitution of PNTL will require our close
engagement, and we will make every effort to ensure
that the conditions are met to allow the joint
implementation of a transitional process, which we are
developing together with UNMIT and UNMIT police.
That includes ensuring that the necessary logistics are
in place, actions are taken to meet certification targets
and satisfactory institutional readiness can be verified
to ensure that the PNTL can assume routine policing
activities. We want the PNTL to uphold the highest
possible standards of professionalism, and therefore
regard the certification process as an important step
towards identifying those PNTL who have serious
disciplinary and/or criminal issues that preclude them
from police service.

As part of efforts to enhance democratic
governance, the Government has made 2008 the Year
of Administrative Reform. Under the guardianship of
the Prime Minister, a Year of Administrative Reform
conference was held in May 2008. The Government
regards that as an important step forward in the
transparency, accountability and integrity of the
democratic governance processes in Timor-Leste. The
conference covered, among other areas, a national anti-
corruption strategy and an anti-corruption commission.
The Prime Minister also established an Inspector-
General working group to advise on necessary reforms
required to expand the competence of the Office of the
Inspector-General and to assume the role of an
Auditor-General of State.

The Government is also working to strengthen an
independent and strong civil service. Earlier this year,
the Council of Ministers approved preliminary
measures for the establishment of a civil service
commission, which will be an independent statutory
authority. It will aim to ensure an apolitical, merit-
based civil service of the highest professional
standards and able to provide quality services to the
Government and people of Timor-Leste.

In that same area, I would like to draw the
Council's attention to an extremely positive
development in Timor-Leste - the functioning of our
National Parliament. The National Parliament has
developed into a credible and dynamic forum for
debate and dialogue. Discussion there is often difficult,
as with parliaments the world over, but it is also
reasoned and productive. It is a new experience for us
Timorese to have our representatives debate public
policies so openly and to consider such a wide range of
opinions.

During the reporting period covered by the
Secretary-General's report, new challenges have arisen
that require a proactive and vigorous response from the
Government. The Prime Minister, when introducing the
law on the rectifying budget to the National Parliament
on 18 July, described those challenges, many of which
will be familiar to the Council as they are related to
international conditions and are not specific to Timor-
Leste. The challenges include the drastic worldwide
increase in the price of basic commodities, such as
rice, which the Prime Minister called a "silent
tsunami". Timor-Leste is a country that depends on the
importation of basic foodstuffs and, as the situation has
changed, so must the Government respond. The
rectifying budget contemplates measures needed to
ensure that our people have the basic necessities of
life. All of the gains of the past years, including those
in areas in which international assistance has been
provided, could be lost in instability if the Government
is not proactive in response to new circumstances.

The economic stabilization fund, with a capital of
$240 million, is an important tool that the Government
is employing to tackle the effects of the rising cost of
food and other commodities, such as fuel and
construction materials, throughout the world. The
packages we have offered to returning IDPs,
pensioners and other vulnerable groups through cash
transfers will be of little use if they find themselves in
a scenario whereby previously estimated costs are no
longer relevant in future months. Meeting the demands
of our population with regard to food and shelter goes
hand in hand with meeting our security obligations.
The fund will be governed in an open and transparent
manner, with all procurement following Government
procurement laws and all expenditure subject to
external auditing.

08-4651]

For the first time, the Timorese State will ensure
social protection for those scarred by war and for the
dependants of those who dedicated their lives to the
struggle for national liberation. Categories for those
entitled to a pension are families of deceased
combatants; veteran combatants with more than
15 years' service; those disabled by the war who have
been unable to work; and the elderly over 55 years of
age with a total of over eight years of active service.
The number of pensions granted was 12,538, with
631 pensions for living combatants and 11,907 to the
widows and families of fallen combatants. Timor-
Leste's sovereignty today is a product of the sacrifices
made by many thousands of our citizens, whom we
will never forget.

Timor-Leste is ever strengthening its bilateral
relationships. The Governments of Timor-Leste and
Indonesia have decided to jointly discuss and agree on
arrangements for the implementation of the
recommendations of the final report of the Truth and
Friendship Commission. Some of the recommendations
have already been the subject of joint efforts, such
those pertaining to the issue of border demarcation. In
a spirit of mutual respect, and to further promote
friendship and reconciliation between the peoples of
our two countries, we have committed ourselves to the
faithful implementation of the Commission's
recommendations, which will be integrated into a plan
of action within the framework of existing bilateral
cooperation mechanisms.

The Commission's report represented a historic
and important milestone in the search for truth and
justice with regard to the events of 1999. The
recommendations of the report aim to address
unresolved issues of State responsibility towards the
victims of violence referred to in the report. Above all,
we have a duty both to the victims and to future
generations to ensure that our society never again faces
similar violent conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
unique partnership between Timor-Leste and the
United Nations. We have made many strides forward in
the past nine years. At this stage of our country's
development, we cannot afford to lose focus. UNMIT
is performing a critical a role and we are eager to see
the United Nations remain in Timor-Leste. Keeping in
mind that a substantive review of UNMIT's mandate is
due in early 2009, I would like to suggest to the
Council that, in order to cement the success of our
partnership, the United Nations should maintain a
substantive peacekeeping presence in Timor-Leste until
the next election cycle, that is, until the year 2012.

