Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): It is
my pleasure to welcome High Representative Inzko
back to the Security Council, and to thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and his continued efforts to
support the Dayton Peace Agreement.

The United States is steadfast in its commitment
to the success of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we, like
our allies, have invested much in that country since the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement in 1995. As
we reflect on the report presented today (S/2013/263, annex) and on the goodwill we have towards Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we wish to address three points.

First, we continue to strongly support the country's
aspirations to integrate into the European Union (EU)
and NATO, and we had hoped that the new coalition
would make those goals its top priorities. Unfortunately,
politicians throughout the country seem more interested
in putting their own personal political agendas above
the interests of the citizens they were elected to
represent. In the Federation entity, ongoing efforts to
reshuffle the governing coalition have distracted from
the Euro-Atlantic reform agenda. The 2009 judgement
of the European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie-
F inci case remains unimplemented, violating the
human rights of non-constituent peoples and blocking
the country from applying for EU candidacy. Unless
the issue is resolved soon, Bosnia and Herzegovina
risks holding elections next year in violation of the
judgement. And the country must still register defence
properties in order to meet NATO's condition for
activating the membership action plan, a process that
is being obstructed by politicians in Republika Srpska.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's lack of progress is all the
more visible in the context of its neighbours, all of
which are rapidly moving ahead towards Euro-Atlantic
integration.

Secondly, it has been more than five long years
since the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board adopted the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office ofthe High Representative.
The so-called "5+2" consists of issues that the Office
of the High Representative is uniquely qualified and
authorized to oversee, and which the political leaders
of Bosnia and Herzegovina could easily have completed
in 2008, propelling the State on its way to EU and
NATO membership. Instead, a number of political
leaders have focused their energies on deconstructing
or undermining Dayton and the various institutions
and laws established since 1995 that Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs both for the people's common good
and for functioning as part of a modern Europe.

The local authorities have a legal obligation to
respect the authority of the High Representative and
the Dayton framework. Yet, Republika Srpska officials
have persistently undermined State institutions and
made statements calling into question Bosnia and
Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
the Federation, local parties in Mostar have failed to
meet their obligation to implement the Constitutional
Court ruling of 10 November 2011 on the electoral
system. Those actions disregard the most fundamental
elements of the Bosnian Constitution and the Dayton
Agreement. They must cease immediately. The
continuing threats to the Dayton Peace Accords are
why we continue to support the presence of the Office
of the High Representative until the 5+2 criteria have
been met. It is crucial that the Office continue to receive
sufficient resources and political support to fulfil its
mandate under both the Dayton Peace Agreement and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Finally, I would like to highlight the continuing
importance of justice and reconciliation to long-
term regional stability, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We join the High Representative in
recognizing President Nikolie of Serbia for his recent
public apology for the crimes committed in Srebrenica.
We strongly support the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia as it continues its crucial
work in bringing tojustice those individuals responsible
for some of the most heinous crimes of the Bosnian
conflict. The January signing of a protocol on war
crimes cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia is another positive development that will
help ensure that locally indicted war crime suspects
face justice.

Other local developments related to reconciliation,
however, are more troubling. We are particularly
concerned about the continued efforts to build an
Orthodox church in close proximity to both an
exhumed mass grave and the Potocari memorial site and
cemetery, where thousands of Victims of the Srebrenica
genocide are laid to rest. The United States strongly
supports freedom of religion, but the construction of
a church in such a sensitive location, where there is no
local Orthodox community, can only be interpreted as a
deliberate provocation designed to deepen mistrust and
fear between ethnic groups.

I again want to stress the strong commitment ofthe
United States to seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina move
beyond its troubled past towards a thriving future. We
look forward to working with the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the international community to
see the Dayton Peace Agreement fully implemented
and the country moving irreversibly towards its Euro-
Atlantic path.

