Mr. Oshima (Japan): It is my pleasure to brief
members of the Council, as outgoing Chairman, on the
work of two of the Security Council's subsidiary
bodies of which I have had the honour to serve as
Chair during Japan's current term on the Security
Council.

First, I should like to deal with the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations. The Working
Group was established in 2001 in the context of the
Council's desire to strengthen cooperation with troop-
contributing countries. At the time the Working Group
started its work in 2001, United Nations peacekeeping
operations had already reached quite a substantial
level. The number of peacekeeping missions was 15,
with 39,000 military and police personnel deployed
and with a budget of $2.6 billion. However, the recent

surge in United Nations peacekeeping operations has
gone far beyond expectations in terms of both the
number of personnel and the budget. As of the end of
October 2006, the number of missions supported by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations had reached
18, with over 80,000 troops and police and with a
budget of more than $5 billion - which is nearly three
times the size of the regular budget of the United
Nations, and which appears to be growing even further.
Recently, Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in public
remarks, indicated that the number of peacekeepers
might increase to between 120,000 and 140,000 in the
near future.

Operations of that magnitude cannot be sustained
without the strong commitment of Member States in
terms of both personnel and financial contributions,
and in political terms. To secure the cooperation and
support of a wide range of Member States, it is
necessary that the transparency of the process and the
involvement of key stakeholders be ensured as much as
possible so that there is a proper understanding of the
activities of the Security Council in the field of
peacekeeping, in particular when a new operation is
created or when the mandate of an existing mission is
changed.

It is with that in mind that we felt the need to
revitalize the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which can serve as an effective forum for
the promotion of better interaction between Council
members and other interested Member States by
providing the opportunity to engage in close,
interactive dialogue with troop-contributing countries,
financial contributors and other major stakeholders,
and with the Secretariat.

The report of the Working Group before the
Council in document S/2006/972 describes activities
carried out by the Working Group over the past two
years. Meetings were held at the time of the creation of
a new mission, for example in the case of the setting up
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
in February 2005, and when a mission's mandate was
modified and its structure changed, for example in the
case of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) earlier this year. There were
meetings to discuss operational issues that affected a
mission's capabilities and the safety and security of its
personnel, such as when restrictions on movement
were imposed on UNMEE by Eritrea. The Working
Group also met to consider certain specific issues that
needed member States' special attention, such as the
problem of sexual exploitation and abuse, focusing on
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and the
issue of inter-mission cooperation and harmonization,
focusing on the three missions deployed in West
Africa: in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.

The report then makes a number of
recommendations for making the work of the Working
Group more meaningful and effective. Let me highlight
a few elements that I consider most important.

One of the recommendations in the report is to
encourage the Working Group to hold a meeting at the
time of the creation of a new mission or of a renewal
involving substantial changes in the mandate, structure
or size of a mission, inviting troop-contributing
countries and other major stakeholders to attend. I
cannot stress too much the importance of having
exchanges of views with major stakeholders when the
Council establishes a new mission or changes the
mandate of an existing mission. The dialogue with
major stakeholders becomes crucial if the Council is to
ensure their willing and full cooperation as the size, the
nature and the budget of peacekeeping operations
continue to expand.

Secondly, the Working Group should be flexible
in taking up issues that affect the operation of a
mission. The report recommends that the Working
Group hold meetings with troop-contributing countries
and other major stakeholders at times of crisis affecting
the safety and security of mission personnel and the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and
also in order to address issues that have broader
ramifications beyond a particular mission.

Thirdly, the modalities of Working Group
meetings should be as flexible as possible, and when
necessary there should be meetings at the expert level.

Fourthly, in discussing the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding in a given country
situation, the Working Group should bear in mind that
the discussion may be of assistance in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission if the Commission decides
to deal with the country in question.

Fifthly, it is felt advisable that when the Working
Group tackles specific issues, such as that of sexual
exploitation and abuse, these should be dealt with in
the context of a specific mission or missions rather
than in a general policy manner, which falls within the
realm of the General Assembly's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations; such a focus of attention
could lend itself to the solution of the specific problem
under consideration.

Sixth and finally, the Security Council and the
General Assembly should maintain an appropriate level
of interaction, respecting one another's authority and
mandate. That is why we believe it important that the
Working Group put itself in contact periodically with
the Bureau of the General Assembly's Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

In conclusion, I wish to stress once again that the
Working Group's main objective is to promote mutual
understanding among the members of the Security
Council, troop-contributing countries and other major
stakeholders, and the Secretariat.

From this viewpoint, allow me to speak in my
national capacity. Japan intends to continue to
cooperate with the Working Group after we leave the
Council at the end of this year. I hope that we, as one
of the major stakeholders, and other stakeholders will
continue to be given opportunities to express our views
when the Council makes important decisions on
peacekeeping.

I should like now to address the issue of working
methods in my capacity as Chairman of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and other
Procedural Questions.

At the beginning of this year, the Council agreed
to revitalize its Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions in the belief that there was
a need to further improve Security Council working
methods and procedures. This also matched the larger
membership's concern at, and strong interest in, this
issue, as reflected in paragraph 154 of the 2005
Summit Outcome Document. In the Outcome
Document, our leaders stated that the Security Council
should continue to adapt its working methods so as to
increase the involvement of States not members of the
Council in its work in order to enhance its
accountability to the membership and increase the
transparency of its work.

It was agreed earlier this year that part of the
revitalization effort should begin with a change in the
way in which the chairmanship of this Working Group
functioned. In lieu of the old practice, whereby the
chairmanship rotated with the monthly presidency, the
Council decided to appoint a Chair with a term of
office lasting several months. That change had the
advantage of making it easier for the Working Group to
function in a more focused and consistent manner.
Japan was appointed as Chair until the end of June, an
appointment that was eventually extended through
December this year.

Between March and July 2006, the Working
Group met 11 times and examined various proposals on
two categories of issues. The first group of issues
relates to the Council's own internal work, with a view
to increasing its efficiency.

The second group of issues relates to the
Council's relationship with non-members. As a result
of the discussions, the Working Group produced a set
of recommendations to be presented to the Council for
its approval. Those recommendations included, for
ease of reference, the agreements on working methods
that already are in place, some of which go as far back
as 1993, as well as newly agreed or updated measures
for improvement. The Council eventually approved the
recommendations of the Working Group, which are
contained in a note by the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/507).

In the latter half of the year, the Working Group
continued its discussions, mainly on two issues: first,
the procedure for conducting Arria-formula meetings,
and, secondly, ways of promoting the implementation
of the recommendations contained in the note by the
President.

With regard to holding Arria-formula meetings,
which had been the practice for some years, members
of the Council requested the Working Group in
September 2006 to discuss the appropriate way to
conduct the meetings, believing that there was a need
for some clarity on this aspect. In response to that
request, the Working Group met twice and reached a
common understanding on the conduct of Arria-
formula meetings, which I shall now present orally.
There are four points.

First, the members of the Security Council are
encouraged to plan Arria-formula meetings, in
accordance with paragraph 54 of the note by the
President of the Security Council in document
S/2006/507, and to take part in such meetings.

Secondly, the content of the background note on
Arria-formula meetings prepared by the Secretariat in
2002 provides a useful description of current and past
practices relating to Arria-formula meetings, and the
members are encouraged to utilize the background note
as a guideline, without undermining the flexibility of
Arria-formula meetings.

Thirdly, any member of the Security Council
convening an Arria-formula meeting is encouraged to
carefully organize the meeting so as to maintain its
informal character.

Fourthly, any member of the Security Council
convening an Arria-formula meeting should inform all
participating Security Council members about the
planned procedures for and participation in the
meeting, and is encouraged to do so well in advance.

Those are the four points on Arria-formula
meetings.

With regard to promoting the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the note, the Chair
felt it useful to prepare a non-paper in which various
agreed recommendations are reconfigured so as to
allow prospective users, such as the President of the
Security Council and members of subsidiary bodies,
some ease of reference. The non-paper has already
been distributed to the members of the Council and
will be included in the briefing materials prepared by
the Secretariat for the benefit of new members of the
Council in future.

In addition, Japan is preparing a handbook on the
working methods of the Security Council which
contains official documents relating to the working
methods of the Council, including the note by the
President and the provisional rules of procedure, in
handbook format. That publication itself is not an
official document, and it will be produced and
distributed to anyone interested under the sole
responsibility of the Permanent Mission of Japan and
as a temporary measure, pending such a handbook
being found useful and the Council deciding to issue it,
or something like it, as a Secretariat publication later
on.

That concludes my report on the work of the
Working Group on documentation.

