Mr. Morejen (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his clear
and detailed report on children and armed conflict
(S/2009/158), which takes stock of the activities
undertaken and progress achieved on this important
issue. Very significant results have been attained,
especially since 1999, when the issue of children
affected by war became an official part of the Security
Council's agenda. Since then, a number of resolutions
have been adopted, setting out specific measures to
improve the situation of children suffering under this
scourge. As the report notes, there is no doubt that the
provisions of the various relevant international
instruments constitute a large, solid body of
international law that will enable the international
community to continue its work to defend children
affected by armed conflict.

It is essential that international instruments be
strengthened, extended and effectively applied in order
to guarantee the necessary protection for children,
especially given the persistence of conflicts of all kinds
throughout the world. We support the Secretary-
General's valuable initiatives in that regard, as well as
the commitments undertaken by several countries to
ensure the well-being and protection of children in
armed conflict and to fully sensitize the authorities and
civil society to their situation.

One of the saddest and tragic realities we have
seen in various regions of the world is the deep

suffering of children exposed to armed conflict. That
intolerable reality - including the threats to children
posed by murder, being orphaned, mutilation,
abduction, lack of education and health care, and deep
physical and psychological trauma, as well as the grave
situation of refugee and displaced children exposed to
violence, recruitment, sexual exploitation, disease,
malnutrition and death - is reflected in the Secretary-
General's reports.

The issue of refugees is of particular concern to
my country. Since 2000, the number of displaced
persons seeking refuge in Ecuador has grown at an
unprecedented rate. Ecuador is host to the greatest
number of persons in need of international protection
in the entire western hemisphere. Protecting those
thousands of people, including children who have been
direct participants in armed conflict, is a priority of my
Government's international policy.

Faced with this difficult humanitarian situation,
the State of Ecuador has assumed, in the context of full
respect for human rights and with a thorough sense of
responsibility and solidarity, the commitment to protect
refugees under several international instruments to
which it is party. Since 2000, my Government has
undertaken legal and institutional reforms to develop a
system aimed ultimately at providing a flexible and
effective response to the needs of those people,
especially children and adolescents. The new State
policy, implemented in particular in the border regions,
seeks to encourage comprehensive economic and social
development and to promote zones of peace.

My delegation also wishes particularly to stress
the impact on children of the illegal traffic in small
arms and light weapons, landmines, cluster munitions
and unexploded ordinance. That is why my country
co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 63/240,
adopted in December 2008, establishing an open-ended
working group to consider elements of a possible arms
trade treaty.

With regard to the problem of the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict, Ecuador believes that
allowing children to take up arms and enter the vortex
of violence, confrontation and destruction is inhuman
and contradicts the highest values of all societies. The
progress that has been made in eliminating the
recruitment of child soldiers is considerable, but there
is still a long way to go and there are many challenges
to face.
In such circumstances, the international
community must give priority attention to the situation
by applying more specific measures to guarantee the
most fundamental rights of children and to mitigate
and prevent the gravest effects of conflict and violence
on children. Ecuador wishes to express its full support
for all initiatives to take concrete measures against that
scourge.

