Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We join other
delegations in welcoming you to the Council, Sir, and
in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August. We
would also like take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Minhea Motoc of Romania for the highly
professional and efficient manner in which he and his
delegation conducted the work of the presidency for
the month of July.

We also join other members of the Council in
commending the Secretary-General's former Special
Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his
outstanding leadership during his term of office as
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister of Public Administration
and Local Self-Government of Serbia. We would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi
for his comprehensive briefing on the latest situation in
Kosovo.

On 17 and 18 March, Kosovo was convulsed by
the worst outbreak of inter-ethnic violence since the
international community stepped in five years ago.
That latest violence claimed the lives of 19 people,
destroyed more than 900 houses and did untold damage
to Kosovo's religious, historical and cultural sites. The
Philippines, which is a troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, joined other
delegations in expressing its indignation about the
violence, which undoubtedly undermined the gains
made by the international community during the past
five years of United Nations administration.

In our statement to the Council on Kosovo two
months ago, we mentioned the fact that UNMIK's most
important challenge is building the necessary trust and
confidence to bridge the gap between the two
communities. It is therefore disheartening to note that,
four months after those incidents, little progress has
been made in efforts to bridge the ethnic divide. We are
also saddened by the fact that, five years after UNMIK
took over, the peoples of Kosovo have still not
mastered the confidence and trust needed to address the
province's ethnic dilemma.

My delegation reiterates its support for and
commitment to the international community's vision of
a tolerant, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. While
we take note of the progress that UNMIK has made in
its efforts to meet the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, my delegation believes that UNMIK
should exercise a greater degree of flexibility by giving
priority to the concerns of ethnic Serbs and other
minorities in the province. Likewise, the international
community should place the onus for protecting
Kosovo's ethnic minorities on the Albanian majority.

For their part, Kosovo's leaders need to
collectively demonstrate their genuine and concrete
commitment to creating a society in which all
communities can coexist peacefully and in which the
rights of members of all of Kosovo's communities are
respected, safeguarded and guaranteed. They should
exert greater efforts to prosecute those responsible for
the March violence and make good their promise to
proceed with the reconstruction of the homes and
churches that were ravaged during the March riots.

Lastly, we agree with Romania on the need for
the Council to keep the situation in Kosovo under the
closest consideration. In this regard, the Council may
wish to explore the possibility of sending a mission to
Kosovo to see for itself the situation on the ground and
to convey a strong message to Kosovo's leaders about
the need to work together and take the measures
required to help the standards process move forward.

