Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, like others, I would like to thank the briefer, Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and Mr. Mathias Licharz of Germany for presenting the report on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. Libya is currently at an impasse. The situation on the ground has garnered the attention of the entire world. The world is watching how the Libyans will resolve their issues, how the international agreement will hold and what the Security Council will do next. Mr. Salame's worrisome report (A/2020/41) refers once again to the many civilian casualties, the children who are falling victim to shelling in Tripoli, the continued escalation of the conflict and the dire humanitarian situation, all of which are grim stories from the field. The Council cannot stay silent. What we, as the Security Council, do now will indeed resonate in history. Therefore, allow me to focus on the following points. First, Indonesia supports all international efforts to bring lasting peace to Libya. We welcome the Berlin conference, as a complementary process to United Nations efforts for Libya. We acknowledge the principles of the Berlin communique and call for the international community to support and respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya; international laws and agreements, including the arms embargo; and efforts to return to the political process for all Libyans. In that connection, we welcome United Nations efforts to facilitate the upcoming dialogue between the House of Representatives, the High Council of State and other constituencies in Libya. The need for such dialogue is something that everyone has voiced, includingIndonesia, and that has enjoyed consensus within the Council. Everybody wants to see Libya find peace. However, achieving peace is not the responsibility solely of Libya but of us all, not only those of us who were in Berlin or just the Council but the international community as a whole. Therefore, we expand our call to the entire international community to provide full support to our Libyan brothers and sisters and to avoid exacerbating the situation. Secondly, we need to focus on Libyans, the very people we are supposed to protect. Indonesia is concerned that, following the truce last week, attacks are persisting against civilians - including women, children and migrants - and against health-care and civilian facilities. Shelling of residential areas and vital civilian infrastructure is continuing, including against Mitiga airport. That must stop. Inthe same spirit of protecting Libyans, we continue to emphasize that all international efforts should enjoy Libyan backing and be pushed forward in a Libyan- owned, Libyan-led process. We also support the efforts of Special Representative Salame and UNSMIL in facilitating a multitrack approach, including the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, which is a good forum for advancing confidence-building measures among the parties. Attendance and participation in the Geneva talks will be indicators of the intention to achieve peace or not. We also need to provide the chance for Libyans to benefit from their own natural resources. We are concerned that the ongoing blockade of ports will deprive them of those benefits. Special Representative Salame also alluded to that very important point. Thirdly, the role of neighbours and regional organizations is very important. The conflict in Libya affects its neighbours, from the flow of arms to the flow of migrants, and creates instability in neighbouring countries and the region. Therefore, we again reiterate the need to involve neighbouring States and regional organizations, since they provide a unique perspective for peace. We welcome the international follow-up committee to the Berlin conference and hope that it will involve relevant stakeholders who were unable to attend in Berlin. At the end of the day, we need to be reminded of our collective duties as the Security Council. We are here to save lives. I say this again and again because it is our only agenda. To save lives, we need to seize the moment - time is fleeting. Ten months after the new conflict began, the Council has yet to produce a formal outcome to address it. However, the momentum is with us now but it will soon disappear. This is our time.
