Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
current situation in Kosovo. We also thank Mr. Ivica
Dacie, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, for his presence and statement. We
welcome the statement made by Mr. Hashim Thaci.

We welcome the election of the new Government
of Kosovo on 9 December. We hope that the spirit of
cooperation and collective responsibility that prevailed
in that process persists as the Government tackles
new challenges such as the economic development
of Kosovo, the fight against organized crime and
corruption, and the establishment of the rule of law.

Regarding the security situation, we are concerned
about the news regarding recent violent events in
Pristina. However, despite disturbances and tensions,
we note positively that the security situation in Kosovo
remained generally stable and police forces in Kosovo
responded appropriately to the circumstances to restore
order. In that respect, we highlight the work and the
central role that UNMIK continues to play in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights, which
is a priority for making progress in reconciliation
between communities.

We also congratulate the Kosovo authorities
on their adoption of the draft law prohibiting the
participation of Kosovo in foreign conflicts. We hope
that those changes can be coupled with improvements
in the living conditions of the citizens of Kosovo,
strengthening public confidence in the democratic
process and dissuading them from leaving their country
to participate in foreign conflicts.

To conclude, I would like to stress that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be in full force as the
internationally accepted legal basis for resolving the
situation in Kosovo, including strict respect for the
principle of territorial integrity. We look forward to
the conversations that will take place in Brussels on
9 February between Belgrade and Pristina, and we
hope that the parties will continue to implement the
agreement of 19 April 2013 to continue the process of
normalizing their relations.

