Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report and to Mr. Klein for his briefing and
thorough assessment of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We note that there have been some important
positive changes in that country that give grounds for
optimism. The key to the success and irreversibility of
the process of the Bosnian settlement is full and
consistent compliance with the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We deem any attempted revision of that
document to be inadmissible. It is solely on the basis of
its implementation that any viable, multi-ethnic State
can evolve, consisting of two equal entities and in
respect for the rights of all peoples of that country.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has made an important
contribution to that process. Thanks to its efforts, it has
been possible to strengthen the rule of law in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to enhance the professionalism of the
local police and reorganize it on a multi-ethnic basis,
and to achieve a certain amount of progress in
reforming the judicial system and in establishing a
unified Border Service.

Positive changes are occurring in Brcko. Unified
structures within the Ministry of the Interior in Mostar.
In this way, a meaningful contribution has been made
to the building of democratic institutions of authority
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, positive trends
towards development, including the consolidation of
statehood and the growth of pluralism in social life,
should not give the international community any
grounds for complacency. We note that this point was
just made by Mr. Klein.
Unfortunately, a certain type of action and
thought based on ethnic approaches continues to
prevail in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ethnic
confrontation and ethnic discrimination persist. Despite
the success of moderate forces in the municipal
elections, the prevalence of nationalist parties has not
been eliminated in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We cannot
fail to be concerned by the fact that efforts to create
effective central structures of authority are being
blocked by the passivity of the unified institutions,
which have no will or initiative to build consensus on
reconciliation. It is extremely important to seek the
further democratization of society in order to overcome
any resumption of political extremism and to achieve
the support of the independent media.

Due to the inactivity of Bosnian politicians, there
is an acute problem relating to the return of refugees,
approximately 300,000 of whom remain outside the
country.

We need to continue to reform the armed forces
and reduce the defence budget. Constant attention
should be given to economic reform, which is being
complicated by a reduction in the level of international
assistance. Additional efforts should be made to attract
foreign investment flows and to combat organized
crime and corruption.

In the light of the experience in Bosnia and
Herzegovina of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, our highest priority remains
freeing its activities from elements of politicization and
short-term interests. We have repeatedly made this
point recently.

The violation of the mandate of the Stabilization
Force should be brought to an end. Such violations are
taking the form, in particular, of the deliberate use of
force to arrest people.

I also wish to note that the failure to invite the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the Brussels meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council, which was held
on 23 and 24 May, was a serious blow to the entire
Dayton structure, I should like to recall that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is one of the parties to the
Dayton Peace Agreement and is an essential guarantor
of its implementation.

We are convinced that, unfortunately, the failure
to invite the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the
Brussels meeting of the Peace Implementation Council
will have a negative impact. Recognizing that fact, and
not wishing to bear the responsibility for it, Russia was
compelled not to participate in the Brussels meeting.

We confirm our position that any attempt, under
any pretext, to isolate the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia from the processes relating to the
settlement of the situation in Bosnia, Kosovo or the
Balkans as a whole would be counter-productive and
lead only to the further accumulation of problems,
which could precipitate a new crisis.

In conclusion, I should like to say that Russia, as
one of the main participants in the Bosnia settlement,
will continue to make an active contribution to the
development of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and will support the activities of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
strict compliance with the Dayton Peace Agreement.

