Mr. Okamura (Japan): Iwish to express my gratitude
to Ambassador Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzogovina, for his informative briefing.
Japan appreciates the High Representative's ongoing
contribution to peace and stability in the country. We
also welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2315 (2016), which supports the implementation of the
Dayton Agreement.

The Dayton Agreement was the best and wisest
choice available to the international community in
1995. I remember being struck by what I saw when I
visited Sarajevo as the ChiefPolitical Officer for United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in
1999. In addition to the ravages of war, I saw a total lack
of communication, five years following the Agreement.
The town of Pale in the Republika Srpska - just 13
kilometres away from Sarajevo, on the other side of the
mountain - had no interaction at all with Sarajevo. I
recall hoping that the ethnic tensions would be resolved
over time through efforts by all sides to overcome the
very difficult matter of ethnic tension.

As a member of the Peace Implementation Council,
Japan has contributed to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement by emphasizing mutuality among
different ethnic groups. Since the collapse ofthe former
Yugoslavia, ethnic tensions have continued to affect
the Balkans. When I was in Kosovo, the prevailing
perspective was that the Dayton Agreement had sowed
interim stability, and it was our belief that in the long
term, Kosovo's borders would become unnecessary and
meaningless in tandem with its regional integration
within the European Union (EU). Japan therefore
welcomes the decision by the EU General Affairs
Council to accept the application of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for membership in the EU. We also
welcome the approval of the Extended Fund Facility
to Bosnia and Herzegovina by the Executive Board of
the International Monetary Fund, which will enhance
economic stability.

It is nonetheless disappointing to see actions that
foment ethnically based divisions and run contrary
to the vision of the Dayton Agreement. Japan is
particularly concerned about the impact on the stability
of the country of the referendum in the Republika
Srpska. The referendum was held against the orders of
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As it has done for the past quarter century, the
international community must continue to provide
the vision to resolve the ethnic tensions that have
plagued the region. The future is in reconciliation,
not in confrontation. The future is in integration,
including market integration, not in secession. Member
States should bolster reconciliation and avoid fanning
ethnic tensions. The Security Council must speak
with one voice in urging dialogue among the various
ethnic groups.

The Office of the High Representative continues
to be vital for the peace and stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Japan will continue to fully support
Ambassador Inzko and his Office to that end.

