The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.

I am grateful to the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban, Ambassador
Heraldo Munoz, for his comprehensive briefing
relating to the work of that important Committee over
the last three months. I wish my first words to be those
of appreciation for his work and that of his skilled
team.

Speaking on behalf of my country, I would also
like to associate myself with the statement to be made
later by the representative of the Netherlands, which
holds the presidency of the European Union.

With regard to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), I would
like to highlight the impetus provided by resolution
1526 (2004) - adopted on 30 January - which has
provided a strengthened framework within which the
Committee can carry out its objectives. In order for
that framework to be able to work in practice, however,
new guidelines must be adopted relating to the work of
the Committee, and these are being discussed today.
We urge all States members of the Committee,
therefore, to resolve the few outstanding questions as
soon as possible. My delegation will provide its full
support in that respect.

With regard to the work of the Monitoring Team,
we believe that it has done a commendable job in the
first few months of its existence and that its report
represents a key contribution to identifying problems
and possible ways of improving not just the work of
the Committee itself but also the activities of the
United Nations in general in combating the scourge of
terrorism. As Ambassador Mufioz rightly pointed out,
the report reflects the opinion of the Monitoring Team
only and is not, therefore, the official position of the
Committee or of the Security Council. Nonetheless, we
believe that the problems that it sets out and the
solutions that it proposes must be tackled in depth by
the Committee on an urgent basis.

The Team has rightly pointed out that the
traditional sanctions system of the United Nations was
designed to target States, not entities or individuals,
and that in that respect it has therefore had only a
limited impact. It is clear that the question of sanctions
goes far beyond the scope of this meeting. In view of
its importance, however, we urge the informal Working
Group on General Issues on Sanctions, chaired by
Ambassador Adechi of Benin, and the
Secretary-General himself, to continue to work on
those issues.

The Consolidated List - the Committee's main
working tool - faces two problems, among others, as
noted by the Monitoring Team. The first is the need to
improve the basic identifying data for individuals and
entities included on the List. In this regard, we believe
that it would be appropriate to approach international
organizations that have broad experience in combating
transnational organized crime - in particular,
Interpol - to assist us in that work. It is a question not
of doing something new, but of applying well-tested
methods that have recognized practical efficiency.

The second issue is the need to establish a
procedure for the possible removal of names from the
List. We believe that that is a key issue if we are to
maintain sufficient guarantees for the persons or
entities affected and preserve the universal legitimacy
of the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) - and, consequently, of the
overall activity of the United Nations in combating
terrorism.

With regard to the financial aspects, important
steps forward have been taken in the context of the
formal financial system to control the flow of assets
that could be intended for the perpetration of terrorist
acts. In this regard, we should highlight the work done
by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), which,
through its eight special recommendations on counter-
terrorist financing, has set an example of efficiency.
Spain would like to see the scope of the application of
the FATF to be extended from its current 31 members
to all the States Members of the United Nations. It is
certainly well known that the problem of the financing
of terrorism is the control not only of the banking
system but also of other methods used by individuals
and terrorist groups, including - as the report of the
Monitoring Team states - systems of money transfer
by cash couriers. We must pay more attention to those
areas.

As regards arms embargoes, the Monitoring Team
stressed that, as with sanctions, they have always been
conceived with a view to the targeting of States. The
danger that terrorist groups - in particular Al
Qaeda - might acquire weapons of mass destruction is
disconcertingly real. That is why Spain welcomes the
Team's intention to closely follow the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its recommendation to add to the
Consolidated List the names of those identified as
supplying Al Qaeda with material or expertise that
could enable it to acquire such weapons.

Finally, with regard to the travel ban on
individuals and entities on the Consolidated List, Spain
fully concurs with the recommendation of the
Monitoring Team that there is a need to improve the
application of the ban, since it has had very little or no
effect on Al Qaeda activities. There is a need for the
establishment of a rapid communications system
among the competent States authorities, in particular
border authorities, so that when a person on the
Consolidated List is arrested or detained, it will be
possible immediately to trigger the appropriate
procedure for that person's handover or extradition to
the State whose justice system is seeking him or her.

In conclusion, there is a need for greater and
better coordination among the various instruments
available to the United Nations with a View to
promoting international cooperation in combating
terrorism. It is vital to have a fluid exchange within the
Security Council among the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the recently created
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). In addition, the General Assembly, as well as
the Secretariat, should act forcefully on an issue that,
in the words of the Secretary-General, assails the spirit
and the purposes of the United Nations. I would like to
recall the words of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, who stated

"Everything that we work for - peace,
development, health, freedom - is damaged by
this horror. Everything that we believe in -
respect for human life, justice, tolerance,
pluralism and democracy - is threatened by it. It
must be defeated and it must be defeated by a
world acting as one." (SG/SM/83 76, para. 7)

 

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Australia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

