The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, Peru, Spain and Uruguay,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, Without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cazeau
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2009/530, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Argentina, Austria,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, France, Guatemala, Japan, Mexico, Peru,
Spain, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, Uruguay and Viet Nam.

I wish to draw the attention of participants to
document S/2009/439, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
2
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.


The President: There were fifteen votes in
favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1892 (2009).

I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.


