Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): As your
presidency approaches its end, Sir, allow me to
congratulate you on the great job that you and the
members of your delegation have accomplished. The
day has been very busy with important activities for the
Council, and before we finish with the last item on
today's agenda, my delegation should like to commend
you on the great flexibility you have demonstrated in
maintaining the Council's unity and credibility.

I have been most pleased to participate actively
with the other members of the Council and to speak
repeatedly in the meetings of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan. Most importantly, we
have repeatedly advised the Panel of Experts and the
Committee members to be precise, cautious and
professional in addressing the issue of Darfur and its
implications for the Sudan as a whole, its people and
Government.

In the course of several consultations, we
expressed our concern as the Panel of Experts hastened
to hurl allegations and accusations against individuals,
without regard for a number of essential principles.
2

Among these is not to encroach on the jurisdiction of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court with
respect to Darfur and not to disregard the results of the
investigation. They even went so far as to level
accusations at high officials of a sovereign nation
without taking sound legal principles into
consideration and without respect for protocol. In
dealing with the issue, of Darfur, the Panel of Experts
has treated as equals the Government of National
Unity - the legitimate Government of the Sudan -
and the rebel groups that are hindering the peace
process and ignoring the calls of the international
community to negotiate and join the agreement, along
with a number of other matters that had previously
been brought to the attention of the Panel.

The Panel, however, has disregarded our concerns
and continued to work in a manner that can hardly be
described as professional.

My delegation respects the technical procedures
of the 1591 Committee in reporting and making
recommendations to the Security Council after
reaching consensus. We would not wish to undermine
the work of the Committee or the utility of its work.
Given the fact that the Panel of Experts is an
independent body assisting the Committee and must be
neutral, transparent and independent of all political
influence, my delegation would send the message that
the Panel's aberrations can be corrected in the future.

It is our hope that all groups of experts working
with the sanctions Committee should do so accurately,
professionally, transparently and non-selectively so as
to maintain the Security Council's credibility before all
humanity. In view of the foregoing, my delegation
intends to continue its cooperation and to vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us in the hope that
the Panel of Experts will reform its working methods
and work in transparency and professionalism in the
future.

A vote was taken by Show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America
06-5436]
