The nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime is a crucial yet long-neglected issue. Evidently, this subject matter has gained critical traction thanks to the adoption of the landmark resolution 2482 (2019) in 2019. That resolution provides a critical framework for international efforts to address this challenge. In this respect, we welcome the Secretary-General's report on actions taken by Member States and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities to address the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime (S/2020/754). Turkey is among the countries that provided substantial contributions to this important work. Turkey has for years been at the forefront of countering terrorist organizations with a broad spectrum of ideologies, be it Da'esh, Al-Qaida, the Kurdish Workers' Party/Kurdish People's Protection Units or the Fethullah Guillen Terrorist Organization. Regardless of their ideologies, what connects them all is that they benefit from a wide range of criminal activities. Clearly, transnational organized crimes are not bound by national borders. As the world becomes more interconnected thanks advances in global trade and e-commerce, the area where such criminal organizations find new windows of opportunities expands as well. These organizations no longer limit themselves to drug-, arms- or human- trafficking activities. They resort to more complex and subtler activities, such as trafficking in artefacts, cultural property and wildlife. They widely benefit from the use of cybertools and cyberplatforms, particularly for financing, propaganda and recruitment activities. Due to the increased variety and complexity of these activities, the international community should be more vigilant and agile than ever to address them. As we shared in detail during the process of the preparation of the Secretary- General's report, Turkey has a variety of legal and administrative measures in place in order to prevent, detect and counter the ties between terrorism and transnational organized crime. Turkey is party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols as well as to the Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime. The Prevention of Financing of Terrorism Act of 2013 introduced a number of measures, including the freezing of assets, sanctions and penalties for smuggling activities. As a member of the Financial Action Task Force, Turkey regularly reviews, and revises where necessary, its legislation and administrative practices in order to fully comply with Task Force recommendations. The MASAK Financial Crimes Investigation Board, Turkey's national financial intelligence unit (FIU), provides significant contributions to the work of the Egmont Group, an international platform for exchange of information among FIUs. With its robust law enforcement and customs control capacity, Turkey makes an essential contribution to international efforts to prevent, detect and disrupt international drug-trafficking. Last but not least, in addition to our bilateral efforts, we have established close operational and results-yielding partnerships with international actors, such as INTERPOL and Europol. We provide support and contribute to the valuable work of United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to advance its work. The disruption caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic has inevitably affected terrorist and criminal groups. However, it has not deterred them from seeking new ways to operate and continue their activities. A number of United Nations reports point out that these groups have directed their activities to online platforms. In that respect, there is no room for complacency for the international community in its collective fight against terrorist and criminal activities. On the contrary, we should be more responsive and innovative in the face of the evolving way terrorist organizations and criminal organizations operate and interact with each other. As the Secretary-General's report on the implementation on resolution 2482 (2019) indicates, "(t]he ability of terrorists to draw on organized crime [...] can exacerbate the threat posed by terrorism to international peace and security." (S/2020/754, para. 105) In concurrence with this understanding, Turkey is committed to countering terrorism and criminal activities in an effective manner. To that end, we remain determined to disrupt all efforts that help such organizations thrive. Security Council resolutions, starting with resolution 2482 (2019), provide us the necessary framework and guidance for preventing interactions between such groups. In this respect, Turkey is deeply committed to continuing to fully implement those resolutions. We will also continue to be a steadfast partner in overcoming the daunting challenges arising from nexus between terrorism and criminal activities. To achieve solid results in this common fight, we need genuine international cooperation more than ever.
