Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Representative
Jean Arnault for his comprehensive briefing this
morning and for the work he does on the ground
in Colombia. He can remain absolutely certain of
Sweden's continued strong support for his efforts, for
the United Nations Mission in Colombia and for the
second Mission, as described in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/745).

We commend the strong commitment to peace of
both parties in Colombia and their efforts to overcome
challenges to the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement. A sustained effort is now needed from the
State at the central, regional and local levels, as well
as the United Nations system and the international
community, in support of the Agreement. This must
include comprehensive rural reform, so that all
Colombians can share in the tangible dividends ofpeace.
The political, economic and social reincorporation of
former combatants into society is an integral part of
that process. Violence against human rights defenders
and community leaders demonstrates the urgent need
for the second United Nations Mission to also verify
the implementation of personal and collective security
guarantees, as requested by the parties.

We welcome the focus on the second Mission
having a strong presence locally and regionally, which
must be robust enough to allow proper verification of
security and reintegration. We also welcome the strong
emphasis on coordination and cooperation with the
United Nations country team, as we just heard. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the work that the Mission has
undertaken regarding the inclusion and participation
of women, which, as the report points out, has been
an important contributing factor for the success of
the Mission so far. Sweden is pleased to be able to
contribute to the current United Nations Mission and
it stands ready to continue to support the succeeding
Mission with personnel.

We welcome the recently announced ceasefire
between the Government of Colombia and the National
Liberation Army. The fact that the parties have
indicated an interest in having the United Nations
verify the implementation of the ceasefire is testimony
to the success of the current Verification Mission. The
United Nations and the Security Council must now
stand prepared to assist the parties moving forward.

We note the commitment by National Liberation
Army to cease the recruitment of minors. As Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we
would like to highlight the Working Group's conclusions
on Colombia from February this year which, inter alia,
encouraged the parties to ensure that child protection
is given due consideration as early as possible in the
peace process and that it is a core priority.

Peace in Colombia is now taking root. As the people
of Colombia and their leaders continue to consolidate
the gains made, we must all continue to stand by their
side. Sweden is committed to doing so.

