Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): At the outset, I
would like to commend you, Madam President, and
your delegation for the excellent manner in which the
delegation of Sweden has prepared this open debate. It
was a fully inclusive process that allowed all delegations,
through the timely circulation of documents, to prepare
early. We truly appreciate that.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his briefing. His briefing and
decision to place conflict prevention and sustaining
peace at the centre of the United Nations mission
are a testimony to his commitment to make conflict
prevention a reality. Indeed, today's debate is about our
ability to deliver on our collective promise, which was
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations more
than 70 years ago, to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. Despite that promise, however,
conflicts have been not only persistent and relapsing.

Today, there is a continued inability of our
Organization to credibly and accurately predict,
pre-empt and/or rapidly respond to conflicts.
Nevertheless, increasing discussions of this nature
and the decision to put this debate at the forefront of
the Security Council's agenda for this year raise hope
for the possibility of reducing the number of missed
opportunities in the future. While today's threats
to peace have become more complex, with intricate
new trends and types, more room for multilateral
and multifaceted actions against those threats have
also emerged, including partnering and working with
regions through existing partnerships.

In Africa, experience in conflict prevention has
shown that the African Union has on several occasions
been better positioned in terms ofknowledge, proximity
and the capability to mobilize and respond quickly.
Moreover, that ability often enables us to circumvent
some of the burdensome, procedural processes of
United Nations interventions. We therefore believe
that the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union could be a collaboration framework
through which conflict prevention in Africa can be
discussed and from which practical measures can
be taken.

In their solemn declaration adopted in Addis Ababa
in May 2013, when African Heads of State embraced
Agenda 2063, African leaders, inter alia, expressed
their determination to achieve the goal of a conflict-
free Africa and pledged not to bequeath the burdens
of conflicts to the next generation of Africans. They
also undertook the goal of ending all wars in Africa by
2020. Conflict prevention is therefore, as we speak here
today in the Security Council, the primary priority of
the African Union. It is through that road map that the

Security Council could collaborate closely with Africa
in order to effectively contribute to conflict prevention
on the continent through practical steps. Allow me to
highlight some of the steps that we suggest.

First, the international community should engage in
strategic dialogues with Africa, including in the United
Nations system, on global policies and practices that
negatively impact Africa and its people. In our view, the
holding of regular dialogues between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council on the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts at all levels, as well as on other
strategic issues, is ofprime importance. We believe that
increased cooperation between these two peace and
security bodies would enhance complementarity and
lead to effective coordination, while at the same time
minimizing the duplication of efforts.

Secondly, we believe that shifting attention in
addressing the underlying causes of conflicts, while
at the same time increasing the capacity to streamline
efforts to intervene when civilians are endangered,
including the ability to recognize and disseminate the
signs ofimpending or potential conflict, would increase
our collective preventive capabilities and help the
United Nations live up to its full potential. We believe
that early warning and response capabilities are critical
requirements for effective early prevention.

Thirdly, linked to that is the implementation
of outstanding components of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, including the full
operationalization of the African Standby Force.

Fourthly, in order to achieve a conflict-free
continent, we should also seek to address the illicit
inflow of arms and weapons into Africa, with a focus
on stopping suppliers and recipients of such weapons
from promoting and sustaining illicit business in arms
and weapons.

Last but not least, we need to ensure that our post-
conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding capabilities
are properly deployed in order to ensure the institutional
capacities that prevent relapses into conflict. On that
point in particular, let me say that as a member of the
African Union Peace and Security Council and a major
contributor of peacekeeping troops, Rwanda pledges its
full support for putting conflict prevention at the centre
of United Nations action.

Allow me to say a few words on sustaining peace.
As we all know, Rwanda would be a different country
today if the post- genocide Government had not invested
in forging a new Rwanda, if it had not been successful
in ensuring inclusivity and equal opportunities for all
its citizens, if it had not overcome divisions, if it had
not engaged reconciliation and restorative justice, and
if it had not worked to build trust in State institutions.
That alone is an indication of every State's primary
responsibility in conflict prevention, including creating
an environment that is conducive to the enjoyment of
human rights and success in promoting and protecting
rights and ensuring accountability for their violation.

It is our hope that this year, which is starting
with such a central and critical debate, will mark a
turning point as we embark on the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals, which provide
concrete ways to sustain peace and development and,
as the Secretary-General put it, to make them a key
prevention tool.

