Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this meeting, and we are pleased
to see you, Mr. President, presiding over it. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
being here with us this afternoon and for his briefing on
the security and humanitarian situation in Myanmar. We
also welcome United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Associate Administrator Tegegnework Gettu
and the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
Goodwill Ambassador Cate Blanchett, and we
appreciate their useful briefings.

It is evident that efforts have been undertaken
by the Government of Myanmar to try to address the
situation in Rakhine state following the visit of the
Security Council and the follow-up engagements.
Certainly, more needs to be done with regard to the
humanitarian situation, accountability measures on
alleged human right violations and implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, as well as in many other areas, to bring
lasting peace and reconciliation to Myanmar.

The memorandum of understanding signed by
the Government of Myanmar and two United Nations
agencies, UNHCR and UNDP, on 6 June, is a step in the
right direction that we hope will facilitate conditions
for the safe, voluntary, sustainable and dignified
repatriation of refugees. It is indeed vital to ensure the
swift and full implementation of that agreement.

The Council's visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh
last May provided the opportunity to witness the
condition of the refugee camps, which continues to be a
matter of serious concern. Therefore, we underline the
need to address the worsening humanitarian situation
and the suffering of those who have fled, particularly
women and children.

Despite the devastating humanitarian situation, the
efforts undertaken by the Government of Bangladesh to
provide safety and humanitarian assistance to refugees
are highly commendable. However, the magnitude and
scale of devastation necessitate further financial and
logistical support to Bangladesh, the United Nations
and the other humanitarian partners that are engaged
in this effort.

Of course, the complex challenges that Rakhine
state is facing need a political solution, which requires
a comprehensive strategy aimed at addressing the
root causes of the crisis through reconciliation, peace,
stability and development. In that vein, the rapid and
effective implementation of the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission remains absolutely vital.

We underscore the need for a transparent and
independent investigation mechanism to ensure
accountability for the alleged human right violations.
To that end, we note the initiative undertaken by the
Government of Myanmar to establish an independent
commission ofinquiry that also comprises international
personalities. In that regard, we stress the need to
expedite the process in order to ensure reconciliation,
peace and stability in Rakhine state.

The bilateral engagement between Bangladesh
and Myanmar remains very important to ensuring
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees.
It is in that context that we took positive note of the
recent Myanmar-Bangladesh ministerial meeting, held
on 10 August. We encourage both Governments to
expedite the implementation of the agreed memorandum
of understanding.

It is also important that the Council continue to
maintain its unity and enhance its cooperation with the
Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh, as well as
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
the situation. We support and encourage the Special
Envoy's engagement with the Government of Myanmar
and other relevant stakeholders, which aims to build
confidence and mutual trust to pave the way for greater
cooperation in resolving the situation in Rakhine state.

