Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to start by stating our pleasure
at seeing you, Madam President, presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council, and by congratulating
you on your initiative to convene this important debate.
Colombia shares the proposed objective as contained
in the concept note before us (S/2013/446, annex),
which invites us to consider this matter from a broad
perspective and to identify options to strengthen and
deepen cooperation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations.

I express my gratitude for the briefings by the
representatives of the African Union and the League
of Arab States, and I welcome the presence for the first
time before the Security Council of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States and the Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR).

The regional and subregional organizations play
an increasingly important role in the work of the
Security Council, and their activities in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security are
more effective when they work in a coordinated manner
and their perspectives are taken into account. Libya,
Yemen, Mali, Cote d'Ivoire, Somalia, the Sudan and
South Sudan are just a few examples of countries where
the contributions of those organizations have been
instrumental vis-a-Vis the decisions of the Security
Council.

In the Americas, Haiti is an example of the results
that can be gained from cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Resolution 2070 (2012) recognized the positive efforts
that UNASUR had deployed in Haiti with tangible
results. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
leadership as well as the technical and financial support
that Argentina has given to the UNASUR technical
secretariat in Haiti.

The fulfilment of the mandate of the Security
Council benefits from the understanding of the
geographical, social, cultural and political context
that regional and subregional organizations have
with respect to crises or conflicts on its agenda. That
aspect is especially relevant to my country, which
acknowledges the way in which the international
community, in particular our regional partners, has
understood the importance of backing the initiative of
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon to hold peace
talks with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia. The positive effect of reaching an agreement
to end the conflict and the achievement of a definitive
peace in Colombia will without question redound to the
benefit of the region. In that respect, we would like to
thank Cuba, Venezuela and Chile for their support for
the process.

One of the challenges that the United Nations
faces in its dialogue with regional and subregional
organizations is finding common ground to build
positive agendas aimed at strengthening those areas
in which the experience of regional or subregional
organizations represents a substantive contribution that
will have an impact on the ground.

Perspectives that are closer to the realities of the
regions enrich and give greater understanding to the
analysis and understanding of a situation of crisis
under study. That implies having an open mind and
considering alternatives for a solution that may not
coincide with universally applicable formulas. That
is why we reiterate the importance of strengthening
consultation, dialogue and coordination mechanisms
between the Council and such organizations, in order
to provide long-term solutions to crises and ensure that
the Council bears in mind in an effective manner that
interaction when, among other aspects, it analyses the
renewal of mandates for peacekeeping operations.

It is of the utmost importance that, pursuant
to Chapter VIII, priority be given to regional and
subregional mechanisms to resolve matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
before referring them to the Security Council. The
search for political and diplomatic solutions to conflict
situations and the strict adherence to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the Organization and to
international law must be the cornerstone that supports
collective international security.

Some decades ago, State actors were the only
protagonists in history, and the main threats to their
peace and security came from other States. Today,
States have realized that they face common threats
that originate from international networks which are
involved in trafficking and crimes of various kinds.
The world of today requires cooperation in different
ways and between different regions. Reality has shown
us that those threats cannot be combated by countries
on an individual basis.

The nature of the crimes that we face today requires
us to cooperate and join our efforts. It is in that sense
that agreements between countries and organizations
from different geographical regions have to be
understood. Those crimes are transnational in nature
and should be fought as such. That is how countries
such as Colombia, which have suffered from the actions
of criminal organizations, understand it.

Cooperation and confidence-building have positive
impacts on all countries and regions, which is why,
to fulfil its mandate, the Security Council needs the
support of strong, capable regional and subregional
organizations that are prepared to resolve in a timely
fashion the conflict situations that arise in their
respective areas.

