Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is one of the main
participants in the Bosnian settlement. It deems it
important that the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina be further developed on the basis of the
scrupulous implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. This should be the thrust of the activities
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), whose mandate we are
convinced should be extended for another year.

It is precisely in the interest of continuing the
peace process that we will not object to the draft
resolution before us now, the general thrust of which
we agree with. However, Russia cannot support this
draft resolution, and, for the first time in the last two
years, it has refused to join the sponsors of the draft
resolution in the Security Council on this subject, since
the Russian amendments on questions of principle were
not taken on board.

Operative paragraph 5, which expresses support
for the declaration of the meeting of the Peace
Implementation Conference, which took place on 23
and 24 May 2000 in Brussels, is not acceptable to us.

As the Council is aware, Russia was compelled to
refuse to participate in that meeting, since its
organizers adopted a discriminatory approach to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It did not allow one of
the direct participants - a signatory to the Dayton
Agreement - to work in that forum.

Russia refused to participate in the meeting of the
Peace Implementation Council in Brussels. We believe
that the Brussels Declaration has no force since the
meeting of the Council was conducted Virtually in
violation of Dayton.

We are categorically opposed to attempts to oust
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from all
multilateral mechanisms on a settlement in the former
Yugoslavia. We have repeatedly warned that the policy
of further isolating and enforcing a blockade against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia reflects the desire
of certain individual States unilaterally to undo the
decisions endorsed by the Security Council in the area
of a settlement. That policy is counterproductive and
could have very serious consequences for the entire
Balkan region and for international efforts to stabilize
the situation in that part of Europe.

Moreover, we have serious problems also with
the provision of the draft that extends the reporting
period of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina from three to six months. We warned
ahead of time that Russia would object to possible
proposals to move the reports of the High
Representative to a six-month cycle. We deem this to
be an attempt to weaken oversight by the Security
Council over the Bosnian settlement process.

Russia, as a participant in the Dayton Agreement,
will continue consistently to see that it is fully and
unswervingly implemented. We will act against any
revision or undermining of it and against any reduction
of the role of the Security Council in ensuring the strict
implementation of the agreements that it has endorsed.

