Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me
to join my colleagues in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jessen-
Petersen, for his entire contribution to the peace
process in Kosovo and for his briefing today. We
believe that, at this critical stage for the international
presence in Kosovo, we can hope for a new
appointment soon.

Our appreciation extends to all the members of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) team for their commitment and daily
work.
On behalf of my delegation, I should like to
welcome Ms. Raskovie-Ivie, President of the
Coordinating Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, and the presence of the Prime
Minister of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of Kosovo, Mr. Ceku, at this meeting.

The region of the western Balkans remains a
natural priority of Slovak foreign policy for many
reasons. Our involvement there is based on the
principles of transparency and impartiality, aimed at
strengthening the stability of the region and at
supporting the democratization and integration process.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered later this morning by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. That is why I
will limit my statement to the following points.

First of all, we wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his evaluation of the situation in Kosovo,
contained in his report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. We continue to
believe that the role of UNMIK, as a consequence of
the Security Council's decision to launch negotiations
in order to define the future status of Kosovo, has
become even more vital and instrumental to the peace,
stability and prosperity of the region and to a lasting
settlement of Kosovo's future status.

That is why we think that the current UNMIK
report does not fully reflect the context in which it is
presented. We had hoped for certain elaborations that
would help us to facilitate our assessment of the
ongoing political process, under the auspices of the
United Nations. We deem the report to be
unsatisfactory with respect to the following areas:
Kosovo's institutions' ability to meet the challenges of
democratization and the rule of law, with an emphasis
on the issue of international organized crime, which
threatens more than just Kosovo and its closest
neighbours; the prospects for Kosovo's economic and
political sustainability; its prognosis for multi-ethnic
coexistence, which is directly proportionate to such
issues as the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons; and, last but not least, the question of whether
Kosovo's ultimate status will contribute to the stability
of the region.

Those critical issues for the determination of
Kosovo's future status should be taken into
consideration, and we look forward to receiving the
forthcoming report of Mr. Ahtisaari, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Future Status Process
for Kosovo.

Secondly, we note with some satisfaction the
section of the Secretary-General's report in which he
elaborates positively on general trends among
Kosovo's new leadership on the ongoing issue of
standards implementation. We commend the personal
role and dedication of Prime Minister Ceku in that
regard, which is also praised in the report.

However, in the context of the talks on future
status, we think it critical objectively to evaluate
whether the overall results in that regard are sufficient
for further progress on the issue of future status, and
vice-versa. The report's lack of directness in that
regard, and the fact that the Contact Group has decided
to redefine and narrow key standards, are indicators
that the situation in this area cannot be considered to
be as positive as it is presented. We therefore believe
that the 13 priorities of standards implementation
considered by the Contact Group deserve special
support and a thorough overview by the Security
Council, as well as by other entities.

Thirdly, in our view the participation of the
Kosovo Serbs in the future status process, as well as
their engagement in Kosovo's political life, are of
cardinal importance. We therefore call on Belgrade to
encourage the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
process and in the political life of Kosovo in order to
influence the process, which will be decisive to the
province's future. We also call on Belgrade and
Pristina to allow Kosovo Serbs to exercise their rights
in a way that will contribute to creating a positive
atmosphere in the negotiating process and to the
stabilization of the region.

However, we do not share the View that the
official target of 16.6 per cent minority participation at
the central level of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government is in the best interests of the international
community in Kosovo, as set down in Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). In our opinion, the current
proportional key is not a good mobilization tool for
minority participation in the central Government. The
ongoing existence of parallel structures, as also
mentioned in the report, is proof that minorities still do
not trust the central Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government.
It is our firm belief that the determination of
Kosovo's future status is an extremely sensitive issue.
It is already almost inevitable that its consequences
will be felt beyond the region's borders. The starting
points in the Kosovo issue are linked to the situation as
it was set up after the Second World War and
intermingled with the ethnic and religious complexities
of the region, which have endured for centuries. Those
are the elements that make the Kosovo case sui generis
and extraordinary.

While it may be problematic today to impose a
desired solution on the international framework of
conflict settlement, there are still many alternatives
that could be explored. The potential failure of an
incorrect solution could call into question the existing
tools for conflict settlement that have been in use for
decades. We therefore wish to repeat that we believe it
necessary to find a lasting and balanced settlement of
the future status of Kosovo. At the same time, as is also
highlighted in the Contact Group's guiding principles
for a settlement of Kosovo's status,

"the settlement of the Kosovo issue should be
fully compatible with international standards of
human rights, democracy and international law
and contribute to regional security".

We continue to believe that it is important to seek
a negotiated settlement and compromise from both
Belgrade and Pristina through direct talks and
dialogue. Only such a solution, reflecting the objective
concerns of all parties concerned and not considered to
have been imposed from the outside, will contribute to
the lasting security and stability of the region. In that
context, we also believe that all options for the
outcome of status talks should remain open. In the
expectation of success in the status talks, we think it
more than important that all participants in the talks
refrain from any activities that could give Belgrade or
Pristina the impression that the outcome of the final
status talks has been prejudged.

In conclusion, I would like to reassure you that
Slovakia, being a troop-contributing country to KFOR,
is ready to continue its dedication to the peace,
stabilization and integration process in the Balkans.

