Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset, please allow me to congratulate
you sincerely, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
 

of the Council for the first month of 1996. I am convinced
that, given your outstanding talent and rich diplomatic
experience, the work of the Council this month will be a
success. I also wish to thank your predecessor, His
Excellency Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian Federation,
who successfully guided the Council's work in the last
month of last year, leading us smoothly into 1996.

We have noted that the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy have made tremendous efforts for the
peaceful settlement of the Georgia conflict. The countries
concerned in the region, the Russian Federation in
particular, have also conducted positive mediation. We
welcome the concerted efforts of the international
community to advance the peace process in Georgia.

The situation in the Abkhaz region of Georgia has
been tense and the political settlement process long
stalemated, despite vigorous mediation by all parties, since
the outbreak of the dispute in the region. The major
problems remain the continued serious differences between
the two parties concerned over the future political status of
Abkhazia and the further obstruction of the return of
refugees to the Abkhaz region. The Chinese delegation is
deeply concerned about these disturbing developments.

We have consistently held that the international
community should respect the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia in
settling the conflict in that country. At the same time, the
basic rights of various ethnic groups in the Abkhaz region
should be guaranteed.

We are of the view that the final settlement of the
question of Georgia depends, in the final analysis, on
Georgians of all ethnic groups. In this connection, the
international community can only play a supplementary and
promoting role that is based on the political will of the two
parties. Therefore, we urge the two parties concerned to
take into account the fundamental interests of Georgians of
all ethnic groups and to engage in real peace talks,
earnestly and constructively, so as to find a final, proper
solution.

Since its deployment, the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), has maintained good
cooperation with the two parties concerned and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping
force, and it has carried out fairly well the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council, at which fact we wish to
express our satisfaction. Therefore, we support the
Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the mandate
of UNOMIG, and we hope that it will further promote
stability in Georgia and facilitate the process of a
comprehensive political settlement.

On the basis of the aforementioned position, the
Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

