Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): It has been a
privilege and an honour to serve as the coordinator
between the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and
the Security Council in 2018. Through presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/20, we aim to consolidate the
steps taken to advance the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in particular vis-a-vis the Security
Council. I wish to thank partners for their support
and constructive engagement, which have enabled the
adoption of the presidential statement on the PBC - the
first of its kind.

We are very pleased with the steady progress made

over the past couple of years, with a more proactive
strategic and relevant PBC that is increasingly finding
its role and fulfilling its mandated advisory function to
the Security Council. We have seen this on numerous
occasions, not least in the most recent recommendations
provided to the Security Council ahead of the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which is a great example of timely and relevant
input from the PBC. More synchronized planning and
increased exchanges between the bodies have similarly
allowed the PBC to more fully bring to bear its
comparative advantages and complementary role.

With its unique composition and by using its
convening role and speaking to a wide range of actors,
the PBC can gather experiences and collect input that
are critical to the strategic long-term engagement of
the United Nations and the international community
for sustaining peace in conflict-affected countries.
The PBC can play a particularly important role during
transitions between different forms of United Nations
engagement and ensure a comprehensive approach
between peacekeeping, peacebuilding and wider
efforts to strengthen social and economic rights. The
full potential of the PBC, however, remains untapped,
and we look forward to continuing to contribute to
this work.

As we pass on the torch to the next focal point and
rejoin the PBC Organizational Committee, we count on
continued active engagement and cooperation with all
members of the Council in the coming year. At the end
ofthe day, the PBC can fulfil its advisory potential only
to the extent that the Security Council allows it to do so.

The fact that development, peace and security and
human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing
is often reiterated in the Council. The collaboration
between the Security Council and the PBC is central
to turning this notion into operational approaches
that have meaning in the United Nations efforts on
the ground.

The meeting rose at 3.10pm.
