Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all, we
thank Mr. Lacroix for his detailed briefing. Let me also
at the outset express our appreciation for the work that
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has been doing since the discovery of the tunnels.
We especially commend the able leadership of Force
Commander Major General Del Col.

We had a chance to discuss this matter in closed
consultations last week, so let me reiterate three points
today: first, our condemnation of the tunnels; secondly,
appreciation of UNIFIL's role and the necessary steps
forward; and, thirdly, the need for a sustainable solution.

First, on the Hizbullah tunnels, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is very concerned aboutthe discovery offour
tunnels - constructed by Hizbullah - on the northern
Israeli border with Lebanon. We strongly condemn
these tunnel activities, which are part of Hizbullah's
illegal and destabilizing activities in Lebanon and in
the region. Hizbullah's actions are a flagrant violation
of Israeli sovereignty and international law, such as laid
down in resolution 1701 (2006). These tunnels pose a
serious threat to regional stability.

We recognize the Israeli right to defend itself,
within the limits of international law, and we underline
that Israel's concerns for its security are legitimate.
We support the Israeli response in destroying these
tunnels, which cross into Israeli territory on the Israeli
side of the Blue Line. It is clear that these tunnels must
be taken seriously by the international community and
by the Council in particular.

This brings me to my second point, on UNIFIL's
role and the necessary steps forward. We deeply
appreciate and support UNIFIL's role and proactive
actions since the discovery of the tunnels. UNIFIL has
been checking the tunnels on the Israeli side and has
concluded so far that two of the four tunnels indeed
cross the Blue Line, violating resolution 1701 (2006).

UNIFIL has been able to decrease tensions. In
doing so, the tripartite mechanism has again proved
its added value. UNIFIL has also been in close contact
with the Lebanese authorities. The Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) have sent a very clear message on the
need for an investigation on the northern side of the
Blue Line.

In our view, the following steps forward are needed.

As a first step, the Lebanese Government and
the LAF must take this issue very seriously and act
responsibly. It has now been more than two weeks since
the discovery of the first tunnel, so an investigation
of the alleged starting points of the tunnels on the
Lebanese side of the Blue Line is urgently needed. We
welcome the announced willingness of the Lebanese
Government to cooperate and allow access to the alleged
starting points of the tunnels. We call on the Lebanese
Government to make good on its commitment. The
inspections should be carried out as soon as possible by
the LAF, in close cooperation with UNIFIL. We look
forward to further information and a conclusion of the
investigations by UNIFIL.

The second step is the need for full respect for
resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004). Although
the current situation is relatively calm and escalation
has been prevented so far, violations on both sides of
the Blue Line remain frequent. We therefore call upon
both sides to maintain this calm by fully respecting and
implementing both resolutions.

My third point on the need for a sustainable solution
is that in our View, the current situation reaffirms the
need for such a solution. This would include, first, the
formation of a national unity Government in Lebanon
without further delay; secondly, the development of
a national defence strategy in Lebanon; and, thirdly,
a clear recommitment to the full implementation of
the dissociation policy by the Lebanese Government.
In that context, Hizbullah should end its illegal and
destabilizing activities.

This must be combined with continued international
support for Lebanon, including for the much-needed
socioeconomic reforms and in building up the Lebanese
Armed Forces.

In conclusion, the Kingdom ofthe Netherlands will
continue to do its part in assisting Lebanon on this path.
My Government has engaged in a long-term partnership
with that beautiful country, and we will continue to do
our utmost to be a true friend to the Lebanese people.

