The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.

At the outset, I wish to thank His Excellency
Mr. Haris Siladeie for his statement. Our thanks go
also to High Representative Inzko for his
comprehensive brieflng. We commend his efforts to
promote the political process and assure him of our full
support.

We support Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
endeavours to meet the objectives and conditions of
the Dayton Peace Agreement and the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council, which will
ultimately lead to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We support Bosnia and Herzegovina as
it embarks on a path that will lead to stability and
prosperity. The country has seen positive
developments, in particular with regard to meeting the
conditions set by the European Union for visa
liberalization and to relations with its neighbours.

However, we believe that progress should be
achieved in several areas, such as constitutional and
economic reform; the resolution of issues related to
State property, especially defence property; filling key
public positions; and the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons. That will require serious
dialogue with a view to achieving genuine
reconciliation and cooperation that will allow the State
to perform its functions. Any diversion from those
principles will have a negative impact on all parties,
irrespective of their political orientation and position,
and on the economic situation and livelihoods of
Bosnia's citizens.
In the light of the elections to be held in October,
we call on all actors to exercise restraint and to refrain
from engaging in inflammatory rhetoric that focuses on
narrow ethnic interests and magnifies divisions. With
regard to the concerning escalation of rhetoric
attacking State institutions, laws and prerogatives, we
stress the importance of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina within its
internationally recognized borders. We are concerned
over these attempts, which could compromise its unity,
and subsequently its stability and that of the entire
Balkan region.

In closing, we commend the positive environment
prevailing in the region and welcome the
announcement by Croatia and Serbia of their support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We commend Turkey for its role in
conducting tripartite talks among Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two neighbours. This initiative
will strengthen stability and good-neighbourly
relations. We cherish the hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will enjoy a future of security and
prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

