Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We wish you every success,
and you know that you can count on our full support.
Allow me also to reiterate our thanks and appreciation
to Ambassador Rosenthal and his team for their able
stewardship of the Council last month.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal

Court (ICC), Ms. Bensouda, for her report and

comprehensive briefing. We fully share the objectives

she stated and the proposed method to pursue. I would

also like to commend her for the work under way to

investigate all facts and evidence relevant to assessing

criminal responsibility under the Rome Statute

following the referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC.

In this regard, we encourage close cooperation between

the Prosecutor's office and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in all
that concerns the work of the independent international
commission of inquiry, as well as the further support
that can be provided to ensure the effectiveness of the
investigations by the Prosecutor.

We also welcome the contacts that the Office
of the Prosecutor continues to hold with the Libyan
Government and the continuing efforts to ensure that a
good level of cooperation is preserved. We will follow
very closely the consideration that is being given
by the Court to the reported incidents in Libya with
Court employees, including with the aim of preventing
incidents such as these from occurring in the future.
It is indeed crucial that those in the Court who are
involved in the investigations in the field are able to
do their work effectively and in appropriate conditions.

Portugal stresses the importance of accountability
and the need to fight impunity for serious violations of
human rights. These are universal goals that guide the
United Nations and are at the core of the international
community's concerns. We thank the Prosecutor for her
update on the ongoing cases.

We will closely follow future developments on
these procedures, bearing in mind the important
role the Statute confers on the Court in deciding
the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi following the procedural challenge filed by
the Libyan Government. We fully trust the Court in its
evaluation of the situation with a view to ensuring the
trial is undertaken in full compliance with international
standards. Likewise, we have similar expectations
concerning the case against Abdullah Al-Senussi and
the need for his prompt presentation to justice.

We also thank Ms. Bensouda for the information
provided on ongoing investigations, including on
gender crimes and the pattern of rapes identified in the
report of the commission of inquiry, and we stress in
this respect the concern of the Office for ensuring, in
its investigative efforts, the protection of victims, thus
preventing situations in which victims could be further
victimized through exposure and possible retaliation.

Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are precisely that - violations
and crimes -regardless of whoever may be found
responsible for them. Acts of retaliation, such as
those against civilians mentioned in the report, are
inadmissible. Let me once again stress that every
person has the right to a fair trial. Cases of arbitrary
arrest and enforced disappearances must stop and be
accounted for, and we welcome the continuing efforts
of the Prosecutor to address these important issues.

In conclusion, we look forward to a full and complete
investigation of allegations of all serious crimes
committed in Libya, and encourage the Prosecutor
and her Office to continue their investigative efforts in
cooperation with the Libyan authorities. We also stress,
as the Prosecutor does in her report, the need for a
comprehensive strategy on the part of Libya to address
these crimes. What is important is to ensure that justice
is done, that no impunity is condoned, and that those
responsible for such serious crimes are brought to
justice and given a fair trial.

