I thank Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their written reports and enlightening briefings. Today I would like to address three points - the efforts of the Mechanism to discharge its important mandate in the challenging environment caused by the health crisis; the essential cooperation between the States Members of the United Nations and the Mechanism; and the importance of our duty to remember future generations. First of all, I would like to underscore that Belgium remains very committed to the mandate of the Mechanism, whose work it continues to fully support. After his arrest in May, Feelicien Kabuga's initial appearance in The Hague in November gave hope to the survivors and relatives of the victims of the genocide in Rwanda, who continue to call for justice. I therefore welcome the establishment of an investigative team within the Office of the Prosecutor to ensure that the procedural steps ahead of a trial can be swiftly taken. Established 10 years ago by the Security Council, the Mechanism continues to play a fundamental role in the process of reconciliation between communities, both in Rwanda and in the countries that emerged from the former Yugoslavia. In that context, my country welcomes the measures taken by the Mechanism, to the extent possible, to continue effective and efficient operations despite the constraints associated with the coronavirus disease pandemic. We welcome the fact that hearings in the various cases were able to resume in August thanks to the use of video-teleconferencing and properly equipped rooms. Through those efforts, the Mechanism meets its priority of completing ongoing judicial proceedings in a timely and efficient manner, while taking into account the procedural safeguards and fundamental rights of the persons under its care. My second point concerns the effective implementation of the Mechanism's mandate, which relies on good cooperation with the States Members of the United Nations. It is in this spirit that Belgium recently agreed to take over the execution of the sentence imposed on a convicted person. While the cooperation provided by States to the Mechanism remains generally satisfactory, there are still exceptions. Such exceptions are unacceptable because they are not in compliance with international obligations, such as, first and foremost, the execution of arrest warrants. Therefore, following the decision of the Appeals Chamber of 24 February in the Prosecutor v. Jovo Ostoji¢ and Vjerica Radeta contempt case, Belgium calls on Serbia to make every effort to ensure that the two accused are arrested, placed in detention and transferred to the Mechanism without delay. Furthermore, it is unacceptable that requests for assistance from the Office of the Prosecutor concerning the six fugitives from the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda remain unanswered. In that regard, I would like to recall paragraph 3 of resolution 2529 (2020), adopted in June, which continues to urge "all States, especially States where fugitives are suspected of being at large, to intensify their cooperation with and render all necessary assistance to the Mechanism". Belgium supports the Prosecutor's call for South Africa to respond decisively and without delay to the requests for assistance addressed to it. We also call on the other States concerned to provide all assistance required so that the fugitives can be quickly arrested and transferred. In conclusion, I would like to refer to the situation in the countries of the former Yugoslavia. Although we welcome the progress made, it remains inadequate and varies greatly from one country to another. Regional judicial cooperation has remained marginal for years. Moreover, the denial of genocide and war crimes and the glorification of war criminals persist, which are not only contrary to the values and principles of the United Nations and the European Union but also undermine the memory of the hundreds of thousands of victims of the Balkan wars. Those practices must stop. Moreover, care must be taken to preserve for future generations the truth about the most serious crimes committed so as to prevent their recurrence.
