Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation is concerned about the
current situation in Kosovo, in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Kosovo is an integral part of the territory of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The question of
Kosovo is, in its essence, an internal matter of the Federal
Republic. It should be resolved properly through
negotiations between both parties concerned on the basis
of the principle of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

We have noted that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has taken a series of positive
measures in this regard and that the situation on the
ground is moving towards stability. We do not think that
the situation in Kosovo endangers regional and
international peace and security.
Ethnic issues are extremely complicated and
sensitive, especially in the Balkans. On the one hand, the
legitimate rights and interests of all ethnic groups should
be protected; on the other, secessionist activities by
various extremist elements should be prevented.

Many countries in the region are multiethnic. If the
Council is to get involved in a dispute without a request
from the country concerned, it may set a bad precedent

 

and have wider negative implications. Therefore, the
Council should be cautious when addressing these issues.

The priority issue in solving the question of Kosovo
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is for the parties to
start the political talks as soon as possible. However, the
draft resolution before us would not help move the parties
to negotiations. Furthermore, it is neither appropriate to
bring before the Council the differences between the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as the human
rights issues in Kosovo, nor proper to link the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia's return to the international
community with the question of Kosovo.

The Chinese delegation has stated its principled
position repeatedly in the Council's consultations. Since the
contents of the draft resolution do not conform to our
principled position, we have no choice but to abstain in the
voting. The Chinese delegation requests that its position be
placed on record.

