Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I congratulate you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. The Pakistan delegation welcomes the holding
of this open debate. I am sure that, under your able
guidance, this discussion will be productive and will
contribute to our collective efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations in one of its central
objectives - conflict prevention and the pacific
settlement of disputes.

Through the framework and vast spectrum of
modalities envisaged in Chapter VI and other

provisions of the Charter, the United Nations organs,
acting in balance and harmony, can play an important
role in preventing disputes from arising between
parties, in preventing existing disputes from escalating
into conflicts, and in containing and resolving conflicts
when they occur. The Security Council, in particular,
has to make a wider and effective use of the procedures
and means for the pacific settlement of disputes,
particularly Articles 33 to 38 of the Charter. Indeed, it
is that aspect of our work at the United Nations that
transforms into action the commitment that we the
people made in the Preamble of the Charter to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In the
maintenance of international peace and security, that is
what operationalizes the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, beginning with Article 1 of the
Charter, which, as a matter of fact, encapsulates well
our deliberations today.

Over the years, Pakistan has followed with great
interest and attachment the discussions in the United
Nations and the Security Council on the topic of the
pacific settlement of disputes. Under its presidency of
the Security Council in May 2003, Pakistan organized
a debate on the role of the Security Council in the
pacific settlement of disputes. In the presidential
statement dated 13 May 2003 (S/PRST/2003/5),
adopted in that debate, the Security Council, inter alia,
underscored that the efforts to strengthen the process of
the peaceful settlement of disputes should be continued
and made more effective. The special focus on
mediation, under the presidency of Burkina Faso last
September and with the adoption of S/PRST/2008/36,
was an important sequel to the consideration by the
Council of the pacific settlement of disputes agenda.

Let me thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/l89), which has merits and deserves serious
consideration. The United Nations has had some
notable successes in the areas of pacific settlement and
mediation, including with the support of regional
organizations and other partners, particularly in Africa.
The emphasis placed in the Secretary-General's report
on early engagement and on processes addressing the
root causes of conflicts is, in our view, one of the key
lessons learned from past engagements. It should be
accorded due priority in ongoing and future work,
strengthening and making full use of the comparative
advantages of regional, national and local capacities,
for mediation, conflict prevention, reconciliation and
dialogue are essential parts of the wider effort. In our
own region, the jirgas, panchayats and other traditional
mechanisms are considered useful and time-tested tools
for mediation, conciliation and arbitration at the local
level.

As pointed out in the report, the need for
professional mediation assistance is evident. One
cannot agree more on the imperative of system-wide
capacity-building, leadership and specialization in that
field. Maintaining a pool of mediation experts and
facilitating their deployment, when required, are
recommendations of a practical nature. The
establishment of the Mediation Support Unit and the
standby team of experts is a welcome step. The
requirement of further resources for Secretariat
capacity may also be considered.

While many of the recommendations in the report
of the Secretary-General are focused on capacity-
building and resources, important as they may be, I
would like to underline that the effectiveness of
mediation and other means of pacific settlement are
more a function of factors that are largely political in
nature. We may not be able to put the enhanced
capacity to any use if, for example, we are not able to
generate the necessary political will among the general
membership, the members of the Security Council and,
in particular, the parties to disputes to accept mediation
or other means of pacific settlement and then
demonstrate the commitment in good faith to following
through with their obligations.

Two of the long-standing situations on the agenda
of the Security Council need to be mentioned here. One
is Palestine and the other Jammu and Kashmir, which
are in ways the victims of such circumstances. It is
manifest that those disputes are such that their
continuance endangers the maintenance of
international peace, security and harmony.

On Palestine, the Security Council has been
unable to implement its own resolutions, which has
been a severe blow to its credibility. As the Council
considered this question yesterday, it was evident that a
renewed, serious and concerted effort was required to
put the peace process back on track and to rebuild the
confidence shattered by the recurrent resort to the use
of force.

Closer to home, the Council need not be
reminded that one of the earliest applications of
Chapter VI of the Charter was in the Jammu and
Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan after it
had been referred to the Security Council. Several
Security Council resolutions, accepted by both India
and Pakistan, provided that the final disposition of the
state of Jammu and Kashmir would be made in
accordance with the will of the people, expressed
through the democratic method of a free and impartial
plebiscite conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations. The Security Council also instituted several
mechanisms, including the United Nations Commission
for India and Pakistan, the deployment of the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan,
and the appointment of United Nations representatives
who consulted the parties and submitted reports on
how to resolve the dispute in accordance with the
provisions of the Security Council resolutions. Those
resolutions remain unimplemented to date. And hopes
pinned on bilateral dialogue have not been fulfilled
either. However, Pakistan remains steadfast in seeking
a just and peaceful resolution to the core issue of
Jammu and Kashmir in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We hope that India will
agree to the resumption of the composite dialogue
process between our two countries. We hope that the
international community, particularly the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, will support this
objective of durable peace and progress in our region.
In order to have a holistic view, the Security Council
should review the extent to which provisions of
Chapter VI have been utilized and implemented.
Needless to say, we cannot fully succeed in our efforts
to strengthen the conflict prevention and pacific
settlement dimensions if the Security Council is not
able to preserve and reinforce the central obligation of
Member States under the Charter to refrain from the
threat of the use of force.

Without repetition, I would like to endorse the
position of the Non-Aligned Movement, especially
with respect to the use of force, sanctions and
enforcement measures. Furthermore, the injudicious
use of Chapter VII creates the wrong impression that
non-Chapter VII resolutions are somehow not equally
binding. That, in our View, has damaged efforts for
pacific settlement under Chapter VI. Experience has
shown that Chapter VII measures are not always ideal
and may further worsen and complicate disputes. On
the other hand, Chapter VI measures seek to resolve
disputes in a manner that is harmonious and cost-
effective. That builds confidence and fosters respect
for the sovereignty of Member States, leading to long-
term and sustainable solutions.

Member States therefore need to invest more in
mechanisms for pacific settlement, promoting and
preserving peace, based at all times on the principles of
justice and international law.

