Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Since this is the first
official meeting under your presidency, Mr. President, I
would like to congratulate Bolivia on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and to wish you successful work. Likewise, we
would like to commend the United States delegation for
its very capable stewardship of the work of the Security
Council during the month of September.

On behalf of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, I would like to give a brief overview
of developments in the work of the Committee, as
requested in paragraph 46 of resolution 2368 (2017).

Since the previous joint briefing to the Council
in May 2017 (see S/PV.7936), the Committee has
continued to devote special focus to the evolving threat
to international peace and security posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and affiliates. The response to the threat must be
comprehensive and coordinated, and employ a range of
tools. The 1267 sanctions regime is an important part
of the toolbox and the Committee stays engaged with
Member States to ensure its effective implementation.

According to the latest report (see S/2018/705)
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, the threat posed by ISIL/Da'esh, Al-Qaida
and affiliates has further evolved over the past year.
Despite having been defeated militarily in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic in 2017, ISIL rallied in early 2018
and still controls small pockets of territory in Syria.
The group was able to extract some oil and to mount
attacks, including across the Iraqi border.

Meanwhile, Al-Qaida remains resilient in the
Syrian Arab Republic, where the Al-Nusra Front for the
People of the Levant may now be the strongest terrorist
group. Al-Qaida and its affiliates are stronger than ISIL
in Yemen, Somalia and parts of West Africa, while its
alliance with the Taliban and other terrorist groups in
Afghanistan is firm, despite rivalry from the local ISIL
affiliate. The sustained coalition of terrorist groups in
Mali and the Sahel is a source of concern and could
supply a model for future cooperation and exchange
among terrorists in other regions.

As of June, the strength of ISIL in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic is assessed to be between 20,000
and 30,000 members, roughly equally distributed
between the two countries. Foreign terrorist fighters
represent a significant component of the group.
Returnees and relocating fighters pose a threat in
several regions, including Iraq, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Central Asia and North Africa. Therefore,
enhanced information-sharing among Member States
is required.

At the same time, in Afghanistan ISIL is estimated
to number between 3,500 and 4,000 fighters. The group
is trying to expand its presence, despite pressure from
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and
the international coalition. Against that background,
neighbouring countries have expressed concern over the
ongoing terrorist threat emanating from Afghanistan
and increasing numbers of ISIL fighters relocating to
Afghanistan from Syria and Iraq.

The evolving threat is also reflected in the adoption
of a number of new resolutions by the Council that have
expanded the work of the Committee and the Monitoring
Team. In July 2017, the Council adopted resolution
2368 (2017) to renew the assets freeze, travel ban and
arms embargo affecting all individuals and entities

on the ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions list. In the same
resolution, the Council extended the mandates of the
Monitoring Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson
until 17 December 2021.

In resolution 2379 (2017) of September 2017, the
Council requested the creation of an investigative
team, headed by a special adviser, to support domestic
efforts or investigations carried out by authorities in
third countries, at their request, in order to hold ISIL
accountable for acts that may amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide committed by the
terrorist group in Iraq. The Council further requested
the Investigative Team to cooperate with the Monitoring
Team and with any other relevant monitoring bodies. I
met with the Special Adviser, Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad
Khan, to discuss ways in which the Committee can
assist the Investigative Team with its mandate.

In resolution 2388 (2017), adopted in November
2017, the Council reiterated its condemnation of all acts
of trafficking, particularly the sale or trade in persons
undertaken by ISIL, and underscored the importance of
collecting and preserving evidence relating to such acts
in order to ensure that those responsible can be held
accountable. The Council also requested the Monitoring
Team to continue including in its discussions the issue
of trafficking in persons in areas of armed conflict
and the use of sexual violence in armed conflict, as it
relates to ISIL and Al-Qaida, and to report to the 1267
(1999) Committee on those discussions, as appropriate.

On 21 December 2017, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2396 (2017), which underscored
the threat posed by returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters, created new obligations for Member
States to help detect terrorists' travels and directed the
Committee to devote special focus on the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters.

For all of those resolutions, it is crucial that Member
States engage with and provide updated information
to the Committee and the Monitoring Team on the
evolving nature of the threat, including foreign terrorist
fighters, listed individuals and entities, and the status
of the implementation of the sanctions measures. In
order to enhance the full and effective implementation
of the sanctions, the Committee also undertakes visits
to selected countries.

In that context, in my capacity as Chair of both
the 1267 Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), I visited
Afghanistan last year on 29 and 30 October. I was
accompanied by representatives from the Committee
and the Monitoring Team. The visit was facilitated by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
with the objective of obtaining first-hand accounts
regarding the implementation and effectiveness of
sanctions measures, and to promote enhanced dialogue
and the engagement of Afghan interlocutors with the
Committees. I also conducted visits to Singapore and
Malaysia in August 2017 and to the Philippines in March
this year to exchange information on the ISIL threat
in the region, as well as to explore how the sanctions
regime can support the South-East Asian countries
dealing with ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates.
The Committee maintains its sanctions list, updated
tofacilitatetheimplementationofthesanctionsmeasures.
Since the lastjoint briefing in May 2017, 13 individuals
and 7 entities have been listed. Five individuals have
been delisted. The Committee approved amendments to
the existing list entries of 16 individuals and 6 entities.
As of today, there are 263 individuals and 82 entities on
the ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Since the lastjoint
briefing to the Council, the Committee has decided to
delist three individuals and retain three individuals on
the basis of reports submitted by the Ombudsperson.
Currently, three requests for delisting are pending
with the Office of the Ombudsperson; two cases are
in the information-gathering period and one case is
being discussed.

The Committee welcomes the fact that Mr. Daniel
Kipfer Fasciati has recently taken up his duties as
Ombudsperson of the ISIL/Da'esh and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee. The Committee looks forward to
cooperating with the Ombudsperson, considering the
important role of his Office.

In the reporting period, I held two briefings to
interested Member States, on 17 October 2017 and on
2 August 2018, respectively. The last briefing was a
joint event for both the 1267 and the 1988 Committees.
I encourage Member States that are not members of the
Security Council to share any queries and concerns
with the Committee, the Monitoring Team and the
Office of the Ombudsperson.

I would like to take this opportunity to call upon
Member States to continue their engagement with
the Committee and the Monitoring Team, as this is
essential to maintaining an up-to-date and dynamic
sanctions list and fundamental to effective cooperation
with the sanctions regime. In that regard, I would like
to note that the Committee is conducting its annual
review for 2017. The purpose of that exercise is to keep
the sanctions list updated by reviewing the names of
individuals and entities that lack identifiers, individuals
who are reportedly deceased and entities that are
reportedly defunct, as well as any other names that
have not been reviewed in three or more years. I thank
the Member States that have provided information, as
it has proven challenging to obtain responses from all
relevant Member States.

In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates list entries based on information provided
by Member States. We encourage Member States to keep
the Team informed. I also urge those Member States
that have not done so to submit the implementation
reports mandated under the relevant resolutions.

As Chair, I would like to thank all Member States for
their cooperation with the Committee, its Monitoring
Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson.

