The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I too would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanis for Criminal Tribunals for their
participation and their briefings.

Unfortunately, an acquaintance with the periodic
reports of the ICTY and ICTR once more emphasizes
the lack of progress both in the Tribunals' approach to
their activities and in their completion and transfer of
their secondary functions to the Residual Mechanism.
At the beginning of the year, the ICTY issued appeal
judgements in the Bordevie and Sainovie cases.
Indictments have been handed down against the
backdrop of the recent acquittal in the very similar
Perisic' case.

In our view, problems have arisen that have a
significant bearing on international criminal justice,
involving in particular legal certainty and the
application ofa single standard ofjustice for all. Such an
approach to judicial activity hardly enhances the legacy
of the ICTY. There have been ongoing deferrals of the
hearings in the Stanisie, Zupljanin and Sesvelj cases.
We understand that the current situation is the result
of the disqualification of Judge Harhoff. Nevertheless,
we also understand that it is now time to overcome
the consequences of that problem. We should not like
to see his recusal become a long-standing pretext for
dragging out the work of the ICTY. In that regard, I
recall the recent election of an additional judge to the
ICTY. According to the Tribunal's report, that judge is
working on only one case, while it had been planned that
he would be assigned a heavier workload. The question
arises as to whether it was genuinely necessary to add
a judge to strengthen the personnel and effectiveness of
the ICTY?

With respect to the ICTR, the time when that body
was a model for the swift conclusion of its mandate has
come and gone. Unfortunately, efforts to shorten the
time frames for the consideration ofthe Butare case have
not borne fruit. Against that backdrop, we rightly hope
that there will be no new excuses for prolonging the
activities of the ICTR. We recognize the gravity - first
and foremost for the States of East Africa - of the
issue of the resettlement of individuals acquitted in
cases before the ICTR. That is a humanitarian problem.
We support the efforts of the ICTR management and
the Residual Mechanism in that respect, and call on
them once again to pursue their work with a view to
maximizing effectiveness.

The function of resettling acquitted individuals
in safe countries should be transferred to the Residual
Mechanism by the end of this year. The Tribunal's
management would appear to understand that. We
would warn against attempts to draw out the ICTR's
work by retaining on its docket the so-called technical
cases involving contempt of court or false testimony in
cases that have already been transferred to the Residual
Mechanism. Pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010), such
cases should also be transferred expeditiously to
the Residual Mechanism. No new Security Council
resolution is needed to that effect. We stress once again
that we remain committed to strict compliance with
resolution 1966 (2010) and are not ready to consider
reopening it under any pretext. We suggest that the work
on transferring the archives to the Residual Mechanism
should already be in full swing. No one is stopping the
ICTR from starting to implement the liquidation plan,
which is not dependent on the conclusion of the Butare
case.

It has become very clear, as we approach the
watershed moment for the Tribunals at the end of 2014,
that attempts to establish pretexts for their ongoing
functioning would taint the backdrop for December's
discussions. Continuing the Tribunals' activities beyond
2014 would require independent external experts to
look into the true state of affairs in the Tribunals in
order to make specific recommendations to address the
situation. We are pursuing relevant work to that end

with our colleagues in the Fifth Committee. We hope
that by the end of the year we shall be able to avert any
excessive complications.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

