Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad, and the
delegation of Senegal for convening this open debate
on an issue that is so important for the future of
humankind. We would also like to commend Mr. Danilo
Tiirk, Ms. Christine Beerli and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar
for their briefings.

In analysing the water issue, UNESCO indicated
in its 2015 report that population growth, urbanization,
migration and industrialization, along with increases
in production and consumption, have generated ever-
increasing demands for freshwater resources. In
addition, about 1.2 billion people live in areas where
water is physically scarce. Approximately 748 million
people do not have access to an improved source of
drinking water. Two and a half billion persons do not
have access to basic sanitation facilities, and 1 billion
people relieve themselves in the open air. An estimated
1.8 billion people use a source of potable water that is
contaminated with faecal bacteria. The farming sector
accounts for approximately 70 per cent of all freshwater
extraction globally, and more than 90 per cent in most
of the world's least developed countries. The United
Nations has also indicated that by 2030 the world is
projected to face a 40 per cent global water deficit under
the business-as-usual scenario. The consequences of
such tensions in an interconnected world will be local,
cross-border and global. In that respect, we must keep
in mind the issue of climate change, which has had
negative global impacts, and in the case of countries
in Africa its devastating effects have already been
seen, affecting health, subsistence, food, the water
supply and security in general. Such a complex reality
complicates the fragile political and security situation
in some States of the region, rendering all the more
difficult a solution through a comprehensive approach
to those conflicts.

As was indicated in the Arria Formula meeting
on the same theme in April, all of the aforementioned
elements have an significant impact on peace, security
and development. With that said, we are convinced
that we must broadly and democratically address those
elements in the General Assembly, which is the organ
mandated to address issues of sustainable development,
and water in particular.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
recognizes that socioeconomic development depends
on the sustainable management of natural resources,
including water, and establishes the commitment to
addressing shortages of water supply and water use
more efficiently. To that end, Sustainable Development
Goal 6 contains important elements and strategies
for achieving those goals. Progress towards the
achievement of these objectives will be considered
annually in the High-level Political Forum under the
auspices of the Economic and Social Council, taking
into account the indivisible, integatred and interrelated
nature of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

In that context, SDG 6 will be considered
more closely in 2018, which is why we must strive
in that framework to assess the achievements and
challenges to be overcome in order to achieve a fair
and equitable form of sustainable development in
which the three dimensions - social, economic, and
environmental - are reflected in a balanced manner.
Moreover, we must not forget that UNESCO has been
working continuously under its mandate to assure that
countries manage their water resources sustainably
through the International Hydrological Programme; the
Institute for Water Education, which is headquartered
in Delft, in the Netherlands; the more than 20 research
centres across the world; and the water-related UNESCO
chairs. UNESCO is also leading the drafting of The
United Nations World Water Development Report.

In conclusion, we wish to express that in keeping
with the times and with the solutions that the
planet requires, the search for integrated initiatives
contributes to the preservation of life and human rights
for present and future generations as a fundamental
value of the relationships and cooperation among
States in order to guarantee the establishment of ajust,
equitable and prosperous world order in the context of
sustainable development.

