Mr. Mitri (Lebanon): We have come to this body,
to the international community, asking for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire. Twenty-seven
days ago, we asked for an immediate ceasefire. More
than 900 lives ago, we asked for an immediate
ceasefire. More than 3,000 injured civilians ago, we
asked for an immediate ceasefire. We asked for a
ceasefire when the 1 million Lebanese who are now
sleeping on the floors of schools, public buildings and
welcoming homes were still sleeping in their own
homes - homes that, for many, no longer exist.

Eight days ago, in the shadow of the massacre of
Qana, we pleaded again for an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire. We are meeting today in the
shadow of yet more massacres - "mistakes", as Israel
calls crimes against civilians. Twenty-eight farm
workers were killed in Qaa, and yesterday, 38 civilians,
at last count, were killed in the bombing in Al Shiyah,
a residential area in Beirut.

I shall now quote from a report released by
Human Rights Watch:

"The pattern of attacks during the Israeli
offensive in Lebanon suggests that the failures
cannot be explained or dismissed as mere
accidents; the extent of the pattern and the
seriousness of the consequences indicate the
commission of war crimes." (Human Rights Watch, vol. 18 no. 3 E, August 2006, summary)

Today, we received the draft resolution with
acknowledgement of the efforts expended by many
members of the Council to come to an agreement. We
acknowledge their determination to end the violence,
and we appreciate the concern expressed by the
international community for the future of Lebanon,
supporting our democratic Government and its attempt
to provide a framework for peace and stability.
Regrettably, the draft resolution not only falls short of
meeting many of our legitimate requests but also may
not bring about the results that the international
community hopes it will achieve.

We requested an immediate ceasefire; what has
taken so much time is still not an immediate ceasefire.
It is neither immediate nor a ceasefire: the draft
resolution calls for a "cessation of hostilities", laying
3
out some principles. Some of those principles Lebanon
affirms and embraces. But greater clarity is needed on
many other issues; that clarity is crucial for Lebanon.

The draft resolution calls for a cessation of
attacks by Hizbollah and for Israel to stop all
"offensive actions". Members of the Council all know
that Israel has never conceded that its actions in
Lebanon have been anything but "defensive". All the
wars launched by Israel against our country have been
claimed to be "self-defensive". In this respect, the draft
resolution leaves Lebanon vulnerable to the whims of
Israel. How can this be viable? How can a resolution
provide for a cessation of hostilities and then in fact
carry the great risk of continued violence and
destruction?

Thus, for a cessation of hostilities to be viable,
Israel has to start withdrawing immediately from
Lebanese territory. This should not be postponed. The
Lebanese armed forces, with the assistance of United
Nations forces, should be the only ones to deploy
throughout Lebanon, including in the area between the
Blue Line and the Litani river. Our Government
reaffirms its immediate readiness to deploy an
Lebanese army force of 15,000 troops in the south as
the Israeli army withdraws behind the Blue Line, and it
expresses as well its readiness to request the assistance
of additional forces to enhance the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, all on the basis of the seven-
point plan that was unanimously approved by the
Lebanese Council of Ministers yesterday.

Moreover, a serious move forward in dealing with
the issue of Sheba'a farms is necessary for a durable
and long-term political settlement. To be frank, we
have had indications that the international community
is ready to move on this issue, but the draft text before
us does not sufficiently reflect such indications and
such readiness.

Our people need an explicit and firm assurance
from the international community that the integrity of
our borders - ground, sea and air - finally will be
respected by Israel. We do not need to list Israel's track
record in refusing to comply with many Security
Council resolutions. Suffice it to refer to Israel's 22-
year delay in complying with resolution 425 (1978).
Since its "withdrawal" in the year 2000, Israel has not
respected Lebanese sovereignty. Frequently it has
ignored the Blue Line, in both Lebanese territory and
airspace, with impunity.
For its part, the Lebanese Government reaffirms
its long-standing and consistent respect for
international resolutions, and also reaffirms its
determination to preserve its independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We have laid
before the Council what we think are the necessary
prerequisites that will empower our Government to
preserve our national unity as a people, to defend our
right to live in peace and to rebuild our devastated
country. To achieve those priority goals we need the
sustained support and solidarity of the Security
Council.

