Allow me first to express my thanks to today's briefers, Under-Secretary- General DiCarlo for her briefing on the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/1177); Ambassador Philippe Kridelka, as the Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015); and Ambassador Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union (EU), on behalf of the Joint Commission, for their insightful presentations. We join others in welcoming the tenth report (S/2020/1177) of the Secretary- General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). South Africa continues to welcome the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) as one of most important diplomatic achievements in the area of nuclear non-proliferation since the signing of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. The JCPOA remains an excellent example of collective action to consolidate peace through cooperation and collaboration on the basis of a binding agreement. We are also of the view that the JCPOA has contributed significantly to the reduction of tensions over Iran's nuclear programme and remains vital in promoting peace, stability and the normalization of relations. As a matter of principle and deeply rooted in its foreign policy, South Africa supports multilateral diplomacy, adherence to international law and the peaceful resolution of conflict. In that regard, we call on all parties to the JCPOA and all Security Council members to uphold and implement resolution 2231 (2015), which is essential for the Council's fulfilment of its mandate to maintain international peace and security. We therefore welcome the 21 December joint ministerial statement on the JCPOA. The JCPOA remains the only legitimate international agreement aimed at addressing the Iran nuclear issue, and also contributes to the realization of an effective global non-proliferation regime. My delegation therefore fully supports the Secretary-General's view that such diplomatic efforts must be preserved and built upon. South Africa notes the concerns raised in the Secretary-General's report regarding the steps undertaken by Iran to gradually and partially cease the implementation of some of its commitments under the JCPOA. South Africa urges Iran to fully implement its obligations under the JCPOA in order to preserve its prospect for success and to reassure the international community of the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. South Africa remains regretful of the decision by the United States to withdraw from the JCPOA, and we share the disappointment expressed by the Secretary- General on the matter in his reports with regard to the decision by the United States not to renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects in the framework of the JCPOA. In our view, the decision by the United States inadvertently affects the ability of Iran to fully implement the provisions of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). It is important to recall that the lifting of sanctions, especially on certain nuclear- related materials, was part of the JCPOA. It is important that the United States reconsider its position regarding its withdrawal from the JCPOA. South Africa calls on the EU partners to accelerate the implementation of the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges mechanism so as to ensure that Iran receives the economic benefits outlined in the JCPOA, particularly as humankind continues to be confronted with the persistent coronavirus disease pandemic, which, according to the World Health Organization, has affected more than 76 million people to date in confirmed cases and has resulted in more than 1.6 million deaths. While we commend the JCPOA as an essential instrument of nuclear non-proliferation, we reiterate that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only guarantee that they will never be used again by anyone under any circumstances. South Africa wishes to remind the Council that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing processes, and that lack of progress on nuclear disarmament will inadvertently affect the gains made on nuclear non-proliferation. We further wish to underline the importance of respecting the inalienable right of States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. South Africa is a staunch supporter of nuclear-weapon free zones as major contributors to nuclear non-proliferation and critical building blocks towards the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. In that regard, my delegation wishes to highlight the urgent need for the establishment of a Middle East free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. In that connection, we take note of the communique agreed to during the Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction, held from 18 to 22 November 2019. In conclusion, in the interest of the broader security of the region, South Africa will remain resolute in supporting efforts to resolve tensions between all stakeholders in the Gulf region and will always promote dialogue over antagonism in order to safeguard gains already made in support of the maintenance of broader international peace and security.
