Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto and Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Fedotov for their interesting briefings. I would also
like to thank Ambassador of New Zealand, Mr. Gerard
van Bohemen, and his entire team for their outstanding
efforts at the healm of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

While the Council's attention is focused on the very
serious situations in other parts of the world, the report
(S/2016/1049) of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
nevertheless serves to remind us of the huge political,
security and humanitarian challenges that that country
continues to face, in spite of the progress achieved, in
particular by the Afghan Government. As part of that
progress, I want to commend the efforts of Afghan
officials in promoting political dialogue, national unity,
peace and stability in the country. That progress has
lead to a relative easing of tensions on the political
front, as witnessed by the signing ofa peace agreement
on 29 September between the Government and Hizb-i
Islami (Gulbuddin). Such momentum towards dialogue
should be encouraged, as it could bring us closer to our
main goal of reducing the number of armed groups that
pose an ongoing threat to Afghanistan.

On the security front, however, much remains to
be done. Armed gangs and terrorist groups continue
to threaten the population and carry out attacks. With
regard to the Taliban, no tangible results have been
achieved so far, unfortunately. In fact, they have
continued, and even stepped up their offensive, with
various attacks in different parts of the country. At the
same time, we should note that the pace of asymmetric
attacks, including killings and abductions, have
increased, along with its trail of tragedy. My delegation
therefore urges that every effort be made to convince
the Taliban of the need to engage in unconditional
dialogue with the Afghan Government.

Also with regard to security, we should welcome
the growing strength of the Afghan security forces. We
should also commend the involvement of international
forces in support of the Afghan army in fighting the
Islamic State.

The security situation I have described and ongoing
challenges in combating drug trafficking,continue to
have devastating consequences on civilians and on
respect for human rights. Evidence of this, according to
the report, is the heavy price paid by civilian victims,
mainly women and children, especially during the
air strikes carried out against the Taliban in the city
of Kunduz.

In the area of human rights, while we welcome
the Government's legislation to protect women against
harassment, we would like to echo the concerns of the
Ministry of Women's Affairs with regard the persistent
obstacles that women encounter in participating
and advancing in State institutions. We call on the
United Nations to continue to take into account the
voice of women, who, as emphasized in the report,
play a crucial role in fostering a peaceful society and
challenging radical ideologies, as well as in preventing
violent extremism.

My delegation would also like to commend the
working group established by the Civilian Casualty
Avoidance and Mitigation Boards and would like the
rules of engagement to take into greater account the
safeguarding of the lives and physical integrity of
innocent civilians. I would also like to align myself
with the Secretary-General in solemnly calling for
protecting the increasing number of displaced persons.
Their quality of life undoubtedly depends on their
finding a permanent home, the allocation of land and
the provision of substantial support.

As we have seen, the Afghan Government continues
to embark upon a path of constructive political and
economic development and good governance in spite
of the difficulties that the country faces on the road to
peace and development. At this point, I would like to
make a solemn appeal to the countries of the region,
to the international community as a whole and to
private investors to intensify their efforts and increase
their support to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in their quest for economic and social
development. In that respect, we need to acknowledge
that the commitments made at the NATO Summit
and at the Brussels Conference offer opportunities
for initiating crucial reforms, particularly in poverty
reduction, governance, establishing the rule of law and
the carrying out of elections.

The surge of international solidarity generated at the
Brussels Conference, which led to pledges by different
partners in the amount of approximately $15.2 billion to
contribute to the development priorities of the country
until 2020, should be praised. Those commendable
pledges must be followed by the disbursement of the
funds so that Afghanistan can once and for all turn the
page on this dark chapter in its long and glorious history.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
support to Mr. Yamamoto and the entire Mission
and commend the Government of Afghanistan for its
efforts to promote peace, stability and development in
the country.

