Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-sixth report on the
situation in Darfur, for the unwavering commitment
that she and her staff have shown for the investigation
and for her briefing to the Security Council today.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
important role to play in global efforts to end impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern.
The United Kingdom fully supports its efforts to hold
perpetrators to account and achieve justice for victims.

The United Kingdom welcomes the reduction of
armed conflict between Government forces and the
armed opposition, as well as the extension of unilateral
cessations of hostilities by both sides to the conflict.
We are also encouraged by the improvements in
humanitarian access and the operational environment.
While the situation in Darfur is beginning to show signs
for cautious optimism, the international community
would be remiss to accept the narrative that the situation
has normalized. As noted in the Prosecutor's report, the
security and human rights situation remains volatile
and unpredictable, particularly for Darfur's 2.1 million
internally displaced persons. Also of particular concern
is the continued use of sexual violence in conflict,
although it is noted that reported incident purportedly
declined during this reporting period.

It has been said many times before in this Chamber
that lasting peace in Darfur can be realized only
with the agreement of a permanent ceasefire and an
inclusive political settlement that addresses the root
causes of conflict. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) will be vital in this regard. We note
the Government's ongoing disarmament campaign but
are concerned by tensions and armed confrontations that
have emerged as a result and that threaten to undermine
the recent improvements in the security situation.
We therefore urge the Government of the Sudan to
pursue balanced DDR and security sector reform
with full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and in close cooperation with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

With regard to the currently stalled peace process,
we urge all parties to capitalize on the recent security
and humanitarian improvements by refocusing their
efforts on implementing the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel road map.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress that
UNAMID has made in completing the first phase of
its reconfiguration and the Government of the Sudan's
improved cooperation with the Mission. However, it
is regrettable that the Government of the Sudan has
yet formally to agree to the opening of a temporary
UNAMID base in G010, Jebel Marra. Such a base would
be vital to ensuring that a smaller UNAMID is able
to focus its efforts on the Jebel Marra area, including
supporting the provision of humanitarian assistance in
that high-need area. We therefore urge the Government
of the Sudan to agree formally to the opening of the
base without further delay.

As UNAMID reconfiguration continues, it is
crucial that the Mission and the Security Council
closely monitor the impact of the reconfiguration on
the situation on the ground, as well as the cooperation
afforded to the Mission by the Government of the Sudan.
The United Kingdom therefore requests other Council
members to engage constructively in the upcoming
assessment of phase 1 of the reconfiguration and
consider carefully whether phase 2 remains appropriate.

In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), the Security
Council committed to supporting the Office of the
Prosecutor in its efforts to investigate the situation in
Darfur. In the 26 reports that have followed since, the
Prosecutor has consistently reminded us of the need for
State cooperation and the Council's support in order
to make progress in the investigation. In that regard,
we must do better. We encourage our fellow Council
members to consider carefully what more we as a Council
can do to ensure that the Court receives the necessary
support. The United Kingdom will continue to call on
the Government of the Sudan to meet its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) and to cooperate fully
with the Court to execute outstanding arrest warrants
and to fulfil its international obligations.

The United Kingdom continues to be frustrated that
fugitives of Court, including Mr. Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun
and Mr. Hussein, are still traveling to certain countries
unhindered. We note the Chamber's finding on 6 July
that, vis-a-vis the Court, the Sudan cannot claim the
immunity of Mr. Al-Bashir as Head of State in the
context of a request to arrest and surrender him to the
Court. For our part, the United Kingdom will continue
to raise our concerns with the relevant Governments,
including through the European Union, as noted in the
Prosecutor's report.

We renew our call on all States parties to cooperate
with the Court and abide by their obligations under the
Rome Statute. We also urge them to consult the Court
if they feel that they are unable to cooperate with it for
any reason.

We welcome and express our gratitude for the
continued efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to
achieve justice for victims in Darfur despite the fragile
security situation, access restrictions and lack of
cooperation. The United Kingdom also appreciated the
efforts to the Prosecutor's Office has put into making
the most effective and efficient use of the resources that
has available while recognizing the lack of resources
does impact on these investigations.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the United Kingdom's commitment to
supporting the Court, both as a State party to the Rome
Statute and as a member of the Security Council. We
thank the Prosecutor again for her report.

