Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing on the recent, very troubling
developments in Khartoum. As many other delegations
have done today here in the Chamber, let me start by
reiterating Poland's full support for the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the work of the Prosecutor.
We support her not only because we believe in
international justice, but also because we believe that
fighting impunity and providing accountability remain
a central pillar of conflict prevention and resolution,
which means that her work lies at the core of a Security
Council mandate. We could not agree more with the
Prosecutor when she said today that

"ending impunity for alleged Rome Statute crimes
in Darfur is essential to the maintenance of peace
and security in Darfur and beyond."

As noted in the Prosecutor's report, her Office relies
on the cooperation of States and others to gain safe
access to the territory where alleged crimes occurred in
order to gather evidence and to apprehend, arrest or force
the surrender of the persons against whom warrants of
arrest have been issued. We note that, pursuant to the
resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur remain
under a legally binding obligation to cooperate fully
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court and
the Prosecutor. In that regard, we hope to see progress
soon and encourage the parties to engage in dialogue
with the Office to ensure that the suspects face justice,
either at the ICC or in the Sudan, in accordance with
the principles of complementarity, fair trial and due
process. Moreover, Poland echoes the recent position of
the Court's Appeals Chamber in noting that the Sudan,
as a party to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, is legally bound
"to undertake to prevent and punish genocide". We
further note that the Court's second arrest warrant for
Mr. Omar Al-Bashir includes the charge of genocide.
Let me now refer to the situation in Darfur in
particular, and the recent developments in Khartoum
and in the Sudan in general. We recognize that in the
past six months the overall security situation in Darfur,
except for the J ebel Marra area, has reportedly remained
relatively stable. However, reports of crimes, violations
and abuses, including killings, sexual and gender-
based violence, arbitrary detentions, displacements,
destruction and theft of property, are a source of the most
serious concern. We strongly condemn the targeting,
including by Government security personnel and Rapid
Support Forces, of the civilian population, especially
the most vulnerable - women, children and internally
displaced persons (IDPs). The still very high number
of IDPs, instances of denial of access to humanitarian
organizations and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as well as the reported
looting and vandalizing of the mission's headquarters,
are also of great concern and cannot be tolerated.

Poland urges the parties to the conflict in Darfur
to stop the hostilities and violence, fully respect
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, as well as the relevant Security
Council resolutions and allow for the safe return of
IDPs. We call on all to work towards resolving the root
causes ofthe conflict and finding a sustainable solution.
Ending impunity and the establishment of truth,
justice, the rule of law and reconciliation must be a
part of it. Accountability for crimes, the protection
of civilians and respect for their fundamental rights,
as well as deterring further crimes and abuses, are of
the utmost importance for the achievement of durable
peace in Darfur, as rightly noted by the Prosecutor.
Poland encourages the redoubling of efforts aimed at
achieving the aforementioned goals. This opportunity
for effecting positive change cannot be wasted.

The events in Darfur must be perceived in the
wider context of the situation in the entire country.
Poland strongly condemns the latest use of violence
by the Sudanese security forces against demonstrators
in Khartoum, which led to many deaths and injuries
among civilians. There is no justification for the use of
force against peaceful protesters. All violence against
the Sudanese people, including extrajudicial, arbitrary
and summary killings, beatings and sexual and gender-
based violence, arrests and disappearances, must stop.
I must add that sexual violence and abuse, including
the rape of women and girls, are extremely abhorrent
and must stop. Only a few months ago, we adopted
resolution 2467 (2019) on ending sexual violence
in conflict. Although it is not considered a serious
violation of international law, it is inhuman.

All human rights violations and abuses must be
investigated in an independent and transparent manner,
and the perpetrators should be held accountable. We
expect the Transitional Military Council, which is
currently responsible for ensuring security and the
rule of law in the country, to respect the aspirations of
Sudanese society and enable freedom of expression and
assembly, freedom of the media, civic space and access
to the Internet without any threat or use of violence,
and to prioritize consensus to allow for the transfer of
power to a civilian-led authority.

As the Prosecutor observes in her report,

"Sudan is at a crossroads. Victims in the Darfur
situation have long sought justice for the horrific
crimes that they suffered. They desire to ensure
alleged perpetrators are held accountable The
eyes of the world are fixed once again on Sudan
and justice for the victims in the Darfur situation
can be within reach."

In conclusion, Poland shares the hope of the
Prosecutor and her Office that the Sudan's new
Administration will decide to open a new chapter of
cooperation with the ICC. We reiterate the call on the
Council and the States parties to lend their full and
unequivocal support to the Sudanese people, the Office
of the Prosecutor and all stakeholders committed to
ensuring peace and accountability for atrocity crimes
in Darfur. Those people, and in particular Darfur's
victims and witnesses, to whom we pay tribute, deserve
no less. They have been waiting too long.

