Ms. Busic' (Croatia): I would like to begin by
acknowledging the work of Peru as Chair of the
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. The honourable President of the International
Residual Mechanism of the Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Agius, as well as its Prosecutor, Mr. Brammertz, and
I thank them for today's briefings. Allow me to pay
tribute to former President of the Mechanism Judge
Meron, whose leadership ensured important progress
in ending impunity and pivotal achievements in the
proper interpretation and application of international
humanitarian law.

Today we mark the Day of International Criminal
Justice - a powerful reminder of the importance of
international courts and tribunals created to adjudicate
crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide and
other serious offences. Although the Mechanism was
established to carry out the essential functions of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) after their closure, it also plays an important
role in the fight against the culture of impunity and
represents an instrument for ensuring accountability.
As we have said on many occasions, accountability is
a prerequisite for peace, stability, development and the
effective protection of human rights because there is no
lasting peace without justice and no justice as long as
there is impunity.

Both the ICTY and the ICTR represent a milestone
in the development of international criminal law, having
paved the way for the creation of the International
Criminal Court, which Croatia strongly supports.
On this day - the Day of International Criminal
Justice - Croatia takes the opportunity to reiterate its
support for international justice and the prosecution of
the most serious violations of international law before
international and hybrid tribunals, as well as domestic
courts, with full respect for fair trial standards.
The Mechanism has made important headway since
the previous Security Council briefing in December 201 8
(see S/PV.8416). The Mechanism's Appeals Chamber
delivered its judgment by which Radovan Karadzie
was sentenced to life imprisonment for the crime of
genocide, crimes against humanity and violations of
the laws or customs of war. Croatia welcomed the final
judgment of one of the main ideologues and executors of
a policy of brutal aggression and ethnic cleansing, who
did not hesitate to commit genocide or other serious
international crimes against Bosniaks and Croats in
order to create so-called Greater Serbia.

The Appeals Chamber found that crimes of
unprecedented scale were committed through four
joint criminal enterprises aimed at permanently
removing Croats and Bosniaks from certain areas in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are aware that there is
no punishment that will ever fully compensate for the
evil that was done and that nothing can bring back the
lives of innocent victims. Nevertheless, we hope that
assignment of personal responsibility to Karadzic' for
some of the most horrific crimes committed after the
Second World War, such as the genocide in Srebrenica,
provide at least a minimum of satisfaction to the victims
and their families.

The verdict is a clear warning to all those who
continue to glorify war criminals that their policies
are utterly unacceptable and that they have been
internationally characterized as criminal. We regret
that the Appeals Chamber has not established the
responsibility of KaradZie as the perpetrator of
genocide in other municipalities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina besides Srebrenica, which we consider
to be an inseparable element of his criminal policy. In
addition, based on the evidence set forth in other ICTY
judgments, we believe that, in the appeals process,
Karadzie's involvement in a comprehensive joint
criminal enterprise in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
also be linked to the top political and military echelons
of the then-Federal Republic of Yugoslavia under the
leadership of Slobodan Milosevic.

With regard to the Mechanism's ongoing work,
Croatia stresses the importance of the completion of
the case on appeal of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic' and
the trial case Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisic and Franko
Simatovic'. We also encourage the Mechanism to
maximize its efforts in this regard. We note the recent
decision by the Mechanism's single judge to revoke
the referral order in the contempt of court proceedings
in the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojic and Vjerica
Radeta, requesting Serbia to transfer the accused to the
Mechanism without delay.

We underline once again the need for Serbia to
fully cooperate with the Mechanism, including by
fully accepting and implementing all of its rulings and
decisions. That is also clearly stated in the European
Commission's 2019 report on Serbia, as well as in the
18 June 2019 conclusions of the European Council.
Repeated challenges by Serbia, including at the highest
levels, to thejudgments ofthe ICTY and the Mechanism,
together with the recent rally of the Serbian Radical
Party led by convicted war criminal Vojislav Seselj
in the town of Hrtkovci - the symbol of suffering of
Croats of Vojvodina - and its overall unwillingness
to prosecute for command responsibility - meaning
those most responsible for crimes - raise the question
of whether the country has the sincere intention of
dealing with the past.

We strongly support the Western Balkans
countries' perspective on attaining membership in the
European Union. The accession process is based on
clear and well-known criteria, and full cooperation
with the Mechanism is certainly among them. Croatia
places great emphasis on continuing constructive
judicial cooperation in war matters with other States
of the region. Meaningful cooperation is not a one-way
process, and we expect other sides to show their
willingness to actively engage.

As reported earlier by the Serbian Minister of
Justice, last year the Croatian and Serbian Ministers of
Justice agreed to establish two joint commissions. One
would work on a bilateral agreement on cooperation
with regard to the prosecution of war crimes, and the
other on the exchange of lists of persons accused or
convicted of war crimes. We cannot say that we are
overly satisfied with the way things have functioned
over the past year. The commissions did engage in work
but have not yet achieved any significant progress.

Croatia's position in the matter is clear: the State
on which territory crimes were committed has primacy
in prosecution. For us, Serbia's position that crimes
committed on the territory of Croatia would fall under
Serbian jurisdiction is unacceptable. Bilateral meetings

were also held between the Ministers of Justice of
Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina this year.

The search for missing persons is a humanitarian
imperative to which we attach the utmost priority.
Croatia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2474
(2019) on missing persons in armed conflict last month
as the first Security Council resolution of its kind fully
dedicated to this issue. We commend the Council's
commitment in this regard.

Today, in Croatia, 1,892 persons remainunaccounted
for from the war period. With the aim of clarifying the
fates of missing persons, steps have been taken with
regard to cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Montenegro, but the key is cooperation with
Serbia. Unfortunately, Serbia still shows no readiness
to open up its full archival records. Cooperation in
addressing this issue is one of the key elements for
further discussion between Croatia and Serbia and is an
important criterion in the context of the negotiations on
Serbia's accession into the European Union.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Croatia's
firm support for the remaining work of the Mechanism.
While the conclusion of the appeals proceedings
in the Karadzie case represents an important step
forward in the completion of its mandate, some of the
most accountable have yet to receive a final verdict
to be brought against them. We hope that justice
in the remaining cases, which is long overdue, will
come soon. Croatia stands ready to continue to extend
its full support to the Mechanism, while expecting it to
complete its mandate in time.

