Mr. Naidu (Fiji): We congratulate the Russian
Federation on taking up the Security Council
presidency this month, and we thank you for this
opportunity to make a short statement.

Had we spoken on Friday, we would have had a
chance to personally thank and welcome Chief
Minister Alkatiri at this meeting and also to
congratulate Mr. Xanana Gusmao, President-elect of
East Timor. Nevertheless, I am sure the message will
be conveyed to both of them.

It is a fitting tribute to East Timor that her first
democratically elected President takes up this revered
calling with a landslide victory. The May 20
Independence Day will showcase the new President
and the success stories of an independent and
democratic East Timor. In welcoming the newest
democracy to the fold, Fiji will be sending our Minister
and our Permanent Secretary for Foreign Affairs to join
the people of East Timor in celebrating their history.

This debate must welcome the achievements in
East Timor to enable the Security Council to better
focus on remaining challenges before it and before the
United Nations system. Today we witness a nation that
has been rebuilt in record time. Two and a half years is
an unimaginable time frame for a nation so devastated
to gain the wisdom that would help it to reverse track
and move solidly towards democracy and towards
observance of the rule of law and human rights
standards.

Despite visible gaps in the new nation's
development roadmap, which are set out in the report
of the Secretary-General, Fiji acknowledges the spirit
of cooperation and maturity in her people. These
attitudes and the determination of the East Timorese
people have helped the United Nations facilitate a
transitional administration.

The promulgation of the constitution in March
2002 has set the foundation for governance of East
Timor when it gains independence in May 2002.
Another critical task for the fledgling nation has been
the conduct of the presidential elections. This historic
event recorded a very high voter turnout, was incident-
free, and was ably managed and conducted by an
experienced Independent Electoral Commission. Both
presidential candidates deserve praise for the mood of
unity they displayed at the start of the polls, which
must have generated optimism and goodwill in the
voters and in the election process.

The commencement of the joint reconnaissance
this week along the West Timor border marks growing
cooperation between all parties. This gives us hope that
common land borders will be fully delineated by the
end of the transition period, as was envisaged in the
drawdown plan.

We agree that infrastructure rehabilitation must
take place in parallel with community development
initiatives. The promotion of human rights, the
protection of the environment and the advancement of
women are three important pillars in this national
development. These are also key targets of the
Millennium Development Goals. We look forward to
the finalization of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for East Timor in May. This
framework can synthesise national development goals
with the forms of assistance that are available from the
United Nations system. We can be confident that such
optimal matching of goals with resources will
accelerate the necessary economic, financial and fiscal
recovery, which the Secretary-General has highlighted
as crucial for the delivery of services by the national
institutions.

New energy clearly emanates from the work of
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, which is consulting on its mandate with
the community - including former political
prisoners - over its various tasks to bring justice to
the aggrieved and to prevent future human rights
violations. The increased numbers of refugees
returning from West Timor recently signal growing
confidence in this and other developing national
processes.

Mindful of the huge gaps in the status of the
security framework in East Timor, we are heartened by
her courageous step this week in hosting a trilateral
police meeting on regional security with Australia and
Indonesia. Common concerns over human trafficking,
drug smuggling and other cross-border crimes led to an
agreement to further trilateral police cooperation.

Having noted some random developments in East
Timor, we balance our observation with a realistic
appreciation of the major areas of need come 20 May
and the end of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

With the International Criminal Court now a
reality, East Timor will draw its substantive law
provisions and regulations principally from the Court's
statute to deal with the serious crimes and atrocities
that occurred in East Timor after the referendum. The
success of this initiative depends on an effective and
able criminal justice system, an area that is really
handicapped. The institutions and judicial complement
need strengthening - in particular the Dili District
Court, which has exclusive jurisdiction over these
serious crimes. The justice system is therefore our
proper area of focus for strategic intervention to
enhance local and international confidence in it.

The Secretary-General has detailed other specific
areas of need where multilateral, bilateral, inter-agency
and private partnerships will continue to be in high
demand if East Timor is to sustain its
accomplishments. On that note, Fiji joins the long list
of those voicing support for the Secretary-General's
proposals and for authorizing the establishment of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) for an initial period of two years. We do
not wish to foreclose any future need to extend that
time frame, should the mission fall below post-
independence development goals and targets. Fiji is of
the firm View that supporting hands are indispensable
to an infant taking its first steps.

The United Nations must continue to guard its
partnership in this success story. East Timor must
remain on the United Nations agenda, notwithstanding
other pressing global crisis situations. This position
well accords with the United Nations goals of
peacekeeping, peacemaking and conflict prevention,
and with their requisite paradigm. In that light, we are
pleased to note that the key areas of focus for
UNMISET will be stability, democracy and justice;
internal security and law enforcement; and external
security and border control. Periodic reports from
UNMISET will keep the United Nations apprised as to
how the successor mission is supporting the
independent Government of East Timor. That can help
the United Nations to better gauge how the weak areas
are responding to rehabilitation, support strategies or
interventions.

Last but not least, we must give credit to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. His perseverance and
outstanding leadership made UNTAET a true success
story. We can be certain that the successor mission,
UNMISET, although far smaller in scale, will take our
collective mission to even greater heights under the
capable command of His Excellency Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, who takes up the post with Fiji's
best wishes and total confidence.

