Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui and Special Envoy Said Djinnit for their
comprehensive and informative briefings, as well as
for their continued efforts and capable leadership in
the field.

We note the significant progress that has been made
in the preparations for the holding of the 23 December
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We appreciate the efforts of the Independent National
Electoral Commission to ensure the achievement
of key milestones in the electoral process. In that
regard, the publication of the final list of candidates
for the presidential, national and provincial legislative
elections is encouraging. We very much welcome the
decision of President Joseph Kabila Kabange not to run
for office, in line with the Congolese Constitution.

The Security Council visit to Kinshasa was indeed
very useful in witnessing the ongoing preparations for
the upcoming elections in December and interacting
with all the relevant stakeholders. We thank the co-leads
for their briefing on the series of important discussions
we had during the visit.

Despite the progress made thus far, many
challenges persist. We observed a lack of trust in
the electoral process, which greatly underscores the
need to implement the confidence-building measures
identified in the 31 December 2016 political agreement.
A11 Congolese political stakeholders need to engage
positively and constructively, with full respect for the
Congolese Constitution and its institutions, to create
the necessary conditions for the holding of free, fair,
credible and peaceful elections.

We observed at first-hand what the United Nations
is doing on the ground to support the electoral process
and witnessed the readiness of MONUSCO to provide
technical and logistical support to the Electoral
Commission. We note that the Mission is carrying out
its mandate under difficult circumstances and needs all
the support it can get from the Council.
The role that MONUSCO has played in Ebola
response efforts, which include operations to address
the persistent threat of armed groups and to protect
humanitarian spaces, is commendable.

The continued activities of negative forces operating
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
remains a matter of concern. We note the outcome of
the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, held in Kampala a few days ago,
which, among other things, stressed the need for a new
approach that goes beyond existing measures to ensure
greater regional cooperation in fully neutralizing those
elements without delay.

Five years after the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, the Great Lakes region
continues to face enormous challenges. That there
is need to do more to build trust among countries of
the region is very clear. We hope greater efforts will
be made in that regard, without which no meaningful
progress can be made in realizing the objectives set out
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The Security Council should support and encourage the
countries of the region to build trust.

As we discussed last week, the Ebola situation is
quite worrisome. We appreciate the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all other
international partners that are making every possible
effort to address and contain the spread of the disease.
The World Health Organization has already alerted
us about the possible risk of the virus spreading to
other parts of the country and the wider region, with
enormous implications for regional peace and stability.
That is why there is a need for greater mobilization of
international support for the ongoing response efforts
to contain the spread of the disease. In that context,
we are planning to propose a draft resolution that will
build on the important discussion we had last week. We
look forward to engaging with all Council members on
the matter over the coming days.

