Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
those who have expressed outrage at the atrocity
committed at the Pakistani school over the past 24
hours. It seems that more than 140 young people left
their homes in the morning in school uniforms and now
lie in caskets. No political creed, no religious creed
and no military strategy justifies deliberately killing
school children. That is a crime against humanity. Our
thoughts and prayers are with the people of Pakistan.

New Zealand has consistently advocated for
strengthened cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, and there is no regional
organization where stronger, more meaningful
engagement is more important than with the African
Union (AU). We therefore thank Chad for convening
today's debate and for the useful suggestions in its
concept note (S/2014/879, annex).

As an incoming Security Council member, New
Zealand will focus its remarks today on improving
the relationship between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council Peace
and Security Council. In that regard, we offer three
practical suggestions.

First, the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council should ensure that their annual
consultations are in a format that allows for a genuine
discussion of issues and a free-flowing, constructive
exchange. That would contribute to a deepened
understanding of perspectives and greater unity of
purpose between the two Councils.

Secondly, consultations between the two Councils
must not be limited to a once-a-year dialogue. To
enable improved coordination on African issues,
there must be ongoing conversations, particularly
between the two Council Presidents. As Chad has
suggested, videoconferencing could be used for those
communications. For our part, before New Zealand
assumes the Security Council presidency in July, we
see value in meeting with members of the AU Peace
and Security Council, not least with its Chair for the
month of July.

Thirdly, there should be constant, ongoing and
better-quality information-sharing between the Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, including
on emerging crises. We see value in Chad's proposal
that African members of the Council might observe
meetings of the Peace and Security Council. We also
welcome the ideas proposed at last week's high-level
seminar on peace and security in Algeria, particularly
on finding ways to more closely link African members
of the Security Council with the Peace and Security
Council. Those ideas could be helpful to this Council's
work, including as part of the AU's wider efforts to
transmit its voice to New York.

New Zealand is committed to playing its part by
working closely next year with the so-called African
Three - Angola, Chad and Nigeria - to ensure that
Africa's voice is better heard.

New Zealand is a strong believer in supporting
African leadership in conflict prevention under Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations - efforts that
can be carried out continent-wide, particularly in the
early stages when regional organizations often have a
comparative advantage over the United Nations. For
that reason, New Zealand is significantly increasing its
diplomatic resources to engage both at AU headquarters
and in African capitals, and has contributed to recent
efforts to support African Union-led responses in Mali,
the Central African Republic and Somalia.

But in order to support AU and regional efforts
in the longer term, solutions must be found to ensure
that such missions have more dependable financing
mechanisms. The Security Council must be prepared
to take bold steps to resolve the funding and capacity
issues faced by African-led missions. New Zealand is
deeply disappointed by the continued failure to make
progress on that matter.

It is indicative of our commitment to partnership
with the African Union that New Zealand, in partnership
with the AU Commission, will launch the next African
Union Handbook at the AU Summit in January. The
second edition will be in French as well as English. It is
a great improvement over the first edition, which was
published in January. We hope that Member States will
find the Handbook to be a useful resource, in a small
but practical way, to contribute to the positive evolution
of the partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union.

