The President: I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, and in doing
so - and I hope the Secretariat will note this - bring
out what the United Kingdom sees as quite a strong
collective consensus on what has been said in this
debate.

We very much welcome the formal establishment
of the Temporary Security Zone (TSZ). This is a
crucial step in the continued implementation of the
peace Agreement between Ethiopia and Eritrea and
signifies a heightened sense of trust between the two
sides. We, like others, praise the efforts of Special
Representative Legwaila and the whole of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) in
this regard and agree that, as Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno said this morning, remarkable progress has
been made so far.

We welcome the signing of the protocol between
UNMEE and Eritrea and the signing of a status-of-
forces agreement with Ethiopia, and we call on both
sides to fulfil their commitment to the principle of
freedom of movement for UNMEE. Like the rest of the
Council, we want to see progress soon on the Boundary
Commission, on flights, on demining and on the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons. We hope
that Member States will also take note of the funding
requirements for these operations that have been noted
in the debate so far.

We encourage the Governments of Ethiopia and
Eritrea to move towards normalization and lasting
reconciliation, and we reiterate our support for the
Algiers peace Agreement, as well as the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement, signed in Algiers in June last
year

We welcome the fact that the parties have
respected the ceasefire agreement for the past 10
months. Still, there is a considerable amount to do, and
we expect the parties to live up to their responsibilities
in this regard.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi to take up any remaining points.

