Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): The Security
Council's consideration of the present grave situation
in the Gaza Strip is timely and pertinent. That situation
has seized the attention of the international community
at large. We acknowledge, in particular, the efforts of
the League of Arab States to deal with the crisis in the
Gaza Strip by holding an emergency session on the
issue in Cairo.

We would like to join other delegations in
thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Gaza.

At this juncture, our delegation will limit its
remarks to the crucial issue at hand and the main theme
of this debate, namely the current humanitarian crisis
in Gaza.

Indonesia is deeply concerned about the current
humanitarian situation in Gaza, deteriorating as a result
of Israeli actions. Fuel shortages closed down the only
remaining power station in the region, plunging the
area into darkness and leaving a third of the population
of 1.5 million without electricity. Hospitals, water
treatment facilities and food supply have been severely
affected. The Palestinian people are living in truly
appalling and inexcusable conditions.

We condemn this unjust and inhumane collective
punishment of the Palestinian people in Gaza, which
constitutes a grave breach of international
humanitarian and human rights laws. It must not go on.
Israel must lift the fuel blockade and open the border
crossings into Gaza immediately. The passage of
imports and exports and the access of humanitarian
workers to Gaza are imperative. Continuous and
uninterrupted supplies of fuel, electricity, medical and
relief items, food and water to Gaza are urgent.

Yesterday we noted the decision by Israel to ease
the blockade of Gaza for one day. It is our call that all
crossings be opened and all blockades lifted
permanently. Israel must abide by its obligations under
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law, and immediately cease all its illegal
measures and practices against the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip.

The burden that Palestinians are bearing has now
been made heavier by the continuing military
incursions and operations by the Israeli occupying
forces into Gaza. Military incursions, border closings
and continued rocket firings will not offer a solution to
the crux of the problem in the region. On the contrary,
they perpetuate the cycle of violence and undermine
efforts to create an environment conducive to the
achievement of the goals within the Annapolis
framework. All parties concerned on the ground must
exercise restraint and refrain from any action that could
undermine those efforts.

The role of the international community in
providing emergency and humanitarian assistance to
the Palestinian people in Gaza to meet their dire
humanitarian needs remains critical. We fully
commend the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the
United Nations specialized agencies, programmes and
funds and numerous non-governmental organizations
for their continued dedication and commitment under
the most strenuous conditions. Their presence and
coordinated contribution will remain critical in the
months ahead. Israel must ensure unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people in
Gaza to alleviate the situation.

Beyond immediate humanitarian concerns, we
underline the need to find ways to sustain Palestinian
economic activity, including in Gaza, and the
importance of creating circumstances that would allow
for the full implementation of the Agreement on
Movement and Access. That is particularly relevant in
view of the impact of crossings on the economic, social
and humanitarian conditions of the Palestinians on a
daily basis.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate its full
support for the realization of the two-State vision as
envisioned in the Road Map and the efforts to achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515
(2003), the Madrid terms of reference, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.

