Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
extend a warm welcome to the Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Haris Silajdzie, and to thank him for his statement
made this morning. My appreciation also goes to High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his comprehensive
briefing. I commend the dedicated efforts of Mr. Inzko
and his staff made with sincerity and passion to address
complex and sensitive issues on the ground in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its contribution to international peace
and security as a member of the Security Council since
January. The successful post-conflict nation-building
effort of Bosnia and Herzegovina is amply reflected in
its active membership of the Council.

Encouraging positive developments include the
acceptance of Bosnia and Herzegovina's application
for a NATO Membership Action Plan, with some
conditions, and the prospects for visa liberalization for
travel by citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
European Union (EU) countries.

The country's relations with Serbia have
improved dramatically, as President Siladeie and
President Tadie signed the Istanbul Declaration at the
recent summit meeting, along with President Gijl of
Turkey. We commend the flexibility shown by both
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and the important
role played by Turkey in achieving this milestone.

Japan fully supports the policy of Bosnia and
Herzegovina towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We
hope that the country will be able to meet the five
objectives and two conditions soon and that the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative will be realized at the
earliest possible date.

Bosnia and Herzegovina can advance its efforts
towards accession to the EU by accelerating
constitutional reform. In that connection, we note with
concern that neither the five objectives and two
conditions nor constitutional reform have seen concrete
progress. Certain potential causes of instability remain,
as manifested by the recent adoption of the law on
referendum by the National Assembly of the Republika
Srpska.

It is important that the October general elections
be conducted in a fair and stable environment. We urge
all parties to refrain from escalating the ethnocentric
rhetoric and to adopt a reasonable and restrained
attitude. The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
requires continued engagement by the international
community. We believe it is essential that the High

Representative make full and appropriate use of his
authority. When a negative sign is detected, he should
exercise his early warning function and hold
consultations with the parties concerned.

Japan, as a member of and major contributor to
the Peace Implementation Council, reaffirms its full
support for the High Representative's role. Japan
continues to contribute to the economic development
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to promoting human
security for every individual in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in other countries in the Western
Balkans.

