Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the
Ambassador of Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for their briefings.

Afghanistan has gone through a major turning
point in its political life with the massive turnout of
Afghans to choose their leaders in the elections of
last April and June. Unfortunately, the hope that was
kindled by the elections has evaporated with the post-
electoral political impasse that the country now finds
itself in. In that regard, we welcome the role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to help diffuse the situation by facilitating
the signing of an agreement on an audit of the votes
for the two presidential candidates - Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai. We thank
UNAMA for and encourage it in its impartial logistical
and technical support, which enabled the electoral
audit. We also welcome the efforts of Secretary of State
of the United States, Mr. John Kerry, to help the parties
to reach an agreement on national unity following the
announcement of the results.

In the same spirit, Chad supports the call recently
addressed by the Afghan Ulema Council to both
candidates, to rapidly resolve the crisis and form
a national unity Government in order to fulfil the
aspirations of the Afghan people. We reiterate our
encouragement to all sectors of Afghan society - in
particular the political parties, traditional and religious
authorities and civil society for their willingness
to engage in direct and inclusive dialogue to solve
the problem, which is the only guarantee for the
maintenance of peace in Afghanistan.

 

The current post-electoral situation should not
overshadow the major challenges Afghanistan is
facing, which require the international community's
constant support, specifically in the areas of security,
humanitarian issues and combatting drug trafficking,
terrorism and extremism. We welcome the political
and diplomatic efforts that are being carried out at the
regional and international levels for peacebuilding and
increasing security in Afghanistan, and we hope that
actions will continue in that area.

Chad congratulates the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) on its tireless efforts during
and after the elections to ensure security in Afghanistan
and on its remarkable results in combatting drug
trafficking. Given that the Force's mandate is coming to
an end, we note the importance of rapidly de-escalating
the political situation in Afghanistan so that a lasting
solution to the security issue can be found after ISAF's
departure.

Chad condemns all violence and terrorist acts
perpetrated by the Taliban, linked with Al-Qaida and
other armed groups. Those inhuman and cruel acts are
serious crimes against humanity, and their perpetrators
should be prosecuted and brought to justice. We believe
that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is
criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of the motives.

We reaffirm our support to the Secretary-
General's call to increase humanitarian assistance in
Afghanistan and to diffuse the political situation by
accepting the choice expressed by the Afghan people.
We welcome the mediation efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, who called on both of the
candidates to recognize the election results following
the agreement that they signed. We also reiterate our
request to the international community and the future
government of Afghanistan to take all necessary
measures to strengthen security after the departure of
the ISAF forces from Afghanistan in order to avoid a
situation similar to the current situation in Iraq.

Finally, we pay a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Jan Kubis, outgoing Special Representative, for his
courageous and tireless efforts as Head of UNAMA. We
congratulate Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his appointment
and wish him much success in his mission. We would like
to encourage all United Nations staff and humanitarian
actors, who, in spite of the challenging conditions in
which they are working in Afghanistan, continue to
work as best as they can to assist the Afghan people.

