Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I warmly
welcome the presence here today of His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration of
the Republic of Mali.

First and foremost, through the French delegation,
I should like to express my condolences to the people
and the Government of France in connection with the
death of one of its soldiers in Operation Barkhane, who
gave his life fighting for freedom and stability in Mali.

The Security Council's consideration of the
report (S/2017/271) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali in line with resolution 2295 (2016) is
yet another chance for us to assess the progress made
in the implementation of the Algiers Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which we in Senegal
consider to be the sole road map for moving forward.
The briefing given us by the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
whom I heartily congratulate on assuming his new
post, clearly illustrated that there is still some way to
go. We welcome the appointment of Mr. Lacroix and
assure him of the Senegalese delegation's full support
for the success of his undertaking.

It is clear that the commitment of the Government
of Mali to sparing no effort in effectively implementing
the peace agreement * a commitment that I am sure
Minister Diop will shortly reiterate - gives us a reason
to believe that, along with the resolute determination and
the mutual trust among the signatories, this will serve as
the sole measure for successful, lasting reconciliation.
We believe that the recently held conference for national
harmony is a positive step in that regard. Less than two
months from the end of the interim period provided for
under the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, and
given the slow pace of implementing various elements
of the agreement, the Senegalese delegation would like
to highlight the following points.

First, there is a need to effectively enact the interim
measures in all the areas concerned. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment of interim authorities in Gao,
Kidal and Me'naka. We hope that the same will soon be
done in Taoudenni and Timbuktu.

Secondly, beginning joint patrols is another
requirement in confronting the security challenges in
the north and centre of the country. In that regard, the
areas of Kidal and Timbuktu should follow the example
of Gao, where such patrols are already taking place.

Thirdly, it is also important to speed up the
institutional reform process, especially in the area
of security. That will make it possible to facilitate
the restructuring of the Malian armed forces, whose
effective presence in the north will help ensure
the restoration of State authority in that part of the
country, where there is growing insecurity and all
types of traffickingThe presence of MINUSMA and
Operation Barkhane in the area is already reassuring.
But they must be reinforced with a national army with
the primary responsibility for providing security and
safety for its citizens. Throughout that entire process,
therefore, Senegal insists on the need for training and
equipping personnel, especially given the new law on
military planning adopted by the National Assembly.

Fourthly, with respect to the deployment of the
quick-reaction force, and without prejudice to the
force-generation meeting to be held here on 8 May, I
can confirm that that will take place as soon as possible.
Senegal is now taking the appropriate measures in
that connection. I should also like to announce that,
two weeks from now, an assessment mission will be
conducted to determine how we can specifically ensure
the deployment of helicopters.

MINUSMA's mandate will come to an end on
30 June. With a view to its renewal, the continuing
hostile environment in which the Mission operates
must be taken into account. Given its multidimensional
character, it is clear that MINUSMA cannot be
considered a classic peacekeeping operation. Boosting
its operational capacities is clearly needed. In that
regard, I should like to recall the provisions of
resolution 2295 (2016). In paragraph 19 (d), the Council
asks MINUSMA

"to anticipate and deter threats and to take robust
and active steps to counter asymmetric attacks
against civilians or United Nations personnel, to
ensure prompt and effective responses to threats
of violence".

Senegal therefore continues to call for MINUSMA to
be adequately equipped.

I will conclude with a reminder that my country has
deployed a 425-unit reserve battalion to MINUSMA,
along with a 140-unit engineering company, two
140-unit police companies totalling 280 persons and, as
I just mentioned, the deployment of the quick-reaction
force is well under way. And I would like to reiterate
to the Foreign Minister that Mali has the full support
of the Senegalese delegation in its quest for peace
and reconciliation.

