Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I express my
strongest appreciation to the Secretary-General and to
his Special Envoy, Mr. Gambari, for their strenuous
efforts on behalf of all of us. I cannot appreciate
enough the special efforts of the Special Adviser,
Mr. Gambari, because the messages that he has
delivered to the Myanmar authorities and the
objectives of his mission as he has described them are
messages and objectives that I think all of us around
this table share. Most important of all, I would say that
they are shared by the membership at large.

His briefing today confirms that, through his
mission, he has been able to achieve the maximum
possible under the current circumstances, in 48 hours
and notwithstanding all the limitations imposed on
him. It is a fact that, as the Secretary-General has said,
a window of opportunity is now open and I make an
appeal to the authorities of Myanmar not to close it.

I am looking forward to what my colleague from
Myanmar will say to show that we are on the right
track. We are convinced that the unanimous support
lent by this Council and by the entire international
community was instrumental in the access to political
actors granted to Mr. Gambari during his mission.
Once again, cohesion, unity of vision and common
purpose have proven to be powerful driving forces. The
United Nations has reaffirmed its unique role as the
trusted and legitimate highest body of international
governance. Today I am glad to see the Secretary-
General here with us, further reinforcing this message,
and I thank him.

I will carefully report, of course, to my
Government on the content of Mr. Gambari's briefing,
which has shadows and light. It was eagerly awaited by
the entire international community and will certainly
be studied in Rome with the greatest attention, in line
with the central priorities that our Government,
Parliament, civil society and public opinion attach to
the call of the people of Myanmar for peace,
democracy and freedom.

Unfortunately, since Mr. Gambari's departure
from the country, we have continued to receive very
disturbing reports of repression. The suspension of
demonstrations has not been achieved through dialogue
and reconciliation, but rather through a ruthless
crackdown and intimidation that we strongly deplore
and condemn.

Three days ago, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights expressed, before the
Human Rights Council, her concern for the safety and
well-being of the monks and for the thousands of
people arrested in the course and aftermath of the
peaceful demonstrations. We fully share her concerns
and join her call on the Myanmar authorities to give a
full account of their actions, including precise and
verifiable information on the number of people killed
and injured and on the whereabouts and condition of
those who were arrested. Humanitarian organizations
should be given full access to detainees. A democratic
transition, to be achieved through an inclusive political
dialogue, remains the only viable recipe for peace and
development in Myanmar.

That is gradually being recognized by the entire
international community, along with the need for an
immediate release of all political prisoners and the
recognition of the vital role to be played by the United
Nations in this regard. The consensual resolution
adopted three days ago by the Human Rights Council
testifies that the peaceful voice of the demonstrators in
Myanmar has been heard and is mobilizing the
attention of the community of nations as a whole. As
has already been said by others, this Council cannot
remain silent.

We are convinced that the latest events make it
increasingly difficult to argue against the competence
of this body to address the situation in Myanmar. Our
firm belief is nurtured by the strong statements we
have heard in the past several days from the countries
of the region and in particular from the ministers of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
main subregional organization. We must continue to
engage at the highest level with key players, notably in
the region. Our special thanks goes to China for the
constructive role that it has played and, I am sure, will
play, and its influence. We are convinced that they hold
a special responsibility to promote a peaceful and
democratic solution to the current situation.

At the same time, the Security Council should
continue to be informed on a regular basis about the
developments on the ground and the progress in the
implementation of the Secretary-General's good offices
mandate. The message that must come from this
body - not necessarily, of course, from this meeting,
but certainly in the coming days - must be a strong

message of strong support to the Secretary-General, so
that we will strengthen the hand of Mr. Gambari, his
Special Envoy, in future initiatives. That is to say, we
must strengthen his hand in the implementation of the
messages that he has delivered on behalf of all of us
and in reaching the objectives of his mission. We must
strengthen his hand. I think that is what is at stake, and
I heard all those who took the floor before me
highlighting that point.

We are convinced that the Council's role will be
essential in achieving our common goals in the country
and beyond, namely reconciliation, stability, freedom
and democracy. I hereby reiterate the position
expressed by the ministers of the European Union on
the need for the Security Council to consider further
steps. On its part, the European Union has already
decided to toughen its sanctions against the regime in
Myanmar, while providing increased humanitarian
assistance to the country.

