Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): As a
country associated with the European Union, Bulgaria
associates itself with the statement to be made shortly
by the Permanent Representative of Italy on behalf of
the Union.

I believe that Bulgaria, as a Balkan country, has a
special role to play in this debate. I shall make a few
preliminary comments, beginning with my thanks to
President Meron for his briefing and, especially, to
Lord Ashdown, not only for his extremely interesting
analysis, but also for his decidedly vigourous activities
on the ground. Having heard him now for the second
time in the Security Council, I believe that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is very lucky to have such a person. He
has political, military and human experience; he has
the ideal profile to accomplish his task of ultimately
doing away with his own position and work, as
Ambassador Jones Parry said. I wish him every success
in that task.

I should like to begin at the point at which I had
wanted to conclude, because I believe that the approach
under consideration is very important. Lord Ashdown
said earlier that the European and Euro-Atlantic
prospects are like a powerful magnet for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I can confirm that on the basis of the
experience of my own country, Bulgaria. Bulgaria's
transition to a market economy and democracy - a
transition now nearing completion - would not have
been possible without this powerful magnet. One thing
is clear: The extremely arduous reforms will go faster
and truly succeed if Bosnia's European and Euro-
Atlantic prospects open up. The more these prospects
are open, the easier it will be for the High
Representative and for the Bosnians themselves.

Developments in Bulgaria, which is a
neighbouring country, should reassure the Bosnians.
Next year Bulgaria will enter the Atlantic Alliance, and
in 2007 it will become a member of the European
Union. Such developments are thus possible, although
there is clearly a great deal of work to be done, as we
have heard.
We should not underestimate the success that has
been achieved thus far. We should recognize the fact
that substantial progress has been made, despite the
problems of organized crime, the parochialism that
sometimes goes too far and the lack of focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the part of the international
community, which has been distracted by more
pressing issues. I shall not go into detail in that respect,
because Lord Ashdown has been very eloquent on the
matter.

I would like to say that the reform of the justice
system is crucial. Speeding up that process will have an
impact not just on political life in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also on the economy. No economy can
function without the rule of law and a justice system
that can arbitrate various trade disputes.

The four ad hoc commissions that have been set
up in Bosnia and Herzegovina are doing very important
work. I would like to underline the importance of the
defence sector, which functions as a cement for the
identity of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
believe that this will be a true test of the ability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to establish a viable State. In
this context, the accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to NATO's Partnership for Peace will be extremely
important and could speed up this process.

Bulgaria is an enthusiastic supporter of the
establishment of a special War Crimes Chamber within
the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, pursuant to
resolution 1503 (2003), which is endorsed by all of the
members of the Council. Over and above
considerations of the effectiveness of the work of the
Tribunal itself, bringing justice to the Bosnians
themselves will certainly have a positive psychological
impact and can only speed up the process of national
reconciliation. Clearly this process will never be
complete as long as war criminals are not brought to
justice at The Hague.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Bulgaria
will continue to support all efforts, using all its
political, diplomatic and material resources, in support
of the reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is a
neighbouring State and a friend. We are currently
contributing to the European Union police mission. The
Stabilization Force contains a Bulgarian contingent,
and the Bulgarian presidency of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which will begin
on 1 January 2004, will accord priority to support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular in the judicial
field.
