Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, as other speakers have done before me, I would
like to express my delegation's gratitude to the Chairs
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) - namely,
Ambassadors, Thomas Mayr-Harting, Ertugrul Apakan
and Claude Heller. I would like very much to commend
them and their teams, who have demonstrated constant
commitment in the course of the past two years.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of the
delegation of the European Union on behalf of the
Union. Allow me to say a few words about each of the
three Committees.

With regard to the 1267 Committee, we have
come to the end of a process that involved two
ambitious tracks, as mentioned by the representative of
Austria. Throughout that process, France has sought to
improve the efficiency of the sanctions regime, both as
a counter-terrorism tool and to strengthen its
legitimacy by taking into account the rights of listed
persons as much as possible. We must ensure that the
reforms set forth in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904
(2009) are fully implemented so as to restore balance
to the Committee's procedures in order to better take
into account the fundamental rights of individuals and
entities on the list. It is also essential that members of
the Committee cooperate as far as possible with the
Ombudsperson, an independent and autonomous body.

The new legal context leads us to reflect on a new
reform of the Committee that would reflect the
concerns of all members of the Security Council and
make it possible to preserve the current sanctions
regime. It seems to me that that would be the best way
to respond to recent criticism of the 1267 sanctions
regime. To condemn the regime is to draw the wrong
conclusions from the current situation. We must all
preserve the authority of the Security Council and
defend its actions in fighting terrorism.

Current events from the Sahel to Pakistan have
shown that we need more than ever an coordinated
international response against the terrorist threat. We
are convinced that the Committee can play an
important role in the inter-Afghan reconciliation
process with those who have chosen to renounce
violence, cut ties with international terrorism and
respect the Afghan Constitution.

Secondly, the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
in recent months continued to refocus on more
strategic tasks. It has highlighted specific difficulties
related to various regional contexts, as well as issues of
concern to all Member States, such as border control,
the financing of terrorism, incitement to terrorism and
judicial cooperation. France is very committed to the
Committee's in-depth work with each Member State of
the United Nations. For us all, that is a way to ensure
that the international measures we take are as effective
as possible.

This year, Ambassador Apakan has organized
several meetings open to all Member States on specific
subjects, which made it possible to share the results of
the Committee's work as widely as possible. We would
like the Committee to continue this information-
sharing work and develop, together with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, a guide of good
practices in the most sensitive areas that would be
accessible for all.

Whatever the commitment of the Chair of the
Committee, it is as effective as it is because it can rely
on the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). In just a few years, the CTED has
become a key body of the United Nations for
countering terrorism, and many States have benefited
from technical assistance thanks to its assistance. Of
course, we shall support the renewal of its mandate in
several weeks.

Finally, I turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction continue to be a major
threat to our security. Resolution 1540 (2004) provided
the Council's concrete and appropriate response to that
threat, which, of course, does not exclude actions by
other bodies. Together with Germany, France presented
in the First Committee this year a draft resolution on
preventing the acquisition by terrorists of radioactive
sources (A/C.1/65/L.46), which was adopted by
consensus. I would also like to recall the holding in
April of the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington,
D.C., which gave political impetus at the highest level
to efforts to counter nuclear terrorism. We welcome the
new summit is to be held in 2012 in Seoul.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is now well established
in the United Nations landscape, but we must pursue
our efforts to implement it effectively. The 1540
Committee remains a crucial tool in this effort, and we
hope that its mandate will be renewed after 25 April
2011. We must also increase the visibility and
effectiveness of the Committee. The Mexican
chairmanship and the Group of Exerts have spared no
effort to that end, and we thank them for that.

One area where particular progress could be made
is assistance. As the Council knows, my delegation
coordinates the working group on this subject. Some
progress has already been made, and we now have an
effective follow-up mechanism for offers of and
requests for assistance. We have just adopted
procedures to rationalize, improve and accelerate our
response to these requests. Other areas in which we are
working include developing specific visits to some
countries, but we need the help of States for the
Committee to play its role as an effective mediator.
Here, I would appeal to all of those who offer or
receive assistance in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) to so inform the Committee.

For its part, France will make the most of its
presidency of the Group of Eight to encourage
continued reflection on supporting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), in particular with respect to
offers of assistance.

The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF) continues its work in coordinating with
different actors, including the three Committees that
we are discussing today. We welcome the appointment
of its Chairman as the Director of the CTITF Office.

The strengthening of the Office will allow it to better
enhance its actions to implement all the pillars of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The review of the
Strategy, which has been under way since September,
has been an opportunity to welcome the effectiveness
of the Task Force. Once again, I welcome that work
today.

