Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The current situation in Libya is complex, sensitive and fragile and is seriously affecting the security and stability of neighbouring countries and the region as a whole. China supports the continued leading role of the United Nations in promoting a Libyan-led and Libyan- owned political process. We call on all parties to the Libyan conflict to achieve a lasting ceasefire as soon as possible. We appreciate the constructive actions taken recently by the international community to ease the situation in Libya. The recently held Berlin Conference on Libya issued a communique that reflects the important consensus reached by the participants. The Security Council's endorsement of the communique will contribute to an early peaceful settlement of the Libyan question. In the light of that, we adopted resolution 2510 (2020), on which China voted in favour. China takes note of the fact that the resolution was not adopted unanimously. We believe that the views of all sides should be fully respected during consultations in order to reach consensus and maintain the unity of the Council. That is the only way for the resolution to yield the maximum positive effect. We hope that all parties in Libya, relevant countries in the region and the international community will work together for the earnest implementation of the Berlin outcome. In that process, the Secretariat should develop a plan of action that fully reflects the leadership and ownership of Libyans, accommodates the concerns of all parties and leverages the positive role of the countries concerned. China supports the African Union and the League of Arab States in bringing their unique influence to bear on a political settlement to the Libyan question and in working in synergy with the United Nations. In the implementation of the outcome of the Berlin Conference and the Council's' resolution, the international community should remain highly vigilant against terrorism in and around Libya, resolutely combat all forms of terrorism in the country and prevent the cross-border movement of foreign terrorist fighters. We must prevent Libya from becoming a breeding ground for terrorism, the spread of which can jeopardize the country's peace process.
