Mrs. Robinson: May I begin by wishing the
Security Council a very happy and fruitful new year.
May I also join in welcoming the new members of the
Council.

I am honoured to address the Council today from
Kinshasa, where I am holding meetings with the senior
leadership of the country with the view to advancing the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. I am meeting with President Kabila
later this afternoon, so I may indeed have to slip away
a little early from this meeting. I apologize for that but
trust that the Council will understand.

My last briefing to the Council, on 11 December
2013, took place in the aftermath of the military defeat
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and preceded
the successful conclusion of the Kampala process,
with the signing by President Museveni and President
Joyce Banda, in Kampala, which I had predicted would
happen on 12 December.

The reality today is that the positive atmosphere
that then prevailed has vanished, as Martin Kobler
has outlined. The region is going through a period
of renewed turbulence. On 25 December, the Allied
Democratic Forces rebel group attacked the town of
Kamango, an attack during which more than 50 people
were killed. On 30 December, the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo repelled a series
of coordinated attacks in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi and
Kindu, leading to the death of more than 100 people.
My colleague has outlined that in more detail. In the
meantime, as Council members will be aware, the crisis
has continued in Central African Republic and fighting
erupted in South Sudan between the Government forces
and the rebels loyal to former Vice-President Riek
Machar.

As we approach the first anniversary of its signing,
and despite the fragility of the situation in the region,
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
remains our best hope for achieving sustainable peace,
security, cooperation and development in the Great
Lakes region. However, it is essential that the pace of
its implementation be increased in order to maximize
its impact.

In the past year, the signatories of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework achieved some
progress in putting instruments and tools in place for
its implementation. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the national oversight mechanism, established
by President Kabila to oversee the implementation of
the national commitments, is functioning and requires
further strengthening. In addition, a national dialogue
involving the majority of political parties was held and
a monitoring committee, co-chaired by the Presidents
of the two chambers of the National Assembly, was
put in place to follow up on the implementation of its
outcome. Despite the military defeat of the M-23, the
Kampala process between the Government and the
M-23 rebel groups reached a political conclusion, which
was vital to securing a good future.

At the regional level, the Technical Support
Committee was established in May. It worked to develop
regional benchmarks, which were adopted by the Heads
of State during the second meeting of regional oversight
mechanism in September in New York. On 8 and
9 January, the Technical Support Committee concluded
the formulation of an action plan, including 15 priority
activities, which will be submitted for adoption to the
next meeting of the regional oversight mechanism,
scheduled for 30 January in Addis Ababa, during the
African Union Summit.

The development of the plan of action is structured
around the seven regional commitments and the
associated benchmarks endorsed by the regional
oversight mechanism in September 2013. For each
commitment and under each regional benchmark,
there is a matrix that includes a list of activities to be
undertaken prior to September 2014. Clearly, ownership
will be taken of the process, there is a commitment to
action and there is a willingness to be monitored and
made accountable for that action, which I believe is
solid progress.

While all the achievements that I have just
mentioned are important steps, it is now essential that
the signatories focus strictly on the implementation of
national and regional commitments in order to generate
the required peace dividends and effect the promised
changes in the Great Lakes region.

At the national level, efforts to reform the security
sector should be significantly increased and accelerated.
This would be essential for the expansion of State
authority, particularly in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Another key priority is, as Martin Kobler
has said, the swift implementation of an effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme to disarm and reintegrate the former
combatants of the M-23, including those who are in
Uganda and Rwanda, and all the other fighters who
have voluntarily surrendered. A prolonged presence
of those ex-combatants in cantonment areas without
reintegration could persuade some of them to return to
an armed group, so time is of the essence.

Should the Parliament of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo adopt the amnesty law, as is profoundly
hoped, the urgency to deal with the DDR caseloads
would become more pressing. Furthermore, it would
be crucial for the Independent National Electoral
Commission to deliver timely and credible local
elections at the end of this year. I had a good meeting
with Abbot Apollinaire Malu Malu Muholongu and
members of the Commission this morning, in which I
encouraged more clarity on the electoral timetable and
the budgetary provisions.

While these commitments are to be implemented
under the leadership and ownership of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is clear
that the process would require the support of donors
who have already expressed their readiness to
engage the authorities. During my current visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I have encouraged
the Government to designate as early as possible an
interlocutor to interact and work with the international
partners, including with a view to developing a mutual
accountability mechanism.
I have also encouraged the Government to align the
roles and responsibilities of the monitoring committee
on national consultations with that of the national
oversight mechanism to create greater coherence
between those structures and avoid possible duplication
of efforts. Furthermore, I insisted on the need to closely
incorporate civil society into the implementation
process of the national commitments, particularly by
utilizing the existing consultative mechanism provided
as part of the national oversight mechanism.

At the regional level, signatory countries must also
begin implementing their commitments. It is now the
moment to work towards achieving further economic
integration, including by agreeing to implement cross-
border economic initiatives, which would benefit the
entire region. The World Bank has agreed to fund
several regional projects in support of such efforts. In
this regard, I also plan to organize, together with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), a regional private sector investment forum
in the first half of 2014. The forum will seek to build
on ongoing initiatives to increase opportunities for
investment and job creation in the Great Lakes region.

Concrete confidence-building steps will have to
be taken by the countries of the region, in particular
by making sure that none are harbouring individuals
responsible for grave human rights Violations, giving
any kind of support or assistance to armed groups or
interfering in the affairs of a neighbouring country. As
my partner in peace Martin Kobler has indicated, there
is worrying evidence that these commitments are not
yet being fully implemented by Rwanda and Uganda.

Increased dialogue among the leaders of the region
also needs take place. In this regard, it is my intention
to help establish a mediated dialogue among relevant
Governments and stakeholders through which some of
the difficult issues can be discussed. It is the concrete
implementation of national commitments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and commitments at
the regional level that would lead to sustainable peace
in the region, and this cannot wait any longer.

Following the conclusion of my visit in Kinshasa,
I will travel to Luanda tomorrow morning to attend
the summit of Heads of State of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. While there,
I will have an opportunity to brief the ICGLR member
States, most of which are signatories of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, on the plan of
action that they would be asked to adopt in a couple of
weeks time at regional oversight mechanism meeting
in Addis Ababa. I will reiterate to the ministers and
Heads of State the message that I have conveyed to the
Council today - it is time to tackle the tough decisions
that would actually make a difference.

In just over two weeks, the regional oversight
mechanism will meet for the third time. The meeting
will take place on 30 January in Addis Ababa, on the
margins of the African Union Summit. The Heads of
State are expected to review and adopt the plan of action
for the implementation of the regional commitments.
They are also expected to welcome Kenya and the
Sudan as new signatories to the Framework. Finally,
they will discuss my proposal to hold a private sector
investment forum for the Great Lakes region in the first
half of the year.

On the margins of the Summit, I will launch the
Great Lakes women's platform. The launch is planned
to take place at the ministerial segment of the African
Union Summit in Addis Ababa. With the platform, I
hope to help empower women in the region to ensure
effective monitoring and advocacy of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework - at both the
regional level and that of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - and the implementation of regional and
national plans of action, under resolution 1325 (2000),
to combat violence against women, support women
affected by violence, and ensure women's livelihoods,
development and access to clean energy at the local
level.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
is at an important juncture. Almost one year after it
was signed, it continues to hold promise for peace
and stability in the region. However, what is most
important for meaningful progress is the immediate
implementation of all commitments at the national and
regional levels in order to bring about concrete peace
dividends and lasting improvements in the lives of
the people of the region. I look to the members of the
Security Council to continue their strong support to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and their
encouragement to all signatories to fully implement I now invite Council members to informal
their commitments. consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

