Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Several member States of the Rio Group have already
spoken in this open meeting of the Security Council on
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait and two
additional non-members of the Council will speak later.
I shall therefore limit myself, in my capacity as the
acting secretary of the Rio Group, to highlighting some
of the principles of greatest importance to the members
of the Group.

The members of the Rio Group, fully committed
to multilateralism and to the principles embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations as basic rules of conduct
in international relations, reiterate their confidence in
multilateral mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

The members of the Rio Group confirm their
confidence that, in the face of the topic under debate in
this public meeting, the Security Council will ensure
respect for the principles and norms of international
law. Likewise, the members of the Rio Group are fully
certain that the Council will apply all necessary
measures and use all appropriate means available in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations to
induce Iraq to comply with its resolutions,
safeguarding the interests of the international
community.

The resolutions of the Security Council must be
complied with as provided by the Charter. We cannot
permit any excuses of any nature in the fulfilment of
that obligation. Therefore, the Rio Group calls for full
and immediate compliance by Iraq with the resolutions
pertaining to disarmament of its weapons of mass
destruction.

The Rio Group urges Iraq to cooperate without
conditions or restrictions with the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) in accordance with resolution 1284
(1999), the other relevant resolutions adopted by this
organ, the practical agreements on resumption of
inspections agreed upon by the Government of Iraq, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
UNMOVIC in Vienna on 1 October 2002, and other
measures that this Council may so adopt.

The Rio Group stresses its full support for the
work of Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the
Commission, and his technical team. We note that the
legitimacy and effectiveness of the Commission
depend upon its impartiality, in keeping with paragraph
6 of resolution 1284 (1999). The Rio Group calls on
the Security Council to strengthen UNMOVIC in order
to permit the mission to verify the existence of
weapons of mass destruction on the Iraqi territory and,
should they be found, to ensure their destruction.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Rio Group, I wish
to express our satisfaction for the convening of this
public meeting of the Council that makes it possible for
Member States to express their opinions and views on a
situation that is of crucial importance in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

