Mr. Mbalati (South Africa): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you, Madam
President, and your delegation for having convened
this important debate on the theme of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We also wish to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
respective briefings today.

For far too long, many civilians have suffered
owing to a lack of protection during armed conflict.
Despite a range of efforts by the Council to address the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
we concur with the Secretary-General's conclusion that
our record in that regard is very poor.

Protection for the civilian population is a
fundamental principle of humanitarian law. Sadly,
despite the provisions embodied in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, which have been ratified by almost all
nations, their 1977 Additional Protocols, other bodies
of international human rights law and our respective
national laws, civilians are increasingly becoming
the victims of armed conflict and other situations of
violence.

The continued deliberate targeting of civilians
through such acts as extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearance, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture,
sexual and gender-based violence and the recruitment
of child soldiers have all become widespread in areas of
conflict, creating an atmosphere of fear aimed at further
destabilizing and displacing civilian populations.

The International Committee of the Red Cross has
reported that in 2012 alone there had been 900 cases in
22 countries of attacks on humanitarian workers, health-
care facilities and health-care workers. In many cases,
those attacks were fatal. Another alarming feature of
armed conflict is the threat posed to the safe delivery of
health care. It is through our collective efforts that such
senseless acts can be put to a halt. We remain steadfast
in our commitment to our international obligations
and, as such, will co-host an international workshop on
the theme "Health care in danger", intended to draw
attention to the plight of health-care workers in armed
conflict and other situations of violence.

It will be recalled that, in 2000, we co-hosted, along
with the International Committee of the Red Cross, a
regional seminar on international humanitarian law,
with the objective of reviewing the ratification and
implementation of international humanitarian law
and discussing developments in the field. The lack of
awareness of international humanitarian law remains a
critical challenge in many States, including in Africa.

Progress in advancing the protection of civilians
will also depend on the consistency with which the
Council pursues that goal. Selectivity gravely limits the
credibility of the Council in advancing mandates for
the protection of civilians and seeking accountability.
The Council cannot be seen to place the value of some
civilians above others'. While we underline that it is
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their borders, an important element of protection
is prevention. Armed opposition groups also bear
responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians are
protected, and failure by both State and non-State actors
to uphold this responsibility should not go unpunished.

We wish to re-emphasize that accountability
must first and foremost be sought at the national
level. It remains the sovereign responsibility of States
to determine what their judicial mechanisms are in
ensuring accountability. Failing that, the international
community has a collective responsibility to act, with
the utmost adherence to international law, in accordance
with the purpose and principles of the Charter, as
prescribed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome and the
Constitutive Act of the African Union.

It is for that reason that, as peacekeepers, we cannot
continue to watch civilians being killed, maimed, raped
and displaced. In that regard, the Intervention Brigade
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which was piloted by the Southern African Development
Community and endorsed by the United Nations, is an
unprecedented innovation that could eventually serve
as a model for the United Nations in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

In conclusion, South Africa remains unwavering in
its commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The protection of civilians is an important
objective that will only be made sustainable by enhancing
the capacities of States emerging from conflict in the
long term. The objective ofpeacekeeping should always
be to assist countries to end conflicts by empowering
them through security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
the training of effective and professional national
security forces in order for them to assume eventual
responsibility over their territories.

