Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): The adoption of the
draft resolution on which we will vote today is a critical
step forward in the Council's consideration of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is a clear
demonstration of the Council's readiness to build on the
momentum of January's open meeting. And in practical
terms, it creates a framework for the United Nations and
the international community to take a substantive role in
resolving the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Now we must press on and get results. The United
Kingdom wants to see the Secretariat move ahead as
rapidly as possible to deploy the expanded United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC) which we will authorize today. But as
the draft resolution spells out, that deployment can
proceed only in parallel with implementation of the

 

Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. Even after the momentum
generated by Ambassador Holbrooke's initiative in January
and by the commitments then made in this Chamber by
regional leaders, the situation on the ground does not look
promising.

The fighting must stop now. International humanitarian
law must be respected. We are in particular extremely
concerned about the situation in the Kivus, to which the
representative of France just referred. There is a risk of a
humanitarian catastrophe. The increasing ethnic tension
there threatens the entire population. This is a stark
reminder of why the Lusaka Agreement has to be made to
work, and why effective disarmament, demobilization
resettlement and reintegration are crucial to future peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the region. It is essential that all the Lusaka parties take
action now to defuse the situation in the Kivus. The
rearming and resupply of armed groups and ethnic
propaganda must stop now. And the United Nations must
be granted access to deploy in the region.

The United Kingdom also believes that it is imperative
to move forward on all the political as well as the military
elements of Lusaka. It is vital that an open, inclusive and
democratic national dialogue on the future of the Congo get
under way as soon as possible. And a programme for the
comprehensive, voluntary and peaceful disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration of armed
groups - without which the Lusaka Agreement cannot
succeed - must be elaborated and agreed. Clearly, synergy
between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity in all these areas is vital.

The parties must also cooperate with MONUC. Access
and security must be provided for the United Nations
mission and for aid agencies. The parties must ensure that
the right conditions are in place for MONUC's deployment
to the four designated sites. We are most concerned that
access has not yet been granted to MONUC to conduct
reconnaissance and survey activities in the proposed
deployment sites. This is unacceptable. We strongly endorse
the elements in the draft resolution that make it clear that
deployment must go forward only when the
Secretary-General is satisfied that the conditions are right,
and that he should keep the Council fully informed of
progress in this area.

Finally, we welcome the recognition in the draft
resolution of the need to address profiteering from and
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the links between such activities
and the continuation of the conflict. We must also look
urgently at ways of strengthening existing relevant United
Nations arms embargoes, as well as other means to curtail
the supply of arms to the region.

