Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing this morning. We also
thank Foreign Ministers Ivan Mrkie and Enver Hoxhaj
for their statements.

We admire the courage and foresight of the leaders
of Serbia and Kosovo and their commitment to working
for peace in the region. The situation is complex,
historical legacies are rife with mistrust and suspicion
and expectations are mismatched. And yet the two
sides choose to opt for dialogue, mediation and the
implementation of the agreements they have concluded.

We agree that the problems that have plagued
the region will not vanish overnight. That is why we
still need diplomacy and continued investment in the
efforts aimed at reconciliation. Progress is being made
in the follow-up to the normalization agreement and
implementation plan. Both sides have voiced complaints
today, but they also demonstrate the commitment to
forge ahead against difficult odds. There are strong
indications that the current process could pave the way
for the two countries to live side by side as peaceful
neighbours. In that regard, we would especially like
to express appreciation for the pivotal mediation role
played by the European Union and High Representative
Catherine Ashton. The decisions of the European
Council in June to open accession negotiations with
Serbia and stabilization and association agreement
negotiations with Kosovo are welcome developments.
Both Pakistan and the United Nations believe the
European Union remains an indispensable catalyst for
the process of normalizing relations between Serbia
and Kosovo.

We see the role of the United Nations as an
enabler, facilitator and impartial arbiter. The Kosovo
Assembly's ratification of the normalization agreement
and approval of the amnesty law will definitely help
promote reconciliation. Amendments to the laws on
local self-government, the rights of communities
and the budget would help the implementation of the
Belgrade-Pristina agreements.

In the interest of peace and the progress of future
generations, all sides must reciprocate the spirit of
accommodation. The Kosovo Serb leadership should
participate in the management team to guide the
implementation of the 19 April agreement and the
creation of the future municipalities. Those efforts
should be supplemented by Pristina's outreach and
assurances to the local population. It is important that
the local Kosovo Serbs see themselves as stakeholders
in the process. Outreach efforts by the leadership of
Serbia to northern Kosovo Serbs are important. Leaders
on both sides should continue to work together to build
support for the implementation of the agreement among
their communities and constituencies.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/444)
notes that the overall security situation in Kosovo has
remained generally calm and that there has been a
decline in incidents affecting the minority communities.
That is good news and may well be early evidence of
a peace dividend for the region. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, under the
leadership of Special Representative Zarif, continues to
play a critical role in the stabilization of Kosovo. We
particularly appreciate its mediation and facilitation
efforts in northern Kosovo.

Recognition of Kosovo as a State is a key question.
One hundred United Nations States Members have
already done so. Pakistan recognized Kosovo late last
year.

The most important step towards normalization and
reconciliation will be formal inter- State communication
between Serbia and Kosovo. That is a difficult step and
we know the sensitivities involved, but it would ensure
full rapprochement. We wish Prime Ministers Thaci
and Dacic' success in the difficult road ahead. We are
confident that their commitment and dedication, and
the dedication of the people of the two countries, will
ensure sustainable harmony and peace.

