Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): South Africa
would like to thank Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her informative briefing
on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, which clearly illustrates
the added value that regional organizations provide to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

The international community, including the EU and
its member States and millions of their citizens, played
an indispensable role in the liberation of all South
Africans and in the fight against the apartheid regime.
None of that progress would have been possible without
the efforts of regional and international organizations.
That is why multilateralism is today a core pillar of
South Africa's foreign policy, which also underpins our
belief in the strengthening of multilateralism through
inter-organizational cooperation. In that regard, I
wish to touch on three major areas of focus - first,
the African Union-European Union-United Nations
trilateral cooperation arrangement; secondly, the
importance of elevating the women, peace and security
agenda; and, finally, the funding of peace operations.

At the third African Union-European Union-United
Nations trilateral meeting, the joint communique
stated that the parties to the trilateral cooperation
arrangement intended to increase their coordination
and cooperation at the political, economic and
operational levels on a range of issues, including in the
areas of peace and security, in particular on conflict
prevention and mediation, as well as on implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU). Through that
trilateral arrangement we also hope to highlight the
nexus between peace and security and development by
promoting and ensuring sustainable growth, advancing
human rights and addressing issues of climate change
and migration, as well as supporting the implementation
of AU and United Nations reforms.

Of particular importance to South Africa is the
role of women in peace and security. That is another
area that was stressed by the AU-EU-United Nations
meeting, with reference to initiatives to support
women's equal and meaningful participation, including
leadership in political and peace processes at all levels
and in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
South Africa also appreciates the focus of the European
Union on women and peace and security. Too often,
women and peace and security issues are treated as
soft issues. However, they are an integral part of the
peace and security agenda. Mainstreaming the women
and peace and security agenda into broader peace and
security perspectives will have a positive impact on
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and on post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

Allow me to make a third and final point. The
adequate funding of peace missions has a significant
influence on the effectiveness of how the Council
prevents and responds to conflict situations. The
AU-EU-United Nations leaders were cognizant of
that reality. They also indicated their intention to
reflect together on how to ensure the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for African
Union-led peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we wish
to acknowledge and welcome the contributions the EU
makes to peacekeeping missions. That invaluable role
has been most evident in Africa, where the EU has been
involved in capacity-building, training and providing
resources while working closely with the AU and the
United Nations.

South Africa, through the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union, will
continue to promote inter-organizational cooperation,
as it fosters multilateral efficiency, openness and
dialogue. We thank the EU and appreciate its efforts
in that regard. We look forward to even closer
collaboration among the AU, the EU and the United
Nations in the future.

