Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on Italy's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. You and your
team can count on our full support. We also wish to
thank the Permanent Representative of Indonesia for
his important work as President last month.

China wishes to thank Prosecutor Moreno-
Ocampo for his briefing and commends the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for its efforts to
resolve the problem of impunity in Darfur, Sudan. The
causes of the problem in Darfur are complex. Any
settlement plan must ensure that the correct solution is
found.

After years of dealing with the issue, the
international community's approach to resolving the
problem of Darfur is continuing to develop. Currently,
the consensus on all sides is that, in dealing with the
Darfur problem, we should comprehensively address
all its aspects - political, security, humanitarian,
development and judicial. We must strike a balance in
undertaking measures involving those aspects.
Appropriate and sound decisions should also be taken
on the basis of the priorities involved at various times.
Even more important, all aspects of such efforts should
be complementary and mutually reinforcing, not
truncated and isolated.

From the very outset, China has believed that the
most urgent aspect of resolving the problem of Darfur
is to stabilize and improve the security situation. At
this point, the international community is moving
forward with its two-track approach and accelerating
the deployment of the Hybrid Operation on the ground.
At the same time, it is striving to move forward the
political negotiations on Darfur. That is now the overall
objective in the Darfur situation, and work on all other
aspects should contribute to its attainment.

China supports the international community's
continuing efforts to resolve the problem of impunity
in the region. We hope that judicial bodies in the Sudan
will continue to make efforts in that regard. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to continue to
step up its communications, establish mutual trust and
strengthen cooperation with the ICC.

In our view, it is only through an improvement of
the situation in Darfur and the stabilization of the
political situation that the problem of impunity can be
resolved. Only then will judicial fairness be
fundamentally achieved. The ICC became involved in
the problem of Darfur on the basis of a Security
Council resolution mandate. Its work should also
complement the efforts of the international community
to advance the political process and deploy
peacekeepers. It is necessary to seek and obtain the
support and cooperation of the Sudanese Government.
To ignore the overall political and security situation
there, simply stress ending impunity and push solely
for mandatory measures is an approach unlikely to
result in cooperation and support from the Sudanese
Government. It would also hardly be conducive to the
overall efforts of the international community to
resolve the problem of Darfur.

Ending impunity is an essential component of
resolving the problem of Darfur. We support the ICC in
playing a constructive role and hope that the Security
Council will achieve a comprehensive resolution to the
problem of Darfur.

