Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (Spoke in Arabic): I have
been speaking in Arabic during our meetings because
it is the official language of my country, but today I
will speak in English, because I am speaking on behalf
of all of my colleagues, and Ethiopia and Senegal
in particular.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the African
countries that are members of the Security Council,
that is, Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's meeting to consider the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507. We
believe it represents an important opportunity for
Council members to go on the record with reflections
on the work of the Council during the past month.
On behalf of the African members, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your stewardship
of the Council, and for a job well done during a very
busy month, with many achievements.

The African members of the Council would like to
highlight the following conclusions based on the work
of the Council since the beginning of the year.

During the past month, the Security Council has
continued to deal with an evolving set of complex
conflicts and unresolved disputes on its agenda. Those
evolving and emerging challenges will require a more
robust, coherent and comprehensive approach on the
part of the Security Council if they are to be resolved.
Speaking from an African perspective, we feel that
it would be very timely for the Council to adopt the
concept of sustaining peace, in a practical and applied
manner, as a target and process. We continue to believe
that the Council is still far from achieving that target.
There is a need for a paradigm shift in mentality, from
one focused on managing conflicts to one that addresses
their root causes, in accordance with their various
contexts, ensuring national reconciliation and moving
towards recovery, reconstruction and development.
The set of tools available to the Council should be used
judiciously, pursuant to varying contexts and realities
on the ground. That will require enhanced analysis
capacities and orchestrated engagement with various
United Nations bodies by furthering the bridging and
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Against that backdrop, and while regional and
international efforts in South Sudan have fallen short
of assisting South Sudan to restore peace and achieve
national reconciliation, now there are nonetheless good
prospects following the joint meeting at the initiative
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, on 29 January in Addis
Ababa, to revitalize the peace process with a View
to ending the vicious cycle of violence and achieve
national reconciliation. It is critical that the people
of South Sudan, while respecting their diversity, also
honour and foster their unity.

Together with addressing the root causes by
contributing to the building by the South Sudanese
of their national institutions of governance, the
Council should seriously enhance its consultation and
coordination with regional actors, in line with the
joint statement of 29 January, in order to ensure that
all South Sudanese recommit to peace and end the
violence. In that vein, empowering President Konare's
efforts is important and cannot be overemphasized. We
see the national dialogue as a crucial opportunity to
redirect the parties' attitude towards ending violence.
The national dialogue should go beyond power-sharing
arrangements and be conducted in an inclusive,
transparent and credible manner so as to represent a
real opportunity for peace and inclusivity.

The three African members of the Security
Council reiterate their commitment to the prevention
of conflicts, and in that regard stress the effective
engagement of the Council in Gambia's political crisis
between December 2016 and January 2017, which
led to the peaceful handover of power to the current
President, Mr. Adama Barrow. The African members
commend the Council's approach, which culminated
in the unanimous adoption of resolution 2337 (2017).
The resolution was a manifestation of the prevention
of conflict in action. It was also a result of a strong
partnership between the United Nations, the AU and
the subregional organization - namely, the Economic
Community of West African States - as well as
a testimony to the complementary roles played by
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council in maintaining regional and
international peace and security. After that milestone
achievement, the African members would like to
highlight the need to continue to extend support to the
new Gambian authorities in order to sustain peace and
consolidate efforts towards Gambia's development.

The Council followed closely developments that
took place in Somalia. It adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/3 on February 10, welcoming the
conclusion of the electoral process, which culminated
with the election of PresidentMohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed "Farmajo". Furthermore, the statement
underscored major upcoming benchmarks, in particular
building a strong Somali national army, functioning
State institutions capable of delivering basic services,
establishing law and order, and the launching of the
constitutional review process. The three African
members reiterate the need for the Security Council to
continue closely monitoring the situation in Somalia and
for the international community to enhance its support
for Somali and African efforts with regard to stabilizing
Somalian institution-building and economic revival.
Furthermore, in a press statement on 20 February
(SC/ 12722), the President of the Council condemned the
heinous terrorist attack that shook a Mogadishu market
on 19 February, leaving around 40 dead and many
more injured. This incident is a stark reminder of the
continuous and precarious threat posed by Al-Shabaab
to the fragile accomplishments achieved in Somalia. In
this regard, the African members firmly believe that
this challenge can be tackled only by rallying support
for the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
Somali national forces to rid Somalia and the region
of the scourge of terrorism. The African members
also note the importance of adopting a comprehensive
and holistic approach to combating terrorism that is
not limited solely to military and security means but
extends to other relevant dimensions, including the
economic, social, cultural and religious.

The three African members welcome the recent
decision of the Security Council to visit the countries
of the Lake Chad basin - namely, Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria - from 2 to 7 March, with the
objective to strengthen its support to the victims and
affected countries in their efforts to address the threats
posed by the terrorist groups Boko Haram and Da'esh,
as well as to mitigate the humanitarian situation
related thereto.

Once again, on behalf of the African members
of the Security Council, we thank you, Sir, and we
look forward to the United Kingdom presidency
and to cooperating and supporting it in ensuring a
successful outcome.

