The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/576, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its
previous statements on Guinea-Bissau, and
having considered the latest report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-
Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2007/576), reaffirms its support for the
continuing efforts to consolidate peace in that
country.
"The Security Council notes with deep
concern the threat posed by drug and human
trafficking which can undermine the important
gains made with respect to rule of law and to
democratic and transparent governance. The
Council further notes that the danger posed by
drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau could have
negative implications towards the region as well
as other regions.

"The Security Council is especially
concerned over the security and safety of Bissau-
Guinean officials involved in combating drug
trafficking and organized crime. The Security
Council therefore calls upon the Government
with appropriate support from the international
community to take concerted action to safeguard
the safety and security of those officials who are
involved in combating these activities.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to convene later this
year a regional conference on combating drug
trafficking, aimed at developing a regional plan
of action to deal with this challenge. The Security
Council calls for urgent consideration of how the
United Nations system might improve its support
for Guinea-Bissau's fight against international
drug trafficking and organized crime. The
Security Council recognizes the importance of
containing and reversing the threat of drug
trafficking to the peace consolidation process in
Guinea-Bissau. The Security Council further
recognizes in particular the important role of
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). The Council requests the Secretary-
General to report on this matter as soon as
practicable. The Council further welcomes the
initiative to hold an international conference in
Lisbon, Portugal on drug trafficking in Guinea-
Bissau in December 2007.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concern with the fragility of the democratization
process in Guinea-Bissau as well as persistent
economic and social crisis.

"The Security Council welcomes the
scheduled convening of legislative elections in
2008 and calls on all segments of Bissau-Guinean
society to ensure that the elections take place in a
07-55339
peaceful and orderly fashion. The Council further
appeals to the international community to provide
the necessary logistical and technical support to
ensure the effective and timely organization of
the polls.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
improved dialogue between the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and the Bretton Wood institutions
and urges the Government to continue to
implement its commitments in the areas of fiscal
responsibility, reforms of the justice sector and
good governance. The Council also welcomes the
assistance provided to Guinea-Bissau by bilateral
and multilateral partners, in particular the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
European Union and the World Bank, and
encourages their enhanced constructive
involvement in the country.

"The Security Council encourages the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau to carry out their
commitment concerning security sector reform.
The Council also takes note of the announcement
made by the European Union and ECOWAS to
make resources available in support of security
sector reform.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of a holistic approach in resolving the
complex and multidimensional situation facing
Guinea-Bissau and requests the Secretary-
General to present proposals on how best the
United Nations could provide effective assistance
in an integrated and holistic manner to national
efforts in order to contribute to the sustainable
stabilization of Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council takes note of the
letter from the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau
the

requesting that Guinea-Bissau be placed on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission and
expresses its intent to consider the request as a
matter of priority.

"The Security Council reaffirms that peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau are critical for
peace and security in the West African subregion.
The Council recognizes the importance of the
regional dimension in the resolution of the
problems faced by Guinea-Bissau and in this
regard welcomes the role being played by the
African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP) in the peacebuilding process in Guinea-
Bissau.

"The Security Council recognizes and
commends the important role played by the
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
staff of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), as well as
the United Nations country team, towards helping
consolidate peace, democracy and the rule of law,
and expresses its appreciation for the activities.

"The Security Council will keep the
situation in Guinea-Bissau under active review."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.

