I thank Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Khawla Matar, Deputy Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for their briefings. Since the Council held its meeting last month (see S/2020/1049), there has been no clear indication that a breakthrough has been made in the political process aimed at ending the Syrian crisis or that the humanitarian situation of Syrians has improved, as we have just heard in the briefings of Mr. Rajasingham and Mr. Pedersen. In that regard, Tunisia reiterates its position that there is no sustainable alternative to a political solution to address the deep roots of the crisis and end the human suffering of Syrians on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), in order to preserve the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, end foreign interventions, expel terrorist groups and restore peace and stability to Syria and the region. We remain hopeful that the Syrian parties will put the interests of the Syrian people first and demonstrate flexibility, seek common ground and engage constructively without preconditions, with a view to reaching an agreement as soon as possible regarding the agenda and date of the fourth meeting of the Constitutional Committee, and ensuring that its talks continue. We also stress that it is important for the Committee's work to be accompanied by confidence-building measures in order to consolidate the expanded political process, leading to the organization of free and fair elections under United Nations auspices, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), that meet the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians. The living conditions of Syrian are a major concern, in view of the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the inability of the Syrian health- care system to address it, the deterioration of food and water security as a result of the fragile economic and security situation, and the repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic. It will be necessary to address vulnerability, fragility and the drivers of instability in order to bridge existing gaps and avoid even worse humanitarian crisis scenarios. In that connection, we would like to emphasize the need to prioritize the following: First, ensuring a sustainable ceasefire throughout Syria is an urgent priority. Although we have seen the overall security situation in Syria improve in recent months, the prevailing calm continues to be punctuated by tensions and violence. Therefore, there is an ongoing risk that conflict and large-scale clashes might resume and undermine the understandings reached to date. We once again call on all parties to exercise restraint, comply with the provisions of international humanitarian law and international human rights law and de-escalate, and to ensure that civilians, civilian facilities and medical and humanitarian workers are protected. We also stress that it is necessary to combat terrorism collectively and in a coordinated manner, in accordance with international law, in order to defeat the terrorist organizations on the Security Council lists. Those organizations continue to pose a serious threat to Syria and the broader region, despite the successes achieved in targeting their leaders. Secondly, there is a need to strengthen humanitarian access. We express our support for the efforts of Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, at the helm of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in coordinating humanitarian relief in Syria. We reaffirm the importance of providing basic assistance and expanding its scope, raising the level of preparedness and stepping up preventive efforts as winter approaches, in order to meet the growing humanitarian and medical needs and respond effectively to the pandemic, using the various means available, including across conflict lines and across borders. We reiterate that it is necessary for all parties to cooperate in order to facilitate secure, sustainable and unobstructed humanitarian access, in line with international humanitarian law and international law. We call on all parties to facilitate the efforts of humanitarian relief organizations, including the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to gain cross-line access, while taking into account the sovereignty of Syria and ultimately ensuring that the country's unity and sovereignty over all its territory is restored. Thirdly, improving such aspects of Syrians' lives as access to food, health care and education in a more sustainable manner. The way to do so is to bolster early recovery efforts and foster resilience in Syrians by maintaining the infrastructure of basic services and providing decent livelihoods for the most affected and vulnerable groups. The work done by the United Nations and its specialized agencies in Syria in relation to the maintenance of hospitals, schools, roads, water, electricity and sanitation is critical. It makes the response to the humanitarian crisis more effective and comprehensive, safeguards the best interests of vulnerable groups and ensures that future generations are protected.
