Mr. Muita (Kenya): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to share my thoughts on this very
important debate. We view this debate as being most
timely, given the current review of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). It is our hope that the
deliberations in the Council today will serve to enrich
this ongoing process.

The Secretary-General, in his 2009 report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304), notes that threats to peace are often more
imminent in the earliest post-conflict stages. It is this
crucial period that offers us a window of opportunity to
build lasting foundations for durable peace. It is
therefore imperative that peacebuilding commence at
the very outset of the cessation of hostilities.
Thereafter, peacebuilding efforts must be nurtured and
sustained until stability is re-established.

It was with great foresight that the 2005 World
Summit decided to establish the PBC to fill the
peacebuilding gaps in United Nations efforts to
consolidate peace in countries coming out of conflict.
Countries emerging from conflict are fragile and could
easily slide back into war after the Blue Helmets
depart. They need to be helped to build sustainable
peace through security, development and human rights
being integrated into a single coherent approach to help
close gaps inherent in such situations. That also calls
for the marshalling of the resources required to target
those national capacities that offer the best chance of
making peace irreversible and those that address the
root causes of conflict.

Kenya recognizes the pivotal role that the PBC
has been playing in consolidating peace in countries
emerging from conflict situations. We have witnessed
first-hand the PBC's engagement in several such
situations on our continent, for example, in Burundi,
Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic. However, we must help the PBC to better
deliver its mandate to the affected countries. In that
regard, my delegation believes that the PBC should
come into the picture at a very early stage in the
peacebuilding process. There is equally the need for
the PBC to work very closely with national and
regional actors in peace consolidation efforts.

To ensure that countries emerging from conflict
do not relapse into chaos, peacebuilding strategies
must dedicate a larger portion of their work to
promoting sustainable economic development,
strengthening institutions of governance and
maintaining democratic norms while involving women
in the process. Equally important in peace
consolidation is the principle of national ownership. It
is imperative that countries on the PBC's agenda
identify with those objectives and feel that they own
the peacebuilding process for sustained and meaningful
peace to be established.

The potential inherent in the PBC as an advisory
body of the General Assembly and the Security
Council should be fully utilized. The ongoing review
should therefore define how the PBC can create a
positive synergy in order to consolidate the efforts of
all partners. The United Nations agencies, the private
sector and civil society organizations can all
complement the PBC's efforts to ensure a successful
peacebuilding strategy.

Kenya, as a member of the PBC's Burundi
configuration, would like to emphasize the importance
of economic recovery, socio-economic integration and
the development dimension in any peacebuilding
process. From that perspective, my delegation would
like to emphasize the need to anchor peacebuilding
gains to regional integration initiatives. It is important
to assist countries emerging from conflict in integrating
their economies in the wider benefits accruing from
regionalization. In the case of Burundi, my delegation
reiterates its support to help the country nurture its
fledgling peace by enhancing its greater economic
development through mutually beneficial membership
in the East African Community.

To conclude, let me once again reaffirm Kenya's
full support and commitment to ensuring that the
Peacebuilding Commission is better adapted and suited
to fulfilling its mandate in order to ensure sustainable
peace and development are attained in those countries
emerging from post-conflict situations.

