Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Jordanian delegation for
its initiative to hold this meeting on such an important
topic.

Although people of any age are subject to
radicalization, young people, with their unformed
outlook and search for identity, are the most vulnerable
to the ideas of violent extremism. Terrorists are actively
involving minors in their heinous crimes. On the
one hand, the joint task of the State is to prevent the
influence of terrorists and radicals over young people
by suppressing extremist propaganda and strengthening
the resilience of young people to it. On the other hand, it
is necessary to use the potential of young people, their
activity, mobility and ability to navigate the information
space with ease so as to create an atmosphere of social
intolerance of violence and rejection of the ideas of
extremism and terrorism.

The issue of young people cannot be considered in
isolation from the overall context of the fight against
the challenges of extremism and terrorism in the
modern world. We see the basis for the work in this
area in an equal and fair partnership of all countries
under United Nations auspices. Its centre must lie in
the comprehensive implementation of the resolutions of
the Security Council and in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in particular its first area
focus on providing conditions conducive to eradicating
the spread of terrorism. We must reject any attempt to
use violent extremism as an instrument of geopolitics
and the redistribution of spheres of influence.

Connivance with the activities of extremist groups
has already allowed them to threaten the future of
entire nations, whose societies have been plunged into
a morass of social, economic and political chaos. That
is particularly clear in the examples of Iraq, Syria
and Libya and the threat posed to other States in the
region. Particular attention should be paid to the use
of technology by extremists, including young people
indoctrinated in extremism, to achieve domestic goals.
We recently saw how insurgents were used in Central
Europe as a spearhead to overthrow a democratically
elected Government, when Molotov cocktails and
snipers' bullets became the main vehicles of debate.

We must be more dynamic in using modern
information and communications technologies to
combat extremism. It is well known that young people
fall easy prey to radical extremist content flooding
popular social networks. Pursuant to resolution 1624
(2005), which is marking its tenth anniversary this year,
States should prohibit by law any incitement to commit
terrorist acts. Extremists' calls for violent actions
on the Internet should be blocked by the competent
Government departments, and their websites shut
down.

The Internet, like traditional media, should be used
to promote a positive agenda as a powerful alternative
to radicalization. It is important to actively disseminate
among young people and with their participation
the ideas of mutual respect and intercultural and
interreligious dialogue, taking local traditions and
specificities into account. Educational institutions
and civil society structures could make a significant
contribution to combating radicalization and extremism.
An important role in the prevention of radicalization
can be played by local religious communities. Their
role is primarily to explain that there is no link between
radicalism and authentic religious precepts, to raise
awareness of the relevant risks, and to take other
preventive steps to prevent young people from engaging
in terrorist and other extremist activities. A set of
agreed recommendations on this subject is contained in
resolution 2178 (2014). Other proven, effective tools are
creative activities and sports, which give young people
the opportunity to participate in socially meaningful
activities, help them to improve their own skills and
talents, increase their self-confidence and self-esteem,
and accustom them to peaceful coexistence.
Russia has consistently taken steps to effectively
protect the State and its citizens against extremism and
terrorism. In November 2014, we adopted a strategy
for combating extremism in the Russian Federation up
to 2025, which contains a complex of tasks aimed at
instilling among young people the capacity to resist
socially dangerous behaviour. Under the strategy,
regional and municipal educational programmes and
teaching materials should provide for the shaping
among the younger generation of respect for all ethnic
and religious groups and a rejection of intolerance. The
strategy provides for universal accessibility to culture,
sports and recreation facilities, and improves conditions
for young people to attain their creative and sporting
potential and cultural development. The intention is to
incorporate new educational standards and methods
to counter extremism, for example by formulating
educational standards for journalists.

We call on the specialized counter-terrorism
agencies of the United Nations to actively promote the
dissemination of national practices that have proven
to be effective in this field. We welcome the recent
compilation by the Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee of a set of best practices of
international and regional organizations in countering
violent extremism and incitement to terrorism in the
context ofthe implementation ofresolution 1624 (2005).
We expect a list of national practices in this area to be
drawn up as soon as possible. We are ready to share our
experiences with our partners at the international and
bilateral levels.

