Mr. Kau (Fiji): Fiji associates itself fully with
the statement made earlier on this subject by the
Permanent Representative of Samoa on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum. We join him and millions of
others throughout the world in condemning terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, and acknowledge
that the heinous and despicable acts of terrorist
violence that continue to be witnessed around the
world today pose a serious threat to national and
international security, to peaceful relations between
States and to the harmonious functioning of democratic
institutions worldwide.

Fiji is participating in this debate fully aware that
our small island country and those of our neighbours in
the Pacific region can no longer claim that distance
insulates us from the direct and indirect effects of
terrorism.

For those of us who hail from nations where there
is a general reliance on a few commodities or a handful
of products that form the backbone of our economic
survival, threats that directly impact those products
could have an irreversible effect on the lives of our
people. A terrorist attack could potentially obliterate
our tourism industry, for instance, and as we have seen
in other areas of the world, it would take us an
enormous time to recover. Put simply, the short-term
economic and social devastation caused by a terrorist
act against our small island economies would be far
worse than the effect of any natural disaster recently
experienced.

Regrettably, terrorism generally is often
associated with a particular religion. Some of our
citizens have experienced difficulties in transiting
international borders because of cases of mistaken
identity. This is the small price that some of our people
will face as a result of our resolve to clamp down on
the perpetrators of such heinous terrorist activities. In
our joint effort to combat terrorism, we again call for
full respect for and observance of the rule of law and
all human rights and fundamental freedoms, as defined
in the relevant international instruments and, where
applicable, in international humanitarian law.

Fiji joins others in emphasizing the importance of
the universal and full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) and other counter-
terrorism related Security Council resolutions. We also
welcome the efforts that are currently being exerted to
refine and improve the working methods of both the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999).

We commend the Council for promulgating its
latest resolution 1566 (2004) and in particular the
provision for setting up a working group to consider
and submit recommendations on practical measures to
be imposed upon those involved in or associated with
terrorist activities, other than those designated by the
Al Qaeda/Taliban Sanctions Committee, including
more effective procedures considered to be appropriate
for bringing them to justice through prosecution or
extradition, freezing of their financial assets,
preventing their movement through the territories of
Member States, and preventing supply to them of all
types of arms and related material.

Fiji further supports the establishment of an
international fund, as envisaged in resolution 1566
(2004), to compensate victims of terrorist acts and their
families. Having said that, we would also like to
respectfully emphasize the importance of not losing
sight of our moral duty to address the legitimate
grievances caused by despair, resentment, ignorance
and poverty. The elimination of the root causes of
terrorism requires the establishment of international
relations based on sovereign equality, multilateralism
and justice, the eradication of exploitation, oppression
and social inequality, and the promotion of sustainable
development.

In conclusion, my delegation acknowledges that
regional and subregional organizations play a critical
role in enhancing the effectiveness of global action
against terrorism. We therefore support the call made
earlier on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum for the
CTC to consider whether a Pacific regional report,
submitted by the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat on
behalf of, and in close cooperation with, its member
countries, might provide a possible option to assist our
small island countries in meeting their reporting
obligations to the CTC.

