Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on Uruguay's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to reiterate my congratulations to the
delegations of Uruguay, Japan, Ukraine, Senegal and
the sister delegation ongypt, which represents the Arab
countries, and wish them all success. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson;
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli; and Ms. Eveline
Rooijmans of Oxfam for their important briefings on a
challenging issue facing the international community,
namely the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The crises in the world today bear troubling witness
to the increased suffering of civilians in conflict. There
are over 60 million displaced persons, in addition to an
increasing number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance, the majority of whom are
civilians affected by armed conflict and complex
emergency situations. We should act decisively to
engage the parties to conflict with respect to their
responsibilities to civilians, in order to make it possible
for humanitarian access to reach the affected civilians
and put an end to the violations of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law. We should also work
to strengthen international mechanisms, criminalize
prohibited acts and ensure that the relevant courts are
seized of those actions for which perpetrators should be
held accountable. Impunity is not an option; therein lies
the importance of the issue under consideration.

Since the issue of the protection of civilians was
placed on the Council's agenda in 1999, the Council
has adopted a number of resolutions and presidential
statements on the topic, the most recent of which is
resolution 2249 (2015). Adopted last November, the
resolution reaffirms the Council's commitment to
resolutions on the protection of civilians. But despite all
of the resolutions, statements and efforts by the United
Nations and its relevant bodies worldwide to protect
civilians, the international community has been unable
to ensure that protection. On the contrary, we have
seen an increase in tragedies, massacres, displacement
and migration. Disagreements among the permanent
members of the Council and the use of the veto have
increased, further complicating the issue, while the
violations continue.

We cannot discuss the protection of civilians without
considering the suffering of the unarmed Palestinian
people. During the more than 60 years of occupation,
aggression, repression, injustice and arrest, all of which
contravene the essential foundations of international
humanitarian law, Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued its violations, defying the international
community and international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. That situation calls
for rapid action by the Council with a view to ensuring
international protection for the unarmed Palestinian
people.

The Syrian crisis is the most severe humanitarian
crisis of modern times, with over a quarter of a million
victims and millions of displaced Syrians. Daily news
broadcasts have exposed the plight of the besieged
Syrian city of Madaya as well as other cities where
the Syrian people have been subjected to famine. The
Secretary-General of the United Nations has affirmed
that the use of starvation as a weapon during conflict is
a war crime. The Council must therefore put an end to
that crisis and the human rights violations there.

The protection of civilians requires that we ensure
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The United
Nations is preparing for the fourth conference on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. The conference will
be held in London on 4 February 2016 and will be
co-chaired by the United Kingdom, Norway, Germany
and Kuwait. It is a follow-up to the efforts of the three
earlier conferences in Kuwait, at which we were able
to gather $7 billion, $1.3 billion of which were pledged
by Kuwait. The London conference on Syria is a new
challenge, as it presents an opportunity to address the
long-term needs of all those suffering from the conflict
in Syria, to set up new areas for work and education,
and, above all, to promote engagement and encourage
all stakeholders to protect civilians and alleviate their
suffering. We stress the need for active participation
in that conference and hope that that humanitarian
effort will be supported by political will in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), allowing us to resolve that
humanitarian tragedy and bring an end to the suffering
of our Syrian brothers, both domestically and abroad.

The actions of Houthi militias and the partisan
forces of former President Saleh, who insists on using
force to return to power, pose a direct threat to the
security of the States of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
and have led to the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. The ongoing siege of the
Governorate of Taiz is an example of how the delivery
of humanitarian access to civilians has been obstructed
and of how extensive the far-reaching humanitarian
crisis in Yemen is. The Houthi militias and partisan
forces of former President Saleh are contravening
resolution 2216 (2015), which calls for a political
solution to the conflict. In that context, we call for the
re-establishment of peace, security and stability for the
people of Yemen, a brotherly nation, in accordance with
Council resolutions.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the role
of the United Nations in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, in particular through peacekeeping
missions, which must act in accordance with clear
mandates. We stress the importance of this debate, as
the issue is a crucial aspect of the Council's action.
The Council must take the necessary steps to protect
civilians in armed conflict and hold accountable those
who violate international humanitarian law.

