Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank the Lithuanian
delegation for organizing today's debate. We appreciate
the concept note circulated by the presidency
(S/2015/307, annex) and thank the briefers for their
contributions.

At the outset, my delegation would like to express
our strong agreement with Lithuania's assessment in
the concept paper that the issue is not so much the lack
of rules but the failure to implement existing norms
in terms of protecting journalists working in conflict
areas from harm. It is pertinent therefore to reiterate
that the protection of journalists in all situations is
the foremost responsibility of every State, and States
should do everything possible in their power to fulfil
this obligation, which is a View which my delegation
has consistently held.

It is also true that the threat faced by the
journalists, like all civilians in armed conflict
situations, has undergone a significant change in recent
years, especially due to the change in the nature and
rising number of the armed conflicts, which often put
journalists at specific risks. This calls for concerted
efforts by all States and parties to ensure the safety of
journalists in conflict situations.
At the national level, India's Constitution and
relevant legislation safeguard freedom of expression
and the functioning of free media, online as well as
offline, in building inclusive and peaceful knowledge
societies and democracies. Since 1950, we have adhered
to and fully supported the Geneva Conventions. We
are committed to the protection of the rights of all
its citizens, including journalists, as stipulated in the
international instruments to which we are a party.

With regard to the specific questions the concept
paper has raised, we highlight the following three.

First, on the issue of accountability as well as on
safety while operating in non-State controlled areas,
we recall the Security Council's demand in resolution
1738 (2006), as well as the call in relevant General
Assembly resolutions, most recently resolution 69/185,
that all parties to an armed conflict comply fully with
their obligations and for Member States to ensure
accountability. The accountability of Member States
faces a specific challenge with regard to non-State
actors, especially terrorist groups, that act beyond the
pale of law with impunity.

The international community has witnessed acts
committed by such non-State terrorist groups against
journalists in the recent and distant past. However, even
non-State terrorist groups cannot act in a vacuum. We
believe that the Council, as the primary organ of the
United Nations for maintaining international peace and
security, needs to act robustly. It should do so using
the instruments of law and the information available
to it to make Member States act against such non-State
actors. The Council should assist those Member States
that may require assistance to strengthen their national
capacities to take such action.

Secondly, on the issue of best practices for
protecting journalists in conflict situations, we believe
that journalists should, first of all, function within
the relevant domestic laws of the countries they are
operating in; secondly, seek access in a legal manner;
and thirdly; maintain strict neutrality and impartiality
and not become a party to the conflict. By following
such precautions, it will become easier for Member
States to protectjournalists, facilitate their professional
work and ensure that journalists become a catalyst for
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. For their part,
national Governments must put in place mechanisms
for protecting journalists and their equipment,
especially when they have provided information about
their whereabouts and coordinates in advance, and
resist imposing arbitrary restrictions unless there is a
dire need.
Thirdly, in the context of peacekeeping missions,
while we concur with the view that, in terms of
implementing the mandates, particular focus should
also be given to the protection ofj ournalists as a distinct
category of civilians to be protected, we would like to
reiterate that this responsibility is vested in the Member
States hosting such peacekeeping operations.

