Mr. Ruiicka (Slovakia): Let me align myself with
the statement delivered by European Union Special
Representative Mellbin on behalf of the European
Union.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2013/535), and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his briefing. Both the statement and the report reflect a
number of important elements, many of which are of a
positive nature.
It is important for all of us not to lose sight of the
situation in Afghanistan, even as we face a complex and
dangerous security situation in Syria and the Middle
East. Past experience teaches us that when we leave
jobs unfinished, the next developments often bring
about very bitter and painful results.

While the overall security situation in Afghanistan
remains a concern, not only for citizens of Afghanistan
but also for the international community, we are
encouraged by efforts aimed at strengthening the
capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces
in protecting the most vulnerable civilian groups. It is
essential to continue the training of Afghan security
and police forces to further reduce the number of
attacks from within the uniformed ranks.

The Slovak Republic is fully committed to assisting
the Afghan forces after the final stage of the security
transition. I am pleased to inform the Council that
the Slovak National Council renewed the mandate of
Slovak personnel in Afghanistan, which should create
the basis for our military engagement beyond 2014.

Security will be cardinal in Afghan-lead
preparations for the electoral cycle and the conduct
of presidential and provincial elections scheduled to
take place in April 2014. The progress made so far
by the Afghan authorities in terms of establishing a
legislative framework is significant. Further progress
in reconciliation is vital for any further success.
The complete inclusivity of talks reduces the risk of
compromising the integrity of the 2014 elections. That
risk would come at a high cost, bearing in mind the
positive momentum and historic opportunity for the
people of Afghanistan.

The process of peace and reconciliation must
be led by Afghans, who can rely on the assistance of
the international community and the good offices
of UNAMA. Among the many examples of the
extraordinary performance of this United Nations
Mission, there is another new element: the beneficial
influence of UNAMA on development in Afghanistan
through increased regional cooperation. Without a
doubt, the productive discussions between Afghanistan
and Pakistan and the opportunities presented by Iran
contribute to a promising future. All those activities are
fully in line with the debate of the Security Council in
August (see S/PV.7015) on the significance of regional
cooperation, which was chaired by Her Excellency
President Cristina Fernandez of Argentina.

We believe that the central role of the United
Nations remains one of the key factors in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We fully support
UNAMA's invaluable work in assisting Afghan-led
processes.

