Mr. Derbez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to thank the delegation of Romania for its kind
invitation to me to participate in this meeting to
consider cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in stabilization processes. I can
only welcome this initiative of the Security Council
presidency because of the relevance of the question and
because it follows up on the reflection initiated by
Mexico in April 2003 during our term as an elected
member of the Security Council (see S/PV.4739). I
therefore especially thank the Romanian delegation.

Recent experience underscores the growing
importance of regional organizations as partners of the
United Nations in the prevention, management and
settlement of conflicts, as well as in peace-building and
stabilization processes once conflict has ended. In fact,
this issue arises repeatedly in the debates of the
Security Council with respect to both specific cases
and thematic debates. It can be seen that as
peacekeeping operations grow exceptionally in number
and scope, cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations must be examined in a radically
different light.

The focus on crisis management and strategies for
peace must not lack medium-term and long-term
perspectives. Peace-building, institutional
reconstruction, the continuation of confidence-building
measures and strategies to encourage development are
undeniably important for preventing conflicts from
recurring or becoming chronic cycles of instability.

While it is understandable that the international
community places high priority on putting an end to
armed conflicts, equal attention should also be given to
stabilization processes. In the end, such measures
represent our only chance to prevent the recurring
resurgence of crises, as we have so regrettably
witnessed in various parts of the world.

The United Nations has a range of particularly
valuable capacities and facilities for treating crises and
promoting the peace process. Those capacities should
be maintained and further strengthened. However, once
a conflict has ended, it would be desirable that regional
organizations increasingly take responsibility for the
tasks of reconstruction, institution-building and the
promotion of development and well-being.

On the basis of the principle of complementarity,
it is possible to make more rational and effective use of

the comparative advantages of each organization. On
the one hand, it is necessary fully to take advantage of
each regional organization's unique experience within
its own sphere of action and its precise knowledge of
local cultural conditions and mechanisms of
understanding for treating post-conflict situations.
However, equally important is the work of prevention,
early warning and the monitoring of potential conflict
situations.

Last year's discussion highlighted the view
shared by most regional organizations that their
cooperation with the United Nations should be carried
out under Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter,
according to the modalities and capabilities of each
organization. It was concluded that the United Nations,
specifically the Security Council, has primary
responsibility for the duties of peacekeeping and
international security. Participants considered that the
role of regional organizations should further
concentrate on the root causes of conflicts, in particular
factors such as poverty, discrimination and the lack of
opportunities.

One of the recurring themes of last year's
meeting was the importance of creating partnerships.
Mexico believes that it is essential that, in stabilization
processes, such alliances should include the Bretton
Woods institutions and other possible promoters of
development. Based on the consensus reached at the
International Conference on Financing for
Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002, we
can note that there are unprecedented bases for
promoting the creation of broad partnerships of that
kind.

In order to carry through such proposals, the
Council should weigh, when renewing peacekeeping
operation mandates, whether those mandates could
more systematically include elements that, in
collaboration with the respective regional
organizations, would promote long-term stability, such
as financing, electoral assistance, respect for human
rights and institutional restructuring.

In that context, perceptions of conditions
affecting the security of States are closely linked to the
regional and subregional context in which they unfold.
Coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations would be enhanced by a better
understanding of those perceptions and the factors
influencing them.

Thus, one of the most important political
developments experienced by the Organization of
American States (OAS) in the past year was the OAS
Special Conference on Security, held in Mexico City in
October 2003, which concluded with the adoption by
consensus of the Declaration on Security in the
Americas.

American States adopted a new concept of
security of multidimensional scope, encompassing both
traditional and new threats. Thus, the Declaration states
that "the States of the hemisphere recognize different
perspectives regarding security threats and priorities".
There was a unanimous rejection of creating a
hierarchy among the various types of threats, since all
were considered equally legitimate. Based on that
analysis, the States of the American hemisphere
identified the mechanisms and instruments of regional
cooperation for addressing the various security
concerns and challenges and made specific
commitments to strengthen such cooperation.

I am fully confident that by identifying
innovative forms of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, the commitments
made at the OAS Special Conference on Security will
create new opportunities for forging productive
alliances for peace and development.

From the viewpoint of Mexico, the mere fact that
the Security Council and regional organizations can
periodically hold this kind of dialogue will enhance the
decision-making process, identification of
opportunities for cooperation among organizations and
the taking into account of the views and concerns of
each region in the delicate tasks of peacekeeping and
the promotion of development.

In the end, the multilateral system, in effect,
comprises the sum of the United Nations, the regional
and subregional organizations and the specialized
institutions. The right cooperation and the full
exploitation of their capacities and comparative
advantages could create a powerful engine for finding
solutions, new areas of focus and new understandings
in order to tackle today's complex international agenda.
This concerted contribution can be equally valuable for
tackling new threats that are sometimes even without
specific national origin, such as international terrorism,
organized crime, the major epidemics, ecological
disasters and the private circulation of weapons and
dangerous materials. Faced with this new category of
challenges, it is essential to correctly use all
international instruments at our disposal in order to
provide collective responses possessing the due
effectiveness, legitimacy and forcefulness.

Given this scenario, Mexico recognizes and
highly esteems the decision of the Government of
Romania to hold this discussion, which we trust will
define new modalities of international cooperation
between the Council and its regional partners.

