Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate the Dutch presidency on
its able leadership of the Security Council during the
month of March and for its choice of this very important
topic for our debate.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his valuable briefing this
morning. I further thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for his
detailed statement, and Ms. Fatimata Toure'.

The Sudan associates itself with the statement
deliveredby the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

My country's delegation would like to express
its deep appreciation for the peacekeepers who
have sacrificed their lives to protect civilians and
implement the noble mandate of achieving peace and
stability throughout the world, particularly in our
African continent, which hosts the greatest number of
peacekeeping missions.

Cooperation with regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is
highly manifested in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which has
been operational since 2008. In strong coordination
with the African Union (AU), the Sudan and the United
Nations, this joint mission participated in political
mediation until the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur was achieved in 2011. This answers the question
of how we can reach political solutions and uphold
strategic cohesion.

Proceeding from our practical experience in Darfur,
we affirm that the joint efforts that led to peace there
and the gradual and smooth withdrawal of UNAMID
from the Sudan, where the second phase will be
concluded in June, resulted from the intensive work and
strong political resolve of the Sudan and the unlimited
support of the AU, the United Nations, the State of
Qatar and other partners. This proves that the desired
goals will never be achieved without the concerted
efforts of all stakeholders - be they national, regional
or international - to maintain, build and sustain peace,
particularly in the post-conflict phases of recovery and
reconstruction, with stabilization and peacebuilding
projects. In that regard, my delegation reaffirms the
need for the international community at large to bring
pressure to bear on all parties that refuse to join the
peace process. It must deny them shelter and support,
and instead push them towards peace so as to alleviate
the suffering of those affected by war and to achieve
comprehensive peace.

Allow me to provide some preliminary suggestions,
based on our practical experience, on how to promote
the work of peacekeeping missions in the future.

First, peacekeeping operations must be given
appropriate mandates, which should be reviewed
regularly in the light of developments on the ground.
Second, appropriate training should be provided to
peacekeepers, be they military, police or civilians.
Third, partnership should be promoted among all
stakeholders, particularly the host country, the
United Nations - either through the Secretariat,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support, the Security Council
or the United Nations country team - other relevant
regional and subregional organizations, and the troop-
and police-contributing countries. Fourth, in light ofthe
organic link between peace and development, we must
strive to promote development in regions and countries
that suffer from conflicts. Fifth, we should give greater
priority to efforts to resolve conflicts by political means.
In this vein, we support all reconciliation efforts, led
by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, to focus on
preventive diplomacy, mediation and reconciliation.
Sixth, we should promote strategic partnerships
between the United Nations and the AU in the field of
peacekeeping. Seventh, we must design an exit strategy
for the missions once the troops are deployed.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to cooperating with the United Nations,
the African Union and all other partners in order to
ensure a better future for peacekeeping operations, so
that they can achieve the desired goals of maintaining
international peace and security, protecting
civilians and contributing to the reconstruction and
development process.

