Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank our colleagues from the United States and the
United Kingdom for the update on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1483 (2003), in
particular for their assessment of the security
conditions and the progress reported in the
humanitarian and economic sectors, as well as for their
report on the political developments.

As regards the political developments, we take
note of the recent conclusion of the agreement on the
political process by the Governing Council and the
Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA). We are
encouraged by the decision to introduce a timetable for
the transfer of sovereignty to a transitional Iraqi
Government and for the reversal of the sequence of the
political process. We believe it is an important step
forward.

Of course, this plan needs to be evaluated against
the background of evolving security conditions. It also
needs to be clarified in certain aspects, and it deserves
a thorough evaluation. We will also have to examine
how the legitimacy of this process of transferring
sovereignty can be strengthened. It is important to ask
how to create the necessary momentum for the
reversed political sequence in order to contribute to a
stabilization of the security situation in the country.
Therefore, we think that putting the agreement between
Mr. Bremer and the Governing Council in a wider
international context would help to send the necessary
signal to the Iraqis. That signal should be that the
process has indeed fundamentally changed.

If we look at the three problems we now face in
Iraq - security, reconstruction and the political
process - it is obvious, I think, that at present the
security and reconstruction business must be dealt with
primarily by the CPA. The CPA has a leading role here
for the foreseeable future.

On the other hand, of course, security and
reconstruction are linked to the political process, and
that process should provide the signal necessary to
facilitate security and reconstruction in the country. I
believe that when we discussed resolution 1511 (2003),
the creation of such a political signal was the main gist
of the French-German amendment. The change of
strategy, as it appears in the agreement between
Mr. Bremer and the Governing Council, reflects to a
certain extent what we have said in this discussion.

SANA-869

 

I feel that, in the political process, there are four
important elements we should look at. First, we think
that a strong United Nations role is imperative to
provide the necessary legitimacy to the process until
we have an Iraqi Government that has been legitimized
by democratic elections. Secondly, I believe we must
consider broadening the basis of the political process in
order to include all political and societal forces in Iraq
that are willing to cooperate in a peaceful manner and
to reject violence and terrorism. The third important
element is to define and consider the role of the
neighbours, because if want to successfully stabilize
Iraq politically, economically and in terms of security,
we must ensure that Iraq is reintegrated into the region
as a new and democratic State. The fourth element is
that we should consider convening an international
conference - which has already been proposed - that
rallies the Iraqis, the neighbours and others in a
common effort to stabilize the political and economic
process. We have done so quite successfully in another
case - Afghanistan. Why should we not repeat that
model if it can help to stabilize and advance the
process that is now going to begin?

In conclusion, I should like to say that, in the face
of growing violence and terrorism - not just in Iraq,
but also in other countries, as the past few days have so
cruelly demonstrated - it is imperative to create an
international order based on cooperation and
inclusiveness, with the United Nations as its centre. I
think that that is the way to a stable Iraq and the way to
return sovereignty to the Iraqi people.

