Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Thank you to
Ambassador Kumalo for his interesting briefing. It is
my honour to follow Ambassador Kumalo in
3
presenting the report today and to speak on behalf of
Ambassador Jones Parry, who co-led the mission. May
I say, at the start, that it was very good as a curtain-
raiser to see President Konare talk to the Security
Council, along with Mr. Djinnit and Mr. Adada, last
Friday.

As Ambassador Kumalo said, Africa is a
continent of critical importance to the Security Council
and to the United Nations more broadly. Around
55,000 United Nations peacekeepers are deployed in
Africa. It is a continent that this Security Council
discusses more than any other. And it is a region where
the United Nations has made some of its most
impressive advances, but has also suffered some of its
most serious setbacks.

Against this backdrop, the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) are venturing, we believe, into a
period of unprecedented coordination and cooperation,
as we try together to tackle conflicts like those in
Darfur and Somalia. It was against that context that the
Security Council decided to visit Africa from 16 to
20 June and to build further the relations of the United
Nations with the AU on issues of peace and security, as
well as to visit Sudan, C6te d'Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to discuss the
engagement of the United Nations there.

Ambassador Kumalo, I think, has said most of
what needed to be said. He was there, and I was not.
So, I will be very brief in my remarks, but to say that
we, of course, support what Ambassador Kumalo said
about the value of holding such a mission.

Discussions in Addis with the AU Commission
and Peace and Security Council ranged across a variety
of issues. Ambassador Kumalo mentioned some of
them; others that we discussed included Chad, the
Central African Republic, Ethiopia and Eritrea and the
Comoros. The sheer number of issues, I think, shows
how much the United Nations and Africa can learn
from each other, but also how important it is, if we are
to be successful, that we establish mechanisms for
deeper cooperation. And, in order to make some
progress in achieving that, the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council adopted in Addis a
joint communique, which has been issued as a Security
Council document. The communique sets out concrete
steps to this end. These include the annual meetings
that Ambassador Kumalo mentioned, the sharing of
United Nations-AU experiences on working methods
and support for further development of the African
peace and security architecture. The communique also
set out the agreement of the two Councils to examine
the possibility of financing a peacekeeping mission
undertaken by the AU or under its authority. We will
obviously want to consider further with partners how
to take forward these various action points in the
communique.

Perhaps I can say a brief word about Darfur,
which Ambassador Kumalo has already mentioned, and
the meeting that we were fortunate enough to have
with President Kufuor of Ghana and the meetings that
the Council mission had when in Khartoum itself. As
Ambassador Kumalo said, the Sudanese Foreign
Minister did tell the Security Council mission that the
Government of Sudan accepted the hybrid operation in
full and without conditionality, and we think that is a
very important commitment. This was, of course, later
confirmed by President Al-Bashir, who urged rapid
implementation and swift agreement on United Nations
funding. Naturally, we are in agreement with that. We
hope that this marks a turning point in terms of
cooperation between the United Nations, the AU and
the Government of the Sudan. Our draft United Nations
Security Council resolution, which has been referred
to, will build on this by endorsing the United Nations-
AU agreement on the hybrid operation, commending
Sudan for its agreement. Following the approach in the
AU-United Nations joint report in the Addis
communique, the draft highlights the political and
humanitarian stance taken to resolve the Darfur crisis.

We all know, and we have all said many times in
this Council, that there is no military solution to the
crisis in Darfur. We, therefore, think it right that the
draft resolution that we are bringing forward now in
mandating the hybrid and its implementation focuses
also on the political process and humanitarian tracks.
At the same time, we must have confidence that
commitments entered into on all sides, including the
rebels, will be kept. That will guide our approach to the
resolution. We look forward to discussing with
partners, inside and outside the Security Council, how
to take this forward to the next stage. I should also tell
members of the Council that we are in touch with the
Government of Sudan, both in New York and in
Khartoum.

If I may briefly say something about other issues,
the AU Commission, the AU Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council also
agreed in Addis on the urgent need for further efforts to
achieve political reconciliation and ensure
humanitarian relief in Somalia. AU Peace and Security
Council members urged the United Nations to deploy a
peacekeeping mission to Somalia. In its turn, the
Security Council briefed the Peace and Security
Council on its approach to the Ethiopia-Eritrea border
dispute and the Lord's Resistance Army, and the Peace
and Security Council briefed the Security Council on
the AU's efforts to resolve the political crisis in the
Comoros, particularly the island of Anjouan.

Our hope is that these outcomes and this mission
represent the beginning of a new phase of broader,
deeper cooperation between the United Nations and the
AU in areas where we share mutual interests and
responsibilities in terms of peace and security in
Africa.

