Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We are deeply honoured to see Guinea
preside over the Security Council on this historic
occasion.

The significance of the United Nations is beyond
any doubt. That is not what is being decided at this
table. Nobody can seriously claim that humanity could
do without the collective security system and
international law and live under an increasingly
unipolar, unjust and unsustainable world order and in
the midst of a world economic crisis.

Paradoxically, some of the circumstances that led
to a war, in which 50 million people died, including
hundreds of thousands of young men from the United
States, seem to be recurring today.

President Fidel Castro declared on 6 March:
"Never before have all the nations of the
world found themselves subjugated by the power
and the whims of those who lead a super-Power
with seemingly unrestrained power, while no one
has the slightest idea of their philosophy, their
political ideas and their notions of ethics. Their
decisions are practically impossible to predict or
to challenge. Their strength and capacity to
destroy and kill seem to permeate every statement
they make. This logically leads to fear and
restlessness in many State leaders, especially in
view of the immense military power that
accompanies the political, economic and
technological power of those who cannot stand to
be disobeyed. The dream of a world ruled by
certain norms and of an organization that would
represent the will and the desires of all of the
peoples is quickly evaporating."

"We the peoples of the United Nations", as the
Charter states, are today an overwhelming majority of
countries, powerful and weak, developed and
underdeveloped, large and small, from all latitudes and
from both hemispheres. We are a powerful coalition of
States and nations, of political forces and ideologies, of
cultures, ethnicities and religions and of Governments
and civil society, which are growing in awareness and
rebelling to defend the peace, preserve the United
Nations and put a timely halt to this world dictatorship
which threatens us all.

There has been an early mobilization against the
war and its rejection by public opinion is
unprecedented. All of those who feel profound
solidarity with the American people admire their
opposition to unilateral war, even though the real
reasons, including casualty estimates and costs, are
being concealed from them.

A unilateral war, the one we are promised, would
have devastating consequences worldwide. It would be
the end of democracy in international relations. It
would cause inestimable harm to the economies of
developing countries, have terrible social consequences
and would totally destabilize the Middle East.

The United Nations and the Security Council
would be dealt a lethal blow that would annihilate their
role and prerogatives as guarantors for international
peace and security. It would put their existence in
jeopardy and place all States, with no exception, at
risk, facing the unpredictable vagaries of a universal
tyranny and putting them at the mercy of new pre-
emptive wars.
A war against Iraq would be unjust and totally
unnecessary. These months of debate, meticulous
inspections by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which have been discrediting evidence and refuting
accusations, the unquestionable cooperation of Iraq and
the disarmament activities it has been carrying out in
compliance with Security Council resolutions have
proved that there is no credible threat or risk to the
national security of the United States. We know this is
not, from any point of view, an act of self-defence.
Instead it is an act of predatory war.

It has now been announced, with astounding
cruelty, that new weapons are to be used and that there
will be an unprecedented intensity of bombing. It is
declared that the magnitude of civilian losses is
incalculable and the terrible humanitarian
consequences are being disguised.

The path to the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council is based on
the preservation of peace, cooperation and the good
faith of all parties to dispel any doubts about the
possession of weapons of mass destruction, the
continuing work of UNMOVIC and IAEA and a
comprehensive settlement on the question of Iraq,
including the lifting of sanctions, to guarantee regional
stability and full respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the political independence of Iraq, Kuwait
and all the countries in the region.

The Non-Aligned Summit, held in Kuala Lumpur,
loyal to its founding principles, has crafted a broad-
ranging and relevant statement.

A unilateral attack against Iraq, as the Secretary-
General has warned, would constitute a violation of the
Charter. It would be an act of aggression.

The draft resolution being discussed is a
declaration of war. Its objective is to deceive public
opinion. Its contents and deadlines are impossible to
implement. Even if it is dressed up with new
benchmarks, or if the ultimatum is postponed for a few
days, it remains essentially the same.

The opposition to war and the defence of the
United Nations and the Charter by the majority of the
members of the Security Council, including three of the
permanent members, is commendable. Pressured by the
empire, they enjoy the almost unanimous support of
Member States, of international public opinion and of
their own peoples.
Nothing could be more serious or have worse
consequences than to surrender, and nothing could
make the Security Council more irrelevant. The veto,
so often used in an indiscriminate and illegitimate way,
despite its obsolete and anti-democratic nature, would
be, in this case, justified by the exceptional
circumstances in which we are living. It would take
limitless cynicism to criticize it.

The non-permanent members now have a special
opportunity to make their own voices heard, as
sovereign and equal nations that can rely on the
enormous legitimacy of our votes. We have elected
them precisely for moments like these. They know they
are acting on our behalf and that we know the risks and
challenges they face; they have our full support. The
Non-Aligned caucus also counts on the solidarity of the
whole Movement.

Whatever happens, if the Security Council fails to
truly and legitimately fulfil its mandate, the General
Assembly should exercise, in this emergency, all the
authority and power granted by the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

