Mr. Vote-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
am pleased to commend you, Sir, on the last day of
your second presidency of the Security Council. I
welcome your initiative to convene this open debate of
the Security Council on small arms, a matter of great
importance to the international community.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable report.

In addressing the serious problem of small arms
and light weapons and ammunition, we must consider
the issue comprehensively, taking supply and demand
into account. From that dual perspective, the adoption
in 2005 of the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, was a most
positive measure. In conjunction with the 2001 United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and

Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, it represents substantial
progress in our approach to the subject.

However, we would have wished the Instrument
to be legally binding, include the aspect of
ammunition, set out specific goals and facilitate
assistance and cooperation among States. We hope that
the report of the Panel of Governmental Experts will
soon spark negotiations on a legally binding
international treaty on small arms and light weapons.

The dimensions of the problem are reflected in
the assessment that more than 875 million small arms
and light weapons are in circulation. It is worrisome to
note that this category of weapons is subject to the
fewest registers because most are in private hands.
When we match such data with the increase of violence
in conflict zones, armed crime, the activities of
insurgent groups that challenge legitimate democracies,
and other phenomena that claim countless victims and
foment social and political instability, it is clear that we
need coordinated international measures to exercise
greater control over the illicit trade in and circulation
of small arms and light weapons.

No threat arising from weapons of mass
destruction should allow us to neglect the fact that
small arms and light weapons cause thousands of
deaths every day throughout the world and are wielded
against peace, security and human rights in myriad
forms. Stopping or reducing that illicit trade is
therefore not just a moral imperative that cannot be
shirked by the manufacturing States and to which all
States must contribute. Above all, it is a shared
responsibility deriving from the United Nations
Charter itself, whereby we have undertaken to maintain
peace and security and to take effective collective
measures to prevent and eliminate all threats. That will
be possible only if we proceed to adopt a series of
common and mandatory measures.

I should like to reiterate that small arms and light
weapons constitute the only category of arms that is
not under the exclusive control of States. Their
manufacture, trade and use are also in private hands.
However, the primary responsibility for controlling the
flow of arms lies with States, be they manufacturers,
exporters, re-exporters, importers or transit points. In
that respect, the Secretary-General has proposed some
measures that we endorse and which should be given
due attention by States as soon as possible. In
particular, we must work to standardize end-user
certification, reduce the excessive accumulation of
ammunition, and develop assistance and cooperation to
enhance States' capacities to halt the proliferation of
small arms, light weapons and ammunition.

Such measures should complement the work of
the Security Council in monitoring arms embargoes;
strengthening synergies between embargoes and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants; and developing practical measures for
cooperation between the sanctions monitoring groups
of the Security Council, peacekeeping missions,
Member States and their investigating authorities, and
the relevant regional and international organizations.

Finally, we believe it important that the Security
Council has decided to address the serious problem of
small arms and light weapons on a biennial basis as of
this year.

