Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States appreciates the commitment of Japan to
improving the working methods of the Security
Council and your initiative, Mr. President, in
convening this open debate. We should like to
recognize your outstanding work, Sir, as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and the excellent management of
these issues by your Mission.

The Council has the solemn responsibility to take
the primary role in preserving international peace and
security on behalf of the entire membership of the
United Nations. It is important that, in carrying out this
role, our work be as effective, efficient and transparent
as possible. Article 30 of the Charter of the United
Nations mandates the Council to adopt its own rules of
procedure. In doing so, the Council understands the
importance of making sure that other Member States
who are our partners in the maintenance of
international peace and security are informed of and
appropriately involved in the work of the Council.

The present debate focuses on the implementation
of the annex to the presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507. That note was the result of
intensive work in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues and was a
significant step forward. The Security Council
undertook a number of measures to improve the
transparency of its work. All Council members have
made significant contributions to this effort.

With respect to transparency, for example, the
Council established a new practice whereby the new
Council Presidents brief non-members of the Council
11
shortly after the adoption of the programme of work
each month. The annual report of the Security Council
includes a high level of detail that expands the
information available to the general membership and
provides a snapshot of the problems faced by the
Council in its work and how these problems have been
addressed.

The Council has also increased its interaction and
dialogue with non-Council members in a variety of
ways, including through informal discussions with
interested parties to seek their views. Open Security
Council meetings, such as the one we are in today,
provide the opportunity for general Members to
participate, and we are pleased that about 20 per cent
of the membership is doing so today.

Another example was the open debate the
Security Council organized on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) last fall (see S/PV.6191). The
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) purposely developed an open and transparent
three-day event for all United Nations Member States,
relevant non-governmental organizations and civil
society to present findings on the implementation of
the resolution. The event was well attended and
included a civil society plenary session side event
organized by the Stanley Foundation. We again
encourage as many Members as possible to attend open
meetings, which are the Council's preferred method of
meeting whenever possible.

The subsidiary bodies of the Council have also
increased their number of open meetings. The Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Permanent
Representative of Turkey, Ambassador Apakan, in
conjunction with Counter-Terrorism Executive Director
Mike Smith, has already held two open meetings this
year, the first on the challenge of effective judicial
cooperation and the second on maritime security and
terrorist acts committed at sea.

United Nations peacekeeping is one of the most
important tools the Security Council has at its disposal,
and we recognize the importance of close cooperation
with troop- and police-contributing countries in this
effort. In line with the New Horizon initiative of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Security
Council has made a concerted effort to engage troop-
and police-contributors in earlier and more meaningful
consultation at least a week in advance of Security
Council consultations on mandates. The Security
12

Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
has also sought to improve the mechanisms for
cooperation with troop- and police-contributing
countries and to engage in regular dialogue about how
to fine tune that cooperation.

Over the course of the past year, the Council has
engaged Member States and other interested
stakeholders in a series of open debates covering a
range of issues on its peacekeeping agenda, including
cooperation with troop- and police-contributing
countries, peacekeeping reform, the relationship
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping, mediation,
and cooperation with regional organizations so that we
can together ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
continues to be an effective means to save lives, end
conflict and rebuild shattered societies.

Making the work of the Council more efficient
requires constant effort. In this regard, we all face the
challenge of balancing the substance with the length of
each of our statements so that we can convey our
message as succinctly and clearly as possible. All of
us, whether we are Council members or not, should
strive to do better on this score so that meetings can be
conducted in a manner that allows as many Member
States to speak as possible, with as many other States
present to hear them.

Today's debate offers an opportunity for the
Council to hear first hand whether the practical
applications of the innovations listed in presidential
note S/2006/507 have helped Member States to follow
the work of the Council. We intend to listen carefully
to constructive comments in order to assess the
effectiveness of practices and measures taken by the
Council to enhance transparency, dialogue and
efficiency. This information will inform the future
efforts of the Council's Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

