Mr. Schieb (Germany): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening this
open debate and for the excellent work done during the
comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004).

While aligning myself with the statement by the
observer of the European Union, I would like to make
the following three points.

First, inthe aftermath of the attackas of 11 September
2001, the Security Council developed a vision ofa safer
world in which humankind was to be spared from the
terrorist use of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
However, that vision has been severely compromised in
recent years. Since 2013, the repeated use of chemical
weapons in Syria, both by Government actors as well
as by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
has dramatically increased concerns about the use of
weapons ofmass destruction by non- State actors, as has
ISIL's use of chemical weapons in Iraq. Holding those
responsible for such heinous acts accountable remains a
major challenge for the international community.

Secondly, besides international frameworks,
conferences and national regulations, responsible
involvement by the private sector is vital for
non-proliferation to be successful in a globalized world.
After all, it is the private sector that must implement
export-control and non-proliferation legislation, under
Government supervision of course. Against that
backdrop, Germany, with the support of many other
Member States, initiated the Wiesbaden process, which
focuses on private-sector engagement in the context
of resolution 1540 (2004). Listening to the concerns
and concrete proposals of industry representatives is
instrumental in identifying practical measures that we
can adopt to prevent non-State actors from obtaining or
using WMDs.
Thirdly, for Germany, resolution 1540 (2004)
continues to be an essential pillar of the multilateral
non-proliferation architecture, as well as an important
tool for preventing the proliferation ofweapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors. Germany supports
resolution 2325 (2016), which was adopted today, and
especially welcomes its aim to strengthen the role of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), especially by further improving
the matching mechanism.

We also welcome other initiatives aimed at further
strengthening resolution 1540 (2004) in a long-term
perspective, such as the work of the Group of Friends
of resolution 1540 (2004), in which Germany actively
participates. We encourage all States to fully fulfil their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). That means
adopting and enforcing effective national legislation.
It also means establishing and implementing export
controls on dual-use goods and technologies. Germany
stands ready to assist other States in doing so, including,
for example, by sharing experiences and identifying
effective practices. Submitting an initial first report
to the 1540 Committee is an essential first step in
identifying national strengths and weaknesses in that
matter. My country will continue to support targeted
outreach towards States that have yet to submit a report.

Let me conclude by stressing that Germany, together
with partner nations and international organizations,
will continue to actively contribute to reducing the
global risk of WMD terrorism. We stand ready to
implement the outcome of the 2016 comprehensive
review on resolution 1540 (2004).

