Mr. Yamazaki: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to apprise the Council on progress made in
strengthening financial and administrative oversight of
the current Development Fund for Iraq; on the legal
issues and options to be considered for implementing
successor arrangements; and on the assessment of the
Government of Iraq's progress in preparing for the
successor arrangements for the Fund, as presented in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/l66), pursuant
to paragraph 3 of resolution 1905 (2009).

With regard to the first issue - the activities of
the Fund and the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board - in its meeting in Vienna on
22 and 23 July 2009, the Board called for the timely
monthly publication of the Fund's financial statements
on the website of the Committee of Financial Experts. I
am pleased to note that the Committee has published
monthly summaries of the Fund's cash inflows and
outflows on its website.

In the absence of a fully operational
comprehensive oil-metering system, it is not possible
reliably to determine the volume of all export sales of
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas from
Iraq, for which proceeds are to be deposited in the oil
proceeds receipts account and the Development Fund
for Iraq accounts. In this respect, I am pleased to report
that the Government of Iraq has finalized a time-bound
action plan to implement a fully operational
comprehensive oil-metering system. The action plan
and the implementation status are available on the
websites of the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board and Committee of Financial Experts. I welcome
the detailed update from the Committee and strongly
urge the full implementation of the action plan, as
envisaged by the Government of Iraq.

I now turn to the legal issues and options relating
to the successor arrangements for the Development
Fund for Iraq. First, with respect to the Iraq escrow
account and other transfers to the Development Fund,
once all outstanding activities under the oil-for-food
programme are concluded, and taking into account
issues mentioned in the Secretary-General's report, all
other remaining funds should be transferred from the
Iraq escrow account to the Fund. While the processing
of the authentication documents has been slow, as
reported in the Secretary-General's status report to the
President of the Security Council of 1 May 2009
(S/2009/230) and the report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 1859 (2008)
dated 27 July 2009 (S/2009/385), the number of
outstanding letters of credit had been reduced
significantly to 65 as of 31 March 2010.

Absent the receipt by the Secretariat of the
requisite confirmation of arrival of goods in Iraq, the
Security Council has the option of cancelling the
remaining letters of credit with outstanding claims of
delivery, subject to the provision by the Government of
Iraq of a comprehensive indemnity with regard to all
activities of the Organization, its representatives and
agents in connection with the oil-for-food programme
since its inception.

I now turn to the issue of obligatory payments to
the United Nations Compensation Fund. It should be
10-30443
recalled that, in paragraph 21 of resolution 1483
(2003), the Security Council decided not only that
5 per cent of the proceeds of all export sales of
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas from
Iraq should be deposited into the Compensation Fund,
but also that "this requirement shall be binding on a
properly constituted, internationally recognized
representative Government of Iraq and any successor
thereto". Therefore, it is important to ensure that the
present mechanism is maintained or that an alternative,
equally effective mechanism is established to ensure
the payment into the Compensation Fund.

I now turn to the issue of the privileges and
immunities of the Development Fund for Iraq. From its
inception in 2003, it was clearly understood that the
Fund would enjoy such privileges and immunities for a
limited and specified period of time. Therefore, once
the Fund becomes a fully nationally owned and
controlled fund, unless otherwise decided by the
Security Council it will cease to enjoy such privileges
and immunities.

I now turn to the issue of the dissolution of the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board. Further
to the extension of its mandate through 31 December
2010 in resolution 1905 (2009), and in accordance with
section 9 B of the revised terms of reference of the
Advisory Board, "arrangements will be made for the
prompt dissolution of the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board no later than 31 December 2010".

Lastly, I will turn to the assessment of the
progress of the Government of Iraq in preparing for the
successor arrangements for the Development Fund for
Iraq. The action plan and timeline, as presented by the
Government of Iraq, are realistic, and I am pleased that
the Government of Iraq plans to select an independent
international auditor to confirm that all proceeds of
export sales of petroleum, petroleum products and
natural gas from Iraq are accounted for. Furthermore, I
note that the Government of Iraq, in its first quarterly
report to the Security Council, acknowledges its
obligations towards the Compensation Fund pursuant
to paragraph 21 of resolution 1483 (2003).
10-30443

As I mentioned earlier during this briefing, the
Committee of Financial Experts has finalized a time-
bound action plan to implement a fully operational
comprehensive oil-metering system, and I encourage
the Government of Iraq to provide an update on this
matter in its next quarterly report to the Security
Council.

With regard to the details on the progress made in
strengthening financial and administrative oversight of
the current Development Fund for Iraq, I note that
certain measures and goals have been included in the
report submitted by Iraq. Furthermore, I note that the
secretariat of the Council of Ministers will ensure that
deadlines for the completion of these goals are met. I
encourage the Government of Iraq to keep the Security
Council informed and to include the update on the
implementation in their next quarterly report to the
Security Council.

Work remains to be done to fully implement the
action plan, as presented by the Government of Iraq,
for the transition to successor arrangements for the
Development Fund for Iraq. I look forward to keeping
the Security Council informed on progress made by the
Government of Iraq in preparing for such
arrangements.

This completes my briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 3 of
resolution 1905 (2009). I would be happy to respond to
any questions from members of the Council relating to
the report.

