Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like
to thank Mr. Ndiaye for convening today's meeting
on an important subject and to acknowledge Senegal's
role as one of the most significant contributors to
United Nations peacekeeping forces. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane, Ambassador Antonio, Special
Representative Menkerios and Mr. Kaberuka for their
briefings, which have conveyed a clear and consistent
set of messages for the Council to consider. New
Zealand looks forward to the Council's adoption later
this morning of draft resolution S/2016/977, prepared
by Senegal and the United States, which we believe will
send a strong signal of the Security Council's political
support and encouragement of the recent efforts of the
African Union (AU) to strengthen our partnership.

Over the past two decades, the States members of
the African Union have demonstrated their willingness
and intention to lead the way in preventing and resolving
conflict and securing peace in their region. Effective
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union is essential to ensure support for those efforts and
to maximize their chances of success. As others have
said, it is therefore critical that the United Nations and
the African Union take a structured, complementary
and integrated approach to tackling peace and security
challenges on the continent.

Various models for such cooperation have been
tested, with varying degrees of success. In Somalia,
we have seen an African-led peace operation, the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
operate with support from bilateral donors, backed by
a United Nations support office. In Darfur, we have
seen a hybrid United Nations-AU force achieve some
progress, but it has also encountered serious challenges
in implementing its mandate. Those missions have
enjoyed some success, and we pay tribute to those who
have contributed to that. But they have also highlighted
some of the ongoing challenges facing United Nations-
AU cooperation, particularly where arrangements for
financing, logistical support and mission leadership are
concerned. The missions initially led by the African
Union in Mali and the Central African Republic are
also a clear case in point.

Although different in nature, the case of the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin
also demonstrated the need for a model that can enable
a more robust response to critical security threats, such
as that posed by Boko Haram to the countries of that
region. In the case of AMISOM, despite the success
of the United Nations logistical-support package,
troop-contributing countries in the region continue to
be frustrated by the lack of predictable financing for
troop stipends. Such approaches are neither sufficient
nor sustainable, which is why New Zealand welcomes
Senegal's initiative in focusing attention on that critical
issue today.

Over the past decade, we have all made obeisance
to the need for cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations. It is time to move beyond the
rhetoric of cooperation to arrangements that will have
practical, meaningful application and deliver concrete
results. I want to focus today on three specific areas
where the United Nations-AU partnership should
be strengthened.

First, we should foster shared analysis and
understanding of security challenges between the
United Nations and the African Union. We share the
view of Special Representative Menkerios that early
engagement on building a common analysis and
understanding of security challenges and conflict
situations creates an essential foundation for effective
cooperation. If the United Nations and the African
Union - and for that matter the regional economic
communities - can agree on objective analyses of the
fundamental causes and drivers of conflict, decisions
on possible responses, solutions and respective roles
should flow more naturally. But how can we achieve
that? Secretariat-to-secretariat connections are critical.
The United Nations Office to the African Union plays
a vital role in United Nations engagement with the
African Union, and should be further strengthened.
Joint assessment missions, information exchanges,
training and secondments are also useful tools for
building connections, mutual trust and understanding
between the two secretariats.

Enhanced cooperation between the executive bodies
of the two organizations - the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council - is also very important. New Zealand
recognizes the significance of regular, structured,
formal exchanges between the Councils, such as their
annualjoint meeting. But we believe that it is much more
useful to have regular informal engagement between the
two bodies, and that will deliver greater value. In our
experience, such interactions have been most successful
when they focus on specific issues, often after field
missions, when the two bodies can focus on what has
been achieved and what the problems are, rather than
the areas where each believes that the other is letting
it down. Greater use of joint visiting missions would
be another practical way to enable the two Councils to
gain a shared appreciation of situations and lend their
combined weight to joint political messaging on what is
required. We urge the African Union and the Security
Council, including next year's incoming members, to
make greater use ofjoint visiting missions in 2017.

Secondly, we must work together to help strengthen
the relevant capacities in the African Union. If we
are to deepen cooperation, it is essential to ensure
that the African Union and the United Nations share
standards and approaches for key aspects of their field
missions. In addition to due-diligence requirements
for human rights in peace operations, we should think
through other challenging and complex issues, such as
standards for conduct and discipline, financial controls,
resource management and environmental standards.
That will require significant effort in building relevant
capabilities within the AU. What the United Nations
will get in return is a stronger partner able to help tackle
shared challenges, often significantly more cheaply
than the United Nations can.

Thirdly, as we have already heard today, we must
tackle the fundamental issue of financing for African-
led peace operations. New Zealand acknowledges
the challenges involved in reaching agreement on a
new, more sustainable financing model in the current
environment of austerity. But continuing to rely on ad
hoc arrangements each time a new African Union-led
mission is deployed is simply not sustainable. Time and
again, we have found ourselves reliant on temporary
fixes and improvised arrangements in order to mobilize
and sustain a response to critical security threats. That
often leads to critical delays in establishing a mission
and to ongoing capability gaps and uncertainties
around funding. The result is less effective missions
and longer, more costly conflicts. Finding a mechanism
for providing sustained, predictable financing for
African-led peace operations is therefore an urgent
priority. That is why we strongly support the proposals
put forward by the African Union to address the issue,
particularly the road map outlined by Mr. Kaberuka
whereby 25 per cent of the cost of African Union-led
peace operations would be financed by African States.
We are also supportive of proposals to utilize United
Nations assessed contributions for financing African
Union-led missions in defined circumstances.

We realize that those are ambitious proposals.
Moreover, we understand what would have to be put in
place as prerequisites for making them work. Meeting
such challenges will need to be a priority for the new
leadership of the United Nations and African Union,
when they assume office next year. In the meantime,
Member States will need to take the difficult decisions
necessary to advance the partnership with the African
Union in a meaningful way.

