Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
commend your leadership, Mr. President, in holding
this open meeting today. I think Somalia has been on
the agenda of the Council for many years. The more
international attention that we can bring to the ongoing
difficulties there, the better.

Last August, the Secretary-General appealed to
the international community to engage actively in
resolving the crisis in Somalia. Djibouti and President
Guelleh took up that challenge. He and a broad range
of Somali leaders worked diligently to promote the
cause of peace and reconciliation in Somalia. What
they have already achieved in terms of re-establishing a
dialogue is impressive. Indeed, the discussions that
have been taking place since 2 May, which have
brought together leaders of civil society, women's
groups, clan representatives and faction leaders, would
have seemed impossible only a short while ago.

While some basic steps have been taken, there are
still many hurdles ahead. Even if the current
discussions in Djibouti produce a blueprint for an
interim Government, we must remember that this is
only the first step, and perhaps the easiest step, towards
the rehabilitation of Somalia. The task of transforming
that structure into a functioning, effective, permanent,
representative Government will be far more difficult.
The United States intends to remain fully engaged in
those efforts, but only the commitment of the Somali
people themselves can ensure its success. Once the
Somalis have demonstrated through solid achievements
on the ground that they are making this process work,
the international community will want to review how
best to support their efforts.

Given the previous failure of overly ambitious
efforts to rebuild Somalia, the United States is
committed to an incremental, long-term approach that
seeks to rebuild the Somali polity from the bottom up
through support for regional entities that emerge from
participatory processes. These efforts offer, in our
view, the best hope for the creation of a stable, durable
and democratic Somalia. They should be seen as
complementary to the work done by the Somalis
convened at Arta.

In line with this approach, and in recognition of
the positive and peaceful evolution taking place in
some regions, we have focused our assistance on the
areas of relative stability, including Somaliland and
Puntland. Also, our humanitarian assistance strategy is
evolving. Unconditional food aid distribution is
increasingly being replaced with food-for-work
activities, and our disaster assistance projects are
placing greater emphasis on the activities that have a
mitigation focus and a transitional nature, as opposed
to pure relief.

We applaud the efforts of President Guelleh and
the Government of Djibouti, and we will watch the
unfolding of the current initiative with the utmost
interest and encouragement. In the end, any effort to
rebuild Somalia must be an all-inclusive process that
enjoys the support of existing regional entities and that
is based on a legitimate participatory process that
derives from Somali civil society and rejects the
predatory violence of the warlords.

