Ms. Zappone (Ireland): I would like to extend, on
behalf ofthe Irish Government, our deepest sympathies
to the American people on the loss of their former
President, George H. W. Bush. Ireland has lost a friend.

I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
important debate. Increasingly, it is recognized that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is crucial to conflict
resolution and prevention. Regional organizations have
a central interest in promoting peace, given the capacity
for conflict to spread across borders.

I am conscious, Mr. President, that you are from a
region of Africa that has witnessed some of the most
successful cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. Your own country, Sir,
emerged from conflict after receiving vital support
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the United Nations. Indeed, as President
Ouattara said in this Chamber yesterday, the Security
Council passed over 50 unprecedented and courageous
resolutions on Cote d'Ivoire, helping your country to
overcome and resolve conflict (see S/PV.8413).

Ireland shares your strong support for
multilateralism, Sir, and your President's assessment
that peace and stability in one country are largely
dependent on the stability of the region. More recently,
mediation by ECOWAS in the post-election crisis in the
Gambia is a further example of the success that can be
achieved when regional efforts are provided with wider
international support.

On the island of Ireland, our own locally led peace
process has benefited hugely from the sustained,
generous and sensitive support of the European Union
(EU) - the regional organization of which Ireland is
a member. Indeed, our simple membership in the EU
played a key role in putting us on the road to ending
violent conflict.

Ireland wishes to acknowledge the recent successes
of regional actors in conflict prevention and resolution,
such as the African Union's recent advances in
developing continental early-warning systems, the
Panel ofthe Wise, Special Envoys, and ad hoc mediation
panels. These steps all make a tangible and incremental
difference to conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

We believe that regional analysis, cooperation and
shared outcomes can facilitate more effective responses
to conflict and to building peaceful societies. With
this in mind, Ireland has facilitated two workshops
bringing together gender advisers from the AU,
the EU, NATO, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, and UN Women, to
enhance practical implementation of women and peace
and security agenda priorities. We all know that if
women are included in peace processes, the agreements
they reach are more durable. Ireland's support for the
women and peace and security agenda is wide-ranging,
including support for the work of the AU Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security and the Women's Peace
and Humanitarian Fund.

On peacekeeping, Ireland is aware ofthe importance
of ensuring that our efforts respond to the needs of the
situation, that resources match mandates, and that they
are reinforced by political will and political support.
Irrespective of the environment, how we approach,
design and decide on a peacekeeping mission has to be
cognizant of local needs.

Secretary-General Guterres's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and its accompanying
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations provide us with the concrete
steps that we need to take. The effectiveness of our
peacekeeping operations depends not just on their
design but on the conduct of those whom we charge to
implement them. There is a responsibility on Member
States to ensure that the capabilities and capacities
that will aid the delivery of effective peacekeeping
are provided.

Ireland is playing its part when it comes to effective
peacekeeping. We have put at the disposal of United
Nations partners a range of courses that will respond to
a number of the training needs identified. We will also
ensure that Irish peacekeepers operate to the highest
standards in accordance with international humanitarian
and human rights law. Ireland's commitment to the
highest possible standards has also led to a whole-of-
government approach to the implementation of the
United Nations voluntary compact on the elimination
of sexual exploitation and abuse. We must ensure that
we continue to eradicate such behaviour from every
part of our system.

In conclusion, Ireland believes that the most
effective pathway to sustainable peace is by
supporting inclusive, locally led and nationally owned
peacebuilding initiatives. As we seek membership of
the Security Council for the term from 2021 to 2022,
we will continue to prioritize support for the increased
participation of women and young people in all
mediation and peacebuilding activities. We also seek to
work with local partners to support interventions that
will bring about sustainable peace.

