Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Mindaoudou, for her briefing.
We commend the progress made in preparing for
the closure of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI). I take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Mindaoudou for her efforts and to congratulate
her, the Secretariat and the UNOCI staff, who have all
contributed to the mission's success for many years.
I would also like to recognize Minister Amon-Tanoh
and congratulate him on his country's election to the
Security Council for the 2018-2019 term, which is the
culmination of Cote d'Ivoire's journey to stability over
the years. I should also like to congratulate the other
newly elected non-permanent members of the Security
Council, in particular the Netherlands, with which we
share a Security Council seat.

The stage we are at today is a precursor to the
closure of the mission in Cote d'Ivoire, which is an
important juncture in the country's recent history and
that of United Nations peacekeeping operations in
general. For Cote d'Ivoire, it reaffirms the journey to
stability on which the country has embarked. Similarly,
we commend the determination of the United Nations
to remain committed to the country, through its
political presence and coordination efforts under the
regional office of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, because the outcome achieved by
UNOCI is a legacy to be preserved.

We have closely followed recent political
developments, which constitute a vital stage in the
history of Cote d'Ivoire and in the changes made to
its Constitution, once again highlighting the country's
resolute commitment to democratic principles. Italy
will continue to support the country on that path at
the bilateral level, as well as in our work at the United
Nations and in the European Union, which remains one
of C6te d'Ivoire's main partners.

The stability of Cote d'Ivoire first and foremost
meets the aspirations of the Ivoirian people, but it
is also a priority for the international community.
International and regional dynamics, especially in the
area of security, require considerable commitment, in
particular on the part ofcountries, such as Cote d'Ivoire,
that have historically played the role of regional
stabilizer. We would also wish to see Cote d'Ivoire play
an active role in fighting the scourges threatening peace
and security in the regional and Sahelian dimensions.
In that regard, the fact that Cote d'Ivoire is again a
troop-contributing country in Mali demonstrates the
country's focus on the regional dynamic.

Moreover, the priorities on which the Ivorian
candidacy for Council membership is based - such
as the fight against terrorism, illegal trafficking,
illicit immigration and piracy, as well as promoting
and protecting human rights - are in our view an
important sign of that commitment. In that respect, I
offer Cote d'Ivoire the full support of Italy in order to
obtain these goals.

In recent months, we have on occasion wondered
about the tools available to us to make peacekeeping
operations more effective. The lesson to be drawn
from the case of Cote d'Ivoire is that the leadership and
unity of the Security Council, which the Council has
demonstrated at considerable cost, are prerequisites
to ensuring the success of peacekeeping operations,
together with the commitment of the host country to
do everything possible to pursue the goals of peace
and stability. I am convinced that the direct experience
that C6te d'Ivoire will be able to offer in terms of
understanding the pluses and minuses of United
Nations peacekeeping activities will add important
value to its membership of the Security Council.

Today is Republic Day in Italy. I am happy that this
day, which is a day of celebration for us, is also one on
which Cote d'Ivoire has reached an important turning
point in its history.

