Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I also
wish to praise you for your guidance in this difficult
time as we seek international unity. Moreover, I cannot
fail to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
representative of Norway, for his important efforts and
for the manner in which he guided the work of the
Council. I also thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for
his sincere personal efforts to find a lasting solution to
the problem in the Middle East, to achieve peace and
harmony in that region and to put an end to the
suffering and tragedy of the defenceless Palestinian
people.

It is regrettable that the Security Council should
be meeting today not to consider positive developments
such as stability in the Middle East, as we might have
expected following the Council's adoption of
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002). On the
contrary, the Council finds itself compelled to meet on
short notice to consider the Israeli Government's public
refusal to implement those two recent resolutions.
Israel continues unremittingly to carry out barbarous
acts as the result of the policy of a Government that
acts under the flag of democracy and waves the flag of
anti-terrorism in order to further personal ambitions
that have led to military and political repression. These
personal ambitions involve targeting the Palestinian
people as a whole and, in particular, the Palestinian
Authority and its leader, unambiguously elected in a
democratic manner.

Kuwait, along with all of the other countries in
the area, is aware of the importance of respecting and
strengthening international law, and that is why it felt
hopeful when the Council recently adopted two
resolutions - 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) - calling
on Israel to withdraw from the occupied Palestinian
territories and to put an end to the Violence.

The two resolutions, adopted unanimously,
represented a positive step, because they showed that
the Council members realized the scope of the tragedy
of the Palestinian people, whose blood is being spilled
in vain.

Mr. Sharon will not even allow the defenceless
Palestinian people to defend themselves. He is
violating the most elementary rules of international
law- rules that today are recognized by all. He is
turning his back on the most elementary principles of
humanitarian law at a time when Council members
have tried to emphasize the importance of these rules
in preserving human dignity.

This tragic situation is daily escalating, and only
God knows the outcome. To avert a full-blown
conflagration, the Council must take resolute measures
on three important issues.

The first issue relates to Israel's pursuit of a
policy of barbaric violence against the Palestinian
people. Israel must be urged in the strongest possible
terms to put an immediate end to this violence; to
withdraw unconditionally from the Palestinian
territories; to lift the siege on the Palestinian Authority
and on its legitimate elected President, Yasser Arafat;
and to lift the siege also on civilians, because this is
without a doubt a form of State terrorism, in clear
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

To besiege Mr. Arafat does not serve the interests
of peace, and Sharon and the Israeli authorities should
not delude themselves: it is futile to try to bring a
people to its knees by humiliating and detaining their
leader. The Israeli Government must stop flouting the
resolutions of the Security Council. It must be ordered
to respect the will of the international community, as
expressed in these resolutions. Israel must bow to the
will of the international community.

Article 25 of the Charter states that the Members
of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council. An international
observation force must be sent to the area as soon as
possible to calm things down and bring about peace,
and stability, and to put an end to Israel's inhuman and
barbaric practices.

The Security Council, today more than ever, must
play its rightful role and implement the message of
peace announced by the Arab Summit in Beirut
through Prince Abdallah - an initiative that shows
that the Arab world rejects war and seeks peace.

However, as is its usual practice, the Israeli
leadership has rejected this initiative, not through
internationally recognized channels but through its
favourite method, which is war, bloodshed, killing and
violent attacks. This comes as no surprise if we look at
the dark past of this individual who is no friend of
peace and who, in fact, detests it.

If the members of the Council do not act
decisively and put an end to this situation, the
consequences will be inconceivable. It may become
impossible to solve the problem if this goes on any
longer. The Council is no doubt aware that large
popular demonstrations are taking place in the capitals
of the Arab world calling for an end to the violence
against Palestinians.

The Kuwait Council of Ministers has adopted two
declarations condemning Israel's dangerous actions and
calling on the international community and the Security
Council to take serious concrete measures to put an end
to Israeli actions and to allow the Palestinian people to
enjoy their legitimate rights, in keeping with
international law.

In conclusion, we must insist that the Council
address the underlying core of the conflict. Its source is
obvious: the illegal occupation by Israel of Arab land.
That is why this problem cannot be resolved unless the
Security Council plays its part and compels Israel to
withdraw, immediately and unconditionally, from all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan;
move back to the line of 4 June 1967; and evacuate
every inch of territory it holds in southern Lebanon, in
keeping with all relevant internationally binding
resolutions, in particular Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

We urge the international community, especially
the co-sponsors of the peace process, and those who
cherish peace to act in order to put an end to these
massacres and this barbaric behaviour and to bring
Israel back to the path of peace. They must create
conditions that will give the Arab peace initiative a real
chance of succeeding. It has elicited the support of the
world and deserves our support. It is now up to the
Council to cooperate in this final stage of this process.

