Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing and commitment.

Since the start of the conflict nine years ago,
violence has claimed the lives of tens of thousands of
civilians. Syria and its people have witnessed some
of the most serious crimes under international law.
Millions of Syrians have left their country and are still
abroad to this day. Thousands of Syrians await signs of
life from relatives who have been arbitrarily detained
or are missing. It was against that backdrop that the
Special Envoy took up his duties a few months ago. The
situation has deteriorated even further since the end of
April, owing to the escalation ofviolence in Idlib. As we
all know, that has created a situation could be disastrous
for Syria and the region on both the humanitarian and
regional security fronts. In that regard, I would like
to recall the statement made by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the co-penholders on Tuesday
(see S/PV.8561). We reiterate that the parties to the

conflict have an obligation to protect civilians and

respect the principles of distinction and proportionality

in international humanitarian law. As Ms. DiCarlo

mentioned last week,

"Our unflagging efforts to find a political solution
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people cannot move forward in an environment of
open conflict" (S/PV8553, 17.2).

We urge the parties to reaffirm their full commitment
to the ceasefire agreements of the Russia-Turkey
memorandum signed on 17 September 2018 and reiterate
our call for a nationwide cessation of hostilities. We
call on all stakeholders to take advantage of every
opportunity there may be to achieve a lasting solution,
including on the sidelines of the forthcoming Group of
20 meeting.

There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. It
was clear from the start and remains so more than eight
years later. The only possible solution is a political one.
In my country's view, the constitutional committee must
be Syrian-owned and -led and facilitated by the United
Nations. We support the important role of the Special
Envoy in its establishment. However, only the creation
of a credible constitutional committee can demonstrate
the political will of the parties to the conflict to work
constructively towards a solution to the crisis. What
is needed is a balanced and inclusive committee that
represents all elements of Syrian society, with clear
working procedures. It seems to us that despite all the
diplomatic efforts, the process is moving too slowly. We
must redouble our efforts. It is time for the crisis to end.

The peace that the Syrian people are waiting for
is outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). We support the
efforts of the Special Envoy to implement the resolution
by establishing a nationwide ceasefire, a political
transition through free and fair national elections that
the Syrian diaspora can participate in, and the building
ofa safe, stable and peaceful environment.

Lastly, we must not forget the millions of Syrians
who continue to be subjected to arbitrary arrest and
detention. We encourage the Special Envoy to continue
his efforts on that important issue.

