Ms. Fitah-Kona (spoke in French): My name is
Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona, from the Central African
Republic. I am proud and very honoured to brief the
Security Council, and I thank Mr. Luis Carrilho for
his invitation.

I am an adviser to the Mayor of the third
arrondissement of Bangui, which is rightly considered
as the most sensitive in the city, and perhaps even the
whole country. I also hold positions in various groups
in the district, specifically for the benefit ofwomen, the
Red Cross and religious associations. Through those
various positions, but also as a resident and citizen
of Bangui, I have been able to observe first-hand the
changes in the security and humanitarian situation
for many years. The changes have been positive,
and the efforts of the police of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) have
been instrumental.

In order for the Council to better understand, I
must recall what the situation in Bangui was like just a
few years ago. In late 2012, early 2013, the country was
plunged into considerable chaos and complete insecurity.
MINUSCA arrived in September 2014 and we very
quickly felt an improvement in Bangui thanks to the
work of the formed police units. Through MINUSCA'S
efforts, significant progress was observed within a
short time. For example, free movement resumed in
the district with the signing of a non-aggression pact
in 2015, schools were reopened, as was the hospital,
although its resources remain limited, trade resumed,
the police station reopened its doors and public services
and intercommunal activities gradually resumed.

As a woman and a mother, I am very grateful for
the communication and awareness-raising work that is
being done on violence against women and on forms
of sexual exp1oitation and abuse. There are still too
many victims, some of them very young, and that is
unbearable. Impunity must end.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary
General for his action during his visit to the PK5
neighbourhood in October 2017. He enabled the
rehabilitation of the community centre, which today
plays a very important ro1e in strengthening social and
intercommunal cohesion.

Other current projects are very promising and
have been developed in close collaboration with
local elected representatives, of which I am one. In
accordance with the wishes of the population, thanks
to United Nations police (UNPOL), the police station
in the third arrondissement reopened its doors to the
public on 28 October and MINUSCA police officers
patrol the neighbourhood based on the principle of
community policing to gradually regain the confidence
of the population. To that end, all the actors were able to
sit around a table and jointly develop the project, with
support from UNPOL, something that was not possible
until recently.

The first steps of the new team, including three
women, are very promising, while tangible results
have already been observed. For instance, dialogue
has resumed between representatives of the various
armed or self-defence groups, and the various religious
communities are coexisting better and are even carrying
out some joint activities. However, some challenges
remain in the country. The peace agreements are not
being implemented as fast as hoped, and there are far
too many weapons in circulation, particularly in the
PK5 neighbourhood.

In conclusion, I thank the Council for the support
it has provided to my country, but I would also like to
emphasize how vital it is for that assistance to continue
to be provided. The political balance is fragile, and the
population has high hopes for the upcoming elections.
I know that United Nations police are already working
hard in that area. We welcome the recruitment of
1,000 police officers and gendarmes, who will soon
be arriving to support our forces in order to secure the
electoral process. We must not be abandoned, because
the situation is still far too fragile. I count on the
support of the Council to help us bring lasting peace
to the Central African Republic. Please help us so
that peace can be fully restored in the Central African
Republic. Help us.

