Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting to discuss the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are
pleased to express to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
our gratitude for his briefing, in which he contributed
very important information concerning recent
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would also like to extend to Mr. Ngongi, the
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, our deepest
appreciation for the efforts over the past two years to
bring about peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would like to associate myself
with the words of gratitude that you, Mr. President,
expressed on behalf of the Council for the success that
he has achieved.

We are especially pleased to welcome the
presence of Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General and
High Representative for Common Policy and Security
Policy of the European Union, and we would like to
express to the European Union and to him, personally,
our gratitude for the efforts made to bring about peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
important areas of the world.

Little time elapsed between visits of the Security
Council mission to Central Africa and of Mr. Solana to
the same region. The views expressed earlier by Mr.
Solana with regard to achieving a final settlement of
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
were very similar to the Security Council mission's
conclusions. The intervention of the European Force in
order to put an end to the killings in Bunia represents a
new stage in promoting the pacification of the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would
like to express our gratitude in particular for the role of
France in this area.

We should not forget the efforts made by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and the
Uruguayan contingent in particular, in taking up
important responsibilities at a very difficult period. We
wish the Bangladesh contingent, whose main forces
have begun to reach Ituri, every success in undertaking
its responsibilities.

Syria agrees with the Security Council's
proposals and recommendations to strengthen
MONUC. We support the draft resolution prepared by
the Council, and look forward to adopting it as soon as
possible so that a modified, strengthened MONUC can
continue its work in support of the peace process and
prevent it from being reversed and put an end to the
actions of those factions that are trying to kill innocent
children or use them as soldiers - a matter that is not
admissible under international humanitarian law. Along
with other members of the Council, we reaffirm that
those who have perpetrated massacres and violated
humanitarian laws will be punished.

The Syrian delegation welcomes the formation of
a Transitional Government of national unity, which will
lead the country to democratic elections, put an end to
the conflict and set the country on the road to peace
and development, for the benefit of a people who have
so greatly suffered. We hope that the National
Observatory for Human Rights and the National Truth
and Reconciliation Commission will begin their work
as soon as possible to unify the position of the entire
Congolese people in order to preserve the welfare of
the country.

The Security Council has on previous occasions
underlined the positive and decisive role that countries
neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can play in promoting the peace process and ensuring
its success; Syria reaffirms that role.

In his statement on behalf of the European Union,
Mr. Solano expressed a number of views and criteria
that would ensure an end to massacres and war in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. He indicated
several responsibilities to be shouldered by the
European Union to promote national reconciliation and
development in that country. Syria welcomes all the
steps that the European Union will undertake or has
already undertaken. I thank the European Union for its
interest and its continuous follow-up of the situation in
that country.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is passing
through a historic stage, moving from violence and
conflict to peace and security, from destruction and
chaos to reconstruction, justice and respect for human
rights. We are fully confident that the international
community and the United Nations, including the
Security Council, will support the people of that
country in the final stage of their journey towards a
brighter future.

