Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): France
fully endorses the statement to be made later today by
the representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of
the European Union.

At the outset, allow me to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico for her initiative to bring us
together here today to address the issue of children and
armed conflict. I also wish to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund and the
Secretary-General for their statements. I further thank
Ms. Grace Akallo for her particularly moving
testimony, which reminds us of the gravity of the
crimes that we must end.

I also wish to pay tribute to the commitment of
Mr. Claude Heller, Permanent Representative of
Mexico, in assuming the duties of Chairman of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict with
conviction and resolve.

Over the past four years ago, the Working Group
has focused on the recruitment and use of child soldiers
and has contributed to the release of tens of thousands
of children. That was made possible by the unflagging
efforts of all the members of the Security Council; the
Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy; UNICEF at the highest
levels; and other actors in the field, particularly the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

Much remains to be done, however, as we are
reminded each day by the tragic situation of children
affected by conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia, the Sudan and Sri Lanka. We must
respond. If the parties to a conflict do not implement
action plans to free children despite repeated calls from
the Security Council, we must not hesitate to impose
tough, targeted sanctions. There is, unfortunately, no
effective prevention or deterrent without sanctions. In
this regard, I particularly welcome the actions taken by
the International Criminal Court and the international
criminal justice system, which have proven their ability
to prosecute those who are guilty of the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflicts. Now more than
ever, the fight against impunity must be a priority.

We do not put legitimate Governments and armed
groups on the same footing, but they have the same
responsibilities with respect to the Paris Principles.
Children - all children - must be freed from the
scourge of war. It is not just the protection and
sometimes even the survival of children that are at
stake, but the credibility of the Security Council and its
resolutions.

France is convinced of the need for substantial
progress with regard to the other five grave violations
of children's rights that have been referred to the
Security Council. We fully agree with the analysis and
recommendations presented by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2009/158). The widespread nature of
sexual crimes against children and the massive,
systematic and planned nature of these crimes in
certain situations call for decisive reaction. Children
are too often killed or maimed during deliberate
attacks, including terrorist attacks aimed at
schoolchildren. We must do everything we can to halt
these vile acts and to ensure that their perpetrators are
held accountable before the courts. I welcome the
adoption later today of a presidential statement that
sends a strong signal to the parties in that regard.

As Bernard Kouchner said here last year,

"the time has come to reflect together on the
possibility of permitting the Working Group to
deal with the tragedy of sexual violence,
independently of whether or not there are child
soldiers in the country concerned" (S/PV.5834, p. 23).

Expanding the criteria for adding parties to the "list of
infamies" to include sexual violence and intentional
killing and maiming would represent an important first
step. The Security Council will today commit itself to
act within three months. We must ensure that this
decision is followed up in deed, which would require,
in particular, triggering the establishment of a reporting
and monitoring mechanism.

Given France's experience at the head of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, I
would like to share three proposals that we believe
would make the Working Group more proactive, more
transparent and more effective.

The Working Group's conclusions should be
followed up more effectively, first, by the Working
Group itself, which should make greater use of the
information regularly provided to it by the Secretariat
and by NGOs; then by the Security Council and its
sanctions committees when examining situations on
their agenda; and finally, in partnership with the donors
to ensure in particular that the children released by
armed groups and all other child victims of abuse
receive appropriate care and are placed in reintegration
programmes. Informal donor meetings could be
organized to that end.

The Paris Conference review forum, "Free
Children from War," inaugurated last September by the
French Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and
Human Rights, could provide a framework for these
meetings. The Mine Action Support Group's
experience could provide a frame of reference in terms
of methodology. France decided last year, at the first
meeting of the forum, to make a special contribution of
more than €1 million to UNICEF's reintegration and
social rehabilitation programmes. We hope that other
countries will be able to do the same, for instance at
the next high-level meeting of the follow-up forum on
the Paris Commitments that we will organize in the fall
in the context of the coming session of the General
Assembly here in New York.

The responsiveness of the Working Group could
be improved. The Working Group has demonstrated its
ability to adopt conclusions on all the reports that have
been submitted to it. However, to date it has been
unable able to find the resources to react formally to
the sometimes troubling information that it may
receive from the field between the submission of the
Secretary-General's reports. We feel it to be crucial for
the Working Group to react more quickly to
emergencies, for instance by allowing the Chairman to
react publicly on behalf of the Working Group.

The Working Group's work must be more
transparent. The Group's formal meetings, based on the
Council's formal meetings, would benefit from being
held in public so that the many States concerned by the
issue of children in armed conflict can be better
informed and thereby in a position to participate in the
international community's critical exertion of pressure
on recalcitrant countries and groups. Using new
information technologies, such as Internet
broadcasting, could also be tried so that stakeholders in
the field can also benefit from, contribute to and even
participate in our debates.

If it is to implement these measures and achieve
these objectives, the Secretariat must provide better
support. The burden for this is currently falling solely
on the Working Group's Chairman. We believe that
increasing the Group's workload must lead to an
allocation of sufficient resources.

At a time when there are believed to be 200,000
child soldiers in the world, the international
community cannot turn its attention from this tragedy
or waver in its efforts to demobilize and reintegrate
them into society. In this regard, the guidelines of
French policy remain unchanged. They are set out in
the full text of my remarks, which will be distributed.
We are translating those principles into action, as
attested by the creation of two attache positions
specializing in the issue of children in armed conflict at
our diplomatic missions in the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, each with its own
budget and regional jurisdiction and working closely
with the authorities of the countries concerned, United
Nations partners, local and international
non-governmental organizations and other donors.
Consequently we were able to respond swiftly, in
partnership with UNICEF, when about one hundred
children were released in Burundi a few weeks ago. We
are also able to implement programmes in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo that fully integrate
best practices defined by the Paris Principles.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the Council of
France's determined support for Mexico's efforts as
chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. Despite the complex
procedure, despite the long period of development, we
must remain animated by a sense of urgency. The fate
of tens of thousands of children depends on that. They
are counting on us to make concrete gestures. Grace
Akallo has just told us of her hope and her confidence
in us, in our ability to act. I am certain that we will
hear her call and that we will all assume our full
responsibilities.
