Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express the gratitude
of the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic for the
convening of this important meeting on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation wishes to
thank the Secretary-General for the report before the
Council (S/2004/431). We wish also to express our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland
for his briefing this morning. We further wish to
express our gratitude to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for its efforts in various
regions of the world.

Civilians constitute the majority of the victims of
armed conflicts, which not only cause death and
destruction, but generate large numbers of refugees and
internally displaced men, women and children who are
compelled to live in difficult conditions, facing
deprivation for long years, far from home. The number
of refugees and persons displaced as a result of armed
conflicts worldwide has reached an unprecedented
level, estimated at 50 million, and it continues to grow.
There are millions of Palestinian and Syrian refugees
and displaced persons who are still far from home, in
many cases after more than 56 years. This is the result
of the Israeli occupation of Arab territories and Israel's
lack of respect for international law and numerous

relevant United Nations resolutions.

The report of the Secretary-General emphasizes
that all parties to a conflict must abide by international
law. Regrettably, there are still those who, under flimsy
pretexts - such as, in Israel's case, the pretext of self-
defence - pursue practices that run counter to
international humanitarian law. If this law had been
respected, large numbers of deaths and injuries could
have been prevented. We also wish to emphasize
something that the report states: that combating
terrorism does not justify a failure to respect
international humanitarian law, the United Nations
Charter or the principle of State sovereignty and
security, and that we have to deal comprehensively
with the root causes of conflicts and not ignore those
causes.

The Middle East is a glaring example of the
suffering of civilians - specifically Palestinian,
Lebanese and Syrian civilians, who are suffering as a
result of the continued Israeli occupation of Arab
territories. This suffering is evidenced in the continued
killing, the demolition of homes, the displacement of
people and the restriction of movement of both workers
and humanitarian personnel, who are indeed sometimes
deliberately targeted by occupation forces. This has
exacerbated the suffering of the Palestinian people, as
has the building of the expansionist barrier. Under-
Secretary-General Egeland, in his briefing to the
Security Council on 9 December 2003, stated that:

"Issues of humanitarian access in the occupied
Palestinian territories also continue to be of great
concern. Recent developments - including the
construction of the Israeli security barrier - will
serve only to further limit the access that affected
communities have to humanitarian assistance, to
essential services and to their livelihoods. Our
efforts to secure access where it is denied require
unflagging commitment provided on a systematic
basis by all of us" (S/PV.4877, p. 3).

We are indeed delighted that the Under-Secretary-
General repeated this in his statement this morning. It
was our hope that the Secretary-General's report would
have discussed these facts and not dealt with them in
such a hurried manner. Civilians everywhere have to be
protected. Not recognizing that recent events in Rafah
and Gaza were crimes that shocked humanity is
unacceptable, especially since the Security Council
adopted a resolution condemning Israeli practices and
calling on the Israeli Government to desist from the
demolition of Palestinian homes and property and from
carrying out extrajudicial killings.

We cannot forget the suffering of innocent
civilians on the African continent. We welcome the
progress achieved in Liberia, cote d'Ivoire and
Burundi after the deployment of joint forces in those
regions.

The report presents a 10-point platform to
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We believe that they are important points that should
be discussed meticulously. Their implementation
should be followed closely so that the international
community can overcome the challenges that we face
in protecting civilians; we must emphasize the norms
of international law and international humanitarian law
as well as the long-accepted norms of the protection of
human rights. In this regard, we would stress the need
for the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, each within its sphere of competence, to
discuss this report and its contents, and for
coordination between the three principal organs of the
United Nations that will allow the issue to be addressed
systematically.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
need for access to vulnerable groups in conflict zones,
which we consider to be one of the most important
aspects of the protection of civilians, a complex and
multifaceted task. We hope that the United Nations will
be able to draft legal and security norms to ensure the
unimpeded access of humanitarian assistance.

We also draw attention to the suffering of women
and children in armed conflict and to the need to
challenge the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, which only helps to prolong such conflicts.

Finally, I would emphasize that the only way
ultimately to settle conflicts is to address their root
causes, such as occupation in the case of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, and to ensure the implementation of the
resolutions of international legitimacy. We can also
achieve comprehensive and just peace by eliminating
the political, economic and social causes of conflicts in
many countries. We stress the need to comply with the
principles of international law, including justice and
respect for human dignity and integrity.

