The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

A year ago, in this Chamber, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1244 (1999). At the time, Kosovo
was devastated. But hundreds of thousands of refugees
and displaced persons finally had hope of returning to
their homes. Their houses had been destroyed; poorly
maintained infrastructure that had years before been
abandoned by the central authorities was unusable. But
above all, the hatred fed by recent atrocities was
looking to return. It was that territory, that society, both
marked by violence and destruction, that a year ago the
United Nations was charged with the difficult task of
administering. We must bear that starting situation in
mind in order to appreciate how much the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kouchner, has done since then. Today, refugees and
displaced persons have in large part returned. Life has
resumed. But we must never forget that the simplest
things of everyday life are all victories by UNMIK
over the past.

Problems, of course, remain. Earlier in this
meeting I spoke of the difficulties reported by the
delegation of Kosovo Serbs with which I met
yesterday. The violence that in recent days has targeted
that community, including its children as Mr. Kouchner
reminds us, is totally unacceptable. Kosovar leaders
must shoulder their responsibilities and do everything
in their power to ensure that such acts do not recur. I
welcome statements to that effect made today by Mr.
Rugova and by Mr. Thaci. Violence and terror must not
be allowed to prevail; we must refuse to give free rein
to extremists whose goals are opposed to those of the
Security Council.

Thanks to the tireless efforts of Mr. Kouchner and
his entire team, joint administrative structures have
been set up. Thanks to his efforts, Serb leaders agreed
to participate as observers in meetings of the Interim
Administrative Council and of the Kosovo Transitional
Council. The policy was beginning to yield results. On
10 May the Kosovo Transitional Council adopted a
political statement on tolerance; in the light of past
hatred, this was of great importance. Everything should
be done to resume that dialogue. To that end, we
support the efforts of UNMIK and KFOR to improve
the safety and security of all communities, and we hope
that cooperation among all Kosovars and the
international organizations will resume very soon.

Efforts must continue in order to guarantee the
effective protection of minorities. Concrete solutions
are needed to give members of minorities access to
public services and medical care; to enable them to
develop economic activities at the local level; to enable
them to receive the professional training they need to
participate in Kosovo's economy and in its society. Mr.
Kouchner and his teams have already done a great deal,
including on the "agenda for coexistence". For this too
he deserves our gratitude and our full support.

After a year of existence, UNMIK should not be
judged solely on the acts of violence that continue to be
committed against minorities. Reconciliation is not
something that can be agreed. Several years will still be
needed for peaceful coexistence among the
communities of Kosovo to be conceivable.

Lasting reconciliation also means that question of
prisoners and missing persons receive an appropriate
response. Like several other speakers, we approve the
idea of nominating a special envoy for this matter.
Coordination with the International Committee of the
Red Cross will be necessary, and it goes without saying
that the mandate of this special envoy should cover
missing persons and detainees from all communities.

UNMIK's job is to create the material,
administrative and political conditions so that this
future coexistence might be possible. In this area too,
much has been done by the Mission under Mr.
Kouchner's direction, as well as by KFOR, in which
the Eurocorps - an important new element- today
forms the core of the staff and provides the military
command.

Previous speakers have for the most part stressed
all of UNMIK's accomplishments in one year. I would
simply stress the fact that all of these jobs that have
been completed by the Mission and the Special
Representative, despite difficulties, have established a
lasting basis for the future of Kosovo. Basic
services- water, electricity and heat- have been
restored. Houses have been rebuilt. Former Kosovo
Liberation Army combatants have been demobilized
and reintegrated into a civil structure. The various
segments of Kosovo society have been involved in the
joint administrative structures. Nevertheless, there is
still work to be done. It could not be otherwise after
only a year of existence.

First, regarding the question of local elections, it
is essential that we be very precise and careful in
preparations and the conditions for holding the
elections. It is also essential to encourage the
participation of the Serb Kosovars. By preventing the
Serbs of Kosovo from participating in the registration
process and therefore in the elections, Mr. Milosevic is
preventing them from using the opportunity to take
charge of their future in Kosovo, and he is thus proving
that he is not the defender of their interests.

For the establishment of a real state of law we
need to put in place all the necessary elements, such as
the police force, judges and prisons, in order to combat
the culture of impunity.

Finally, discussions should take place within the
appropriate framework and at the most appropriate
time on the contents of autonomy, a point which has
been made by several speakers today.

This first anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999) is an important date. However,
we should not forget that the job entrusted to UNMIK
requires time, financial means and staffing resources.
This Council meeting will make States here aware of
the importance of giving UNMIK the means that it still
requires. I associate myself with what our colleague
Mr. Duval has said regarding the recruitment plan, that
important progress has been made here. Our meeting
will also make it possible for us to reiterate our full
support to Mr. Kouchner and to all the Mission staff on
the ground in achieving their difficult task.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council. I call on the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to answer questions that have been
raised.

