Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): With the signing of the
Peace Agreement in Paris yesterday, the parties in the
former Yugoslavia have taken another important step in
their search for peace in their homelands. Although it is
an important step, it is none the less a symbolic one: now
comes the hard part of the implementation of the various
accords they have entered into. We congratulate in this
specific instance all the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and their leaders for what seems like the
dawn of peace in a country that has been ravaged by war
during the last four years.

After the initialling of the Dayton Agreement on
21 November 1995, my delegation observed that the
development represented an important breakthrough in the
peace process. We saw it as a first step in what would
undoubtedly be a long and difficult journey to peace. We
none the less believed then, as we do now, that this
agreement represents the best opportunity thus far to end
the conflict. We therefore repeat our call to all the
Bosnian parties and their respective allies to back their
commitments with concrete steps on the ground.

The agreement reached will have a lot of
humanitarian and emotional implications. It is likely to
lead to the movement of peoples, with implications for
their lives. People may have to make difficult decisions
on whether to remain where their families have lived for
hundreds of years or move to new areas where they
would feel more secure. These are emotional questions,
the resolution of which will determine the success of the
Peace Agreement.

There is also the important question of justice as
opposed to the exigency of securing peace for the present
time. Let me, however, say that my Government will
extend its full cooperation to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This is because in
the end there can be no lasting peace without justice, and
unless justice is done, and seen to be done, the cycle of
killings in the Balkans may never cease.

 

There will be no easy answers to all of these issues,
yet there is no viable alternative to a determined effort to
confront and resolve these problems if the peoples of
Bosnia are to start enjoying peace and begin the process of
rebuilding their lives and their homes. My Government will
be behind them and give them all the support within our
means. We wish them well.

In addition to the foregoing, the parties to the conflict
and particularly all the States in the region must recognize
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of one another. There must be a genuine effort and
commitment to abandon the military logic and the illusion
that there could be the victor and the vanquished. In this
regard, all the States must respect Annex l-B of the Dayton
Agreement on arms control and regional stabilization. And
we call on the States in the region, many of them with the
capacity for the production of armaments, to be responsible
in their dealings with the parties. Furthermore, the multi-
ethnic, multireligious and multicultural nature of the States
in the region must be recognized, respected and preserved
by all.

The draft resolution before us has been described as
urgent and very critical to the implementation of peace in
Bosnia. The Security Council has been requested to adopt
this draft resolution so as to enable the implementation
process to start. In principle, my delegation has no
problems with that view. We are all for peace. However, let
me state the following.

We would have preferred a United Nations operation
under the policy control of the Security Council and the
managerial supervision of the Secretary-General, in spite of
the fact that the parties to the Agreement have requested a
multinational force. We are of course mindful of the
observations of the Secretary-General about the inability of
the United Nations at present to undertake such an
operation. In our view, what our Organization lacks in the
present circumstances is the political backing and resource
support of Member States to directly undertake enforcement
operations as envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter.

My delegation believes that we should not continue to
contract out what would normally be a United Nations
responsibility to a group of powerful States. It is my
delegation' s belief that, with the necessary political will and
commitment to the ideas of collective security enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, multinational forces for peace
enforcement should be placed at the disposal of the United
Nations and operated under the command of the Secretary-
General.

 

Concerning the various provisions of this extensive
draft resolution, we should like to observe that it took
members of the Contact Group about two weeks to
discuss and resolve among themselves the various
intricacies of what is undoubtedly a complex military,
political and humanitarian operation. To have expected
other members of the Security Council to make
meaningful contributions towards its enrichment in less
than 48 hours was certainly unrealistic. We would not like
to believe that it was deliberately done to achieve the
purpose of their not being able to contribute meaningfully.

For example, questions about the time-frame and
concept of the operation are not quite clear, nor can one
say exactly whence the post of High Representative - in
spite of the qualities of the nominee - derives its
legitimacy and authority. As Member States of the United
Nations, we should not support decisions that have the
effect of subordinating our Organization or our
Secretary-General to another organization, no matter how
powerful its members. After all, ours is still the most
universal expression of the will of the international
community.

However, in view of my Government's policy of
supporting all peace initiatives and the primary objective
of helping to resolve the Balkan conflict, we are able to
go along with the overriding purpose of this draft
resolution. We are therefore able to support it.
