Ms. Bensouda: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, and to wish you,
Sir, every success in steering the important work of this
organ throughout the month of June.

It has been over 13 years since the Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and directed me to report to it every six
months on actions taken and progress made pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). After 13 years and 27 reports, the
victims of the grave crimes that prompted the Security
Council to refer the situation in Darfur to the ICC have
yet to see those alleged to be most responsible for such
crimes face justice. The question begs asking - how
many more years and how many more reports will be
required for the Council to be galvanized into taking
tangible action? How much longer should victims of
the alleged atrocity crimes in Darfur suffer in silence
or wait to have their torment acknowledged through
concrete results?

The Security Council has an important role to play
in supporting the effective implementation of its own
resolution - resolution 1593 (2005) - which referred
the Darfur situation to the Court. In paragraph 2 of the
resolution, the Council decided that the Government of
the Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur
shall cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor. Regrettably,

the Government of the Sudan has not only refused
to cooperate with the Court, in clear violation of the
Council's resolution, but has rather been emboldened
to publicly denounce the Court in this forum. It does so
repeatedly, with facile and baseless allegations aimed
at creating a distraction from the real issues and the
Government's failure to fulfil its responsibilities and
obligations. It is also regrettable that such intransigence
has been presented in this Chamber, where respectful
discourse is to govern all interventions, focused on
finding real solutions to the serious issues of which this
organ is seized.

The eyes of the world are upon us; the eyes of
victims and victims' groups in Darfur, some of whom
are present today, are upon us. They are owed at least
this minimum decorum, and they deserve not to not
have their ordeals undermined by rhetoric aimed at
confusing the issues and distracting the Council's
and the world's attention from what we are really
concerned with here - the need to ensure that there is
accountability for the serious and destabilizing crimes
under the Rome Statute committed in Darfur through
the Court's independent judicial process.

Today, I want to use this opportunity to reassure the
victims in Darfur that my Office has neither forgotten
nor abandoned them. Despite the many challenges we
face, my Office continues to do all within its power
and means to ensure that alleged perpetrators against
whom ICC warrants have been issued will face justice
in Court.

The ICC is a permanent judicial institution and it
is here to stay. The evidence collected to date as part
of our Darfur investigations, thanks to the assistance
and commitment of victims and witnesses, and often
at great risk, has persuaded the judges of the Court
to issue warrants of arrest against five suspects. My
Office continues to collect more evidence. Considerable
progress has been made in this regard, thanks to the
cooperation of a number of States and the sacrifices
that many continue to make to help us solidify our cases
towards the aim of being trial-ready. What is required
now is for the Council and the international community
at large to support the apprehension and transfer of
ICC suspects to the Court so that they can answer the
charges against them through a fair, independent and
objective judicial process.

Let me be clear. The effective power to arrest
and surrender ICC suspects in the Darfur situation
rests solely with States. The Council also plays a vital
role in ensuring that these obligations are honoured.
I once again urge the Council to take concrete action
concerning States referred to it by the Court following
failures by such States to arrest and surrender ICC
suspects in the Darfur situation while such suspects are
on their territory. I am encouraged by the efforts that a
number of members of the Council, including permanent
members, continue to make to break the impasse. These
efforts include proposals for potential responses on the
part ofthe Council to the referrals it receives and public
calls on States, including the Sudan, to cooperate with
the Court to execute outstanding arrest warrants. This
ongoing support for the work of the Office by individual
members of the Council is greatly valued.

As mentioned, there are today five persons in the
Darfur situation subject to outstanding warrants of
arrest: officials of the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Ahmad Harun and
Mr. Abdel Hussein; militia leader Mr. Ali Kushayb;
and rebel leader Mr. Abdallah Banda. All are presently
at large. These fugitives stand accused of multiple
crimes against humanity and war crimes. These alleged
atrocities include the widespread rape and sexual assault
of women and girls; attacks on civilians and forcible
expulsion from their homes; and detention, torture and
summary executions of men detained by Janjaweed
and the Sudanese army. It is also alleged that in 2007,
personnel of an African Union peacekeeping operation
in Darfur were attacked and murdered at their Haskanita
base by rebel forces under the command of Mr. Banda.
These are all serious crimes of great concern that must
be addressed.

Following the Council's referral, the Office's
investigation and application for warrants of arrest and
the Pre-Trial Chambers' issuance of these warrants,
there are now two main areas of focus in the Darfur
situation: first, the Office's efforts to advance its
investigations, and secondly, the Court's collective
efforts to secure the arrest and surrender of the suspects
in the Darfur situation. The support of the Council is
critical to each if we are to move the Darfur situation
forward and achieve justice for the victims.

In relation to the Office's ongoing investigations,
during the reporting period the efforts of my team
of lawyers, investigators and analysts resulted in
important advancements in the cases against the Darfur
suspects. Additional witnesses have been interviewed
and a significant number of leads developed. However,
despite this progress, additional funding is required
to allow the team to increase the pace and breadth of
its investigations. For this reason, I must respectfully
repeat my request to the Council to facilitate financial
support from the United Nations for the Office's
investigations in the Darfur situation, as envisaged
under article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute.

My report also makes clear that during the reporting
period, the team's ongoing investigations benefited from
the cooperation of over 20 States parties. My Office
is immensely grateful for this support. Regrettably,
however, the Sudan and a number of States parties do
not cooperate with my Office in the Darfur situation.
I therefore repeat my request to the Council to take
steps to facilitate dialogue between my Office and the
Government of the Sudan. I also repeat my invitation to
the Government of the Sudan to constructively engage
with my Office, including in particular to discuss future
investigative missions by the Office to Darfur.

My report further provides an overview of the
current ongoing litigation before the Court relating
to States parties that failed to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir while he was on their territory. In
relation to the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of
Chad, Pre-Trial Chamber II has initiated proceedings
pursuant to article 87.7 of the Rome Statute in relation to
the failures of those State parties to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir during official visits on 14 November
2017 and 1 and 2 December 2017, respectively. Both
Uganda and Chad were previously referred by Pre-Trial
Chambers of the Court to the Council for past failures to
arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir - Uganda in 2016
and Chad in 2011 and 2013. No action in relation to
these or any other referrals by Pre-Trial Chambers to the
Council, has been taken. This situation, I respectfully
submit, is untenable and the Council must increasingly
assume its responsibility to take appropriate action
following a notification by the Court of non-compliant
States. Proceedings are also ongoing regarding Jordan's
failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir in March
2017.

I must emphasize that the Pre-Trial Chambers of
the Court have developed a body of jurisprudence that
clarifies the obligations of States parties under the Rome
Statute. The Council will recall that Pre-Trial Chamber
II ofthe Court made a decision in December 2017 to find
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in non-compliance
with its obligation to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
during a visit on 29 March 2017, and to refer the matter
to the Council and the Assembly of States Parties. That
decision again made clear that Mr. Al-Bashir's official
status did not justify a failure by a State party to
arrest and surrender a suspect subject to an ICC arrest
warrant. Jordan appealed that decision and the Court's
Appeals Chamber is now seized of the question.

The Appeals Chamber has scheduled a hearing
for 10, 11 and 12 September 2018. In advance of that
hearing, on the basis that the legal issues in the appeal
may have broader implications, the Appeals Chamber
has invited the relevant parties to make submissions
that may assist in its determination of the legal issues
raised in Jordan's appeal. In response to an invitation by
the Appeals Chamber to States parties and professors
of international law, the United Mexican States and
16 law professors were granted permission to submit
legal observations. The Appeals Chamber also invited
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization
of American States to submit observations on the legal
issues in the appeal by 16 July.

I am particularly encouraged by the fact that the
African Union recently notified the Appeals Chamber of
its acceptance of the invitation to submit observations.
The participation of the African Union in the process is
very important, not least because, as the African Union
observed in its notification to the Appeals Chamber, 33
of the 55 African Union States members are also parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

The issue of official immunities in relation to
persons subject to ICC warrants ofarrests was discussed
at the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 28 and
29 January. I am also aware that various follow-up
initiatives are being considered by the African Union.
In that context, I commend the African Union for
taking the opportunity to constructively engage with
the Appeals Chamber on this important issue.

The Appeals Chamber also invited the Sudan and
Mr. Al-Bashir to file submissions, by 16 July, on the
merits of the legal questions raised in Jordan's appeal.
It is important for the Appeals Chamber to hear and
consider the views of all interested parties before its
final determination on the issue.

All the relevant stakeholders in the matter have an
opportunity to express their viewpoints to the Appeals
Chamber. I am hopeful that they will each do so,
including the Security Council via the United Nations,
and thereby participate in a process that will result in a
final determination of this critical issue.
My Office would be remiss not to recognize and
appreciate the continued progress towards stability in
Darfur. I commend the efforts of all those involved in
the Darfur peace process, led by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel and supported by the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.

Despite that progress, as my report makes clear,
intermitent violence in Darfur continued during the
reporting period. A number of clashes were reported
between forces of the Government of the Sudan
and various rebel groups in the Jebel Marra area. In
addition, there were reported attacks by Rapid Support
Forces and militiamen during March and April on
villages located in Jebel Marra. The clashes and attacks
reportedly resulted in tens of thousands of additional
internally displaced persons.

My report notes the 1 February report by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), which stated that, according to the
Government of the Sudan, there had been a substantial
decrease in the overall number of internally displaced
persons from Darfur and that hundreds of thousands
were returning to their homes. I note that OCHA
indicated that it is verifying the numbers of returning
internally displaced persons. As stated in my previous
report, the Office echoes the Council's view expressed
in its resolution 2363 (2017) that any return should
be safe, voluntary and in accordance with applicable
international law.

Sustainable peace and stability can return to Darfur
only once the root causes of conflict are addressed.
That includes ending impunity for alleged crimes under
the Rome Statute in Darfur and ensuring accountability
for the victims of those serious crimes. The collective
efforts aimed at ensuring such accountability, which
I outlined in my report, will go on. My Office will
continue to play its role, together with the other organs
of the Court and the international community at large.
I appeal to the courageous women and men who are
victims of the past and ongoing crimes in Darfur not to
despair but to bear with us and continue to cooperate
with our ongoing investigations.

Today I ask the Council, as the organ that began the
process of accountability for Rome Statute crimes in
Darfur, to more actively play its part in these collective
efforts - and in particular to show its support for my
Office's investigations by facilitating United Nations
funding and taking steps to ensure that my Office
obtains the cooperation it needs, including from the
Sudan.

Finally, I respectfully request the Council to
provide its support to secure the arrest and surrender
of the Darfur suspects. That is a prerequisite for justice
being done for the thousands of victims in the Darfur
situation, and a vital next step in the process that the
Council started with its referral of the Darfur situation
to my Office.

In addition to falling short of adequately responding
to the legitimate calls of victims for justice, the status
quo will not only erode public confidence in the cause
of international criminal justice in Darfur, but also
in the Council itself. We must work together more
effectively, within our respective mandates, to ensure
full implementation of, and compliance with, resolution
1593 (2005). More than a decade since the Council
adopted that resolution, it is past time that we did just
that. We must act collectively and with resolve. My
Office remains firm in its commitment and as a ready
partner in that joint obligation.

