Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to extend our congratulations
to the German presidency for the good innovations.

I would be remiss ifI did not personally express our
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and High
Commissioner Bachelet, as well as Ms. Viaud, for their
informative briefings, which truly spoke to our hearts.

We congratulate the Government of Haiti and
would first like to say how happy we are to have
among us today the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Haiti, whom we welcome and wish a good stay here
in New York. We would also like to thank him for the
significant improvements seen in Haiti with regard
to both the functioning of institutions and respect for
human rights, as we have just heard in the briefings.

Given those improvements, for which we give credit
to the United Nations support mission and the political
will and leadership of the Government of Haiti, we
now need to increase and further strengthen support
for the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the Government in order to
build on those improvements and prevent them from
being reversed.

The humanitarian situation in Haiti is still very
fragile. Indeed, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than
2.5 million Haitians in the country currently need
humanitarian assistance, a significant part of the
population does not have access to drinking water and
hundreds of thousands of children do not have access
to education. We sincerely believe that insufficient
attention has been paid to the humanitarian risk.
There should therefore be a considerable increase in
humanitarian assistance in order to significantly reduce
the current figures regarding the humanitarian situation
in the country by the end of the year, in particular all
those adverse events suffered by children and women.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea fully supports
the renewal of the MINUJUSTH mandate for six months
and a review of the possible options to be adopted for
the period after 15 October, on the basis of resolution
2410 (2018). In our view, the United Nations presence
is essential in order to support the process of rebuilding
the country's institutions. That should be carried out
through a special political mission, not a peacekeeping
one. We fully share the Secretary-General's desire for
a smooth and orderly transition to maintain a strong
United Nations political presence in Haiti, since a
gradual approach is necessary if we wish to see a
successful transition.

In conclusion, the Government of Haiti must
give high priority to addressing gang violence and
to building stronger links with communities affected
by violent crime. At the same time, the international
community must give greater support to MINUJUSTH
in its community violence reduction programme in
order to even further mitigate violence in hotspots in the
Port-au-Prince metropolitan area. It must also continue
to promote dialogue in fragile neighbourhoods affected
by a chronic lack of socioeconomic opportunities and
limited access to basic services, including the police
and justice systems.

