Mr. Oshima (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank Mr. Mark Malloch Brown for his briefing. I also
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this public
meeting this morning on an issue of great concern, not
only to members of the Council but also to the entire
membership of the Organization. The nature of the
problem is such that it is important to ensure in our
discussion a maximum of transparency and
inclusiveness, and a public meeting allows for that.

We are very disturbed at the report of the non-
insignificant incidence of fraud and mismanagement
with regard to procurement in our Organization,
especially in relation to peacekeeping operations. The
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) report
indicates that, for the period 2000-2004, the aggregated
procurement value for peacekeeping operations is
estimated at $3.7 billion, no small amount. We are
struck by the references to a grievous lack of internal
controls and non-adherence to the existing controls. We
are also alarmed by the reported lack of enforcement of
accountability by management in handling the large
amount of resources that has been provided to the
Organization by Member States.

Peacekeeping operations is a flagship operation
of the United Nations in the area of peace and security,
for which tens of thousands of personnel, including
civilian, military and police, are working hard, day and
night, in difficult circumstances. It is truly regrettable
that the good image of the blue helmets, who are
engaged around the globe, should be tarnished by these
unfortunate allegations.

It goes without saying that, in our countries, good
governance must ensure that taxpayers' money is spent
not only wisely but also accountably, adhering to rules
and regulations. The same should hold true for
intergovernmental bodies, including the United
Nations. Member States, whatever the size of their
contributions to the Organization's budget, are obliged
to ask the Secretary-General and his staff, particularly
those with management responsibility, to ensure that
the resources entrusted to the United Nations are spent
accountably. Any failings or shortcomings in this
respect should be immediately and energetically
addressed and remedied.

We, therefore, ask that the Secretary-General
continue the thorough and rigorous investigation into
the alleged wrongdoing and abuse in the procurement
office in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), as well as in other procurement-related
offices, in order to arrive as soon as possible at a full
accounting of the facts, including the identification of
all those who should be held accountable, as well as
remedial measures to prevent the recurrence of such
fraud and mismanagement in future.

In this connection, we recall that the Secretary-
General referred to a zero-tolerance policy in the
context of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers, as Mr. Malloch Brown again
reminded us in his briefing. We agree that the same
spirit and rigour should also apply to the financial
management of the Organization, including, in
particular, procurement.

I feel compelled to say that, unless immediate and
convincing measures are taken to redress this problem,
my Government, which currently contributes 20 per
cent of the peacekeeping operations budget, will find it
very difficult to maintain domestic support for
underwriting peacekeeping operations, both ongoing
operations and new ones, including a possible
operation in Darfur.

The issue before us falls clearly under the
purview of the Security Council, as the organ
responsible for the creation of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and for their overall
oversight. In the light of this responsibility, it is quite
appropriate that the Security Council should take up
this issue and that Council members express their
views.

At the same time, the issues of management,
budget and procurement have generally been the
prerogative of the General Assembly, as the chief
deliberative and representative organ of the United
Nations. This applies to peacekeeping operations as
well. On the basis of a thorough investigation, Member
States will in due course conduct a review of the
current procurement system in the General Assembly,
which has the responsibility of overseeing the
administrative and financial aspects of peacekeeping
operations, including a comprehensive review of the
relevant policies, practices, rules and regulations.

There is thus, in our view, complementarity
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council in the handling of the issue before us. In the
light of the seriousness of the alleged wrongdoing, both
the Security Council and the General Assembly need to
work with a sense of urgency, by complementing each
other and ensuring coherence in our overall approach
to the matter. To do that, we expect that as an example
of good top-level management within the Organization,
the Presidents of the Council and the Assembly will
consult closely with each other and with the Secretary-
General to ensure coherence of policy and approach.

Mr. President, we appreciate the fact that you
conferred with the President of the General Assembly
about the discussion of this issue. We support and
encourage such consultations. After all, we have a
common goal: an efficient, effective and accountable
Secretariat that will discharge the tasks entrusted to it
by us, the Member States.

