Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Nickolay
for his briefing just now, which made clear that we are
beginning a difficult year for the Middle East.

Fifty years since the Six Day War and almost six
years since the start of fighting in Syria, peace for
many in the region is but a distant memory. Years of
Violence are now, sadly, the norm. We saw that last
week on the streets of Jerusalem. Let me take this
opportunity to condemn that horrific terrorist attack
and to offer my sincere condolences to the four victims
and their families. There simply can be no justification
for this kind of terrorism. The United Kingdom urges
the authorities to take appropriate actions against those
who commit such crimes. And we call upon Hamas and
other terrorist groups permanently to end their violence
and rocket fire against Israel.

At the root of this violence lies a seemingly
unending cycle of poisonous rhetoric and incitement.
The British Government strongly condemns the use
of racist, anti-Semitic and hateful language. We
deplore incitement, wherever it comes from. As the
Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) made clear, this
spiral of violence and incitement is only eroding the
prospects of a two-State solution. It is critical that the
Palestinian leadership implement the recommendations
of the report and continue their efforts to tackle terror
and incitement, strengthen institutions and develop a
sustainable economy.

It was because of the United Kingdom's long-
running support for the two-State solution and our
commitment to Israel as the Jewish homeland that we
voted in favour of resolution 2234 (2016) last month.
It has long been our position that Israeli settlement
activity is illegal and undermines the viability of two
States for two peoples. But we should also recognize
that the resolution calls upon all parties to exert efforts
to launch credible negotiations on all final-status
issues and urged the intensification and acceleration
of international and regional efforts to support a
comprehensive peace. We recognize that, utlimately, an
agreement can be achieved only by direct negotiations
between the parties. But international action has an
important role to play in supporting those bilateral
efforts and in helping bring about peace - and it is
long overdue.

Turning briefly now to Syria, we begin 2017
much as we did 2016, with some cautious and fragile
optimism. But although 2016 began with promise - the
International Syria Support Group, resolution 2254
(2015) and the London Conference - the year that
followed saw some of the worst violence since the start
of the conflict. We owe it to the people of Aleppo, and
so many others, to ensure that in 2017 we seen the end of
atrocities by the Syrian regime. That means that this year
must be the year that we see a full, nationwide cessation
of hostilities, one monitored by the United Nations and
that leads to a return to genuine and inclusive political
negotiations led by the United Nations. We will support
all efforts that bring about that reality. For that reason,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2336 (2016) last
year. It is time for that resolution, and all those before
it, to be fully enacted.

The ceasefire agreed by Russia, Turkey and Iran,
which came into force on 29 December, is still very
fragile. Reports of violations are commonplace. We
must continue to monitor developments in the coming
days and weeks and ensure that all those directly
involved in violations and those with influence adhere
to the ceasefire.

We are especially concerned by the situation in
the Wadi Barada area of Damascus. Civilians there are
facing intense bombardment from pro-regime forces.
More than 5 million people across Damascus also
remain without access to the central water supply. And
there are still more than 700,000 people in besieged
areas in Syria, the vast majority besieged by the regime,
whose activity has been abetted by external actors.

We can therefore be under no illusions. The task
to bring peace to Syria remains painfully incomplete.
The frameworks for dialogue are there, but they cannot
exist on paper alone. And those who have perpetrated
terrible crimes in Syria continue to escape justice.
As we work together to find peace this year, we must
pursue accountability in tandem. To that end, the
United Kingdom and France will be putting forward
a draft resolution to ensure that those members of
the regime who were involved in the abhorrent use
of chemical weapons will face the consequences. We
urge all members to support that vital initiative when it
comes before the Security Council.

