Mr. Owada (Japan): On 21 June this year the
Security Council adopted resolution 1115 (1997), in the
face of Iraq's non-cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM), condemning the
repeated refusal of the Iraqi authorities to allow access to
sites designated by the Commission. Specifically, the
resolution expressed in paragraph 6 the firm intention of
the Security Council - unless the Special Commission
advised the Council that Iraq was in substantial
compliance with the provisions of that resolution - to
impose additional measures on those categories of Iraqi
officials responsible for the non-compliance.

Regrettably, the latest report submitted by
Ambassador Richard Butler, Executive Chairman of
UNSCOM, makes it clear that there has been a continued
series of Iraqi non-cooperation in this respect,
representing attempts on the part of the Iraqi authorities
not to comply with the provisions of resolution 1115
(1997) to allow UNSCOM. the rights of inspection under
the mandate of the Council.

While my delegation takes note of the progress
achieved by the Special Commission - as set out in the
latest report of the Executive Chairman (S/ 1997/774) -
towards the elimination of Iraq's programme of weapons
of mass destruction, it is most important that the Security
Council make its determination abundantly clear to ensure
full cooperation by Iraq with all its obligations under all
previous relevant resolutions. The Council should insist
upon its demand that Iraq allow the Special Commission
immediate, unconditional, unrestricted access to any site
which the Commission wishes to inspect.

This issue should not be looked at as a mere
technicality of Violations of the sanctions regime against
Iraq. As my delegation stated at the time of the adoption
of resolution 1115 (1997) on 21 June, what is at issue is
the most serious question of how to prevent the
development of weapons of mass destruction, an issue of
the utmost concern to all of us in the Security Council
involved in the problem of peace and stability in the
region.

It is important for the international community,
through the decision of the Security Council, to

 

demonstrate its position of principle on this situation. With
this point in mind, my delegation, together with other like-
minded delegations, has actively participated in our efforts
to produce a draft resolution that reflects this common
position of the international community. Our efforts have
been directed to produce a draft resolution which could
command the unified position of the Security Council.

With all the efforts exerted in the Council in good
faith, however, there is a limit beyond which we cannot go
in deference to the points of principle involved. Simply to
repeat condemnations which have been issued in the past
for dealing with past incidents will, in the view of my
delegation, not be sufficient in the light of the gravity of
the situation. An approach building upon and following
upon what the Council agreed in resolution 1115 (1997) is
needed, so that the Council may bring about the compliance
of Iraq with its obligations.

Based on this approach, Japan is in support of the
direction in which the Security Council will now be moving
in adopting this draft resolution. In particular, my
delegation notes that paragraphs 6 and 7 of the draft
resolution are essential elements which seek to bring Iraq
to resuming full cooperation with UNSCOM. as soon as
possible. It is our sincere hope that Iraq will review its
position and cooperate unconditionally with UNSCOM. My
delegation understands the purport of these paragraphs to be
requiring Iraq to cooperate fully with UNSCOM, in form as
well as in substance, and to give immediate, unconditional
and unrestricted access to its officials and other persons
under its authority for interviews, so that UNSCOM. can
exercise all its rights as an essential precondition for
discharging its mandate.

In the view of my delegation, this draft resolution is
an essential response needed in order for the Council to
maintain its authority and to carry out its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. It is for
this reason that Japan is co-sponsoring this draft resolution.

