Mr. Mayoral (Argentina)(spoke in Spanish):
Argentina is also gravely concerned about the recent
events in the Gaza Strip and, in particular, about the
rising death toll of innocent civilians as a result of the
Israeli military operations.

My country unequivocally and energetically
condemns the military operation carried out in the
residential area of Beit Hanoun on the morning of 8
November, which has resulted in the deaths of at least
18 Palestinian civilians, including eight children and
seven women. We extend our sincere condolences to
the bereaved families.

We believe that this type of Israeli military action
in populated areas must cease immediately from now
on. Too many so-called mistakes are occurring.

As we have stated in previous occasions, Israel
has the right to defend itself, but in the exercise of this
right it should fully abide by the provisions of
humanitarian international law regarding the protection
of the civilian population, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

In view of the serious nature of the recent events
in Beit Hanoun, we believe that an independent and
impartial investigation should be carried out urgently,
and that its results should be made available to this
Security Council and to the wider international
community.

In these difficult circumstances, it is necessary
that the parties exercise the utmost restraint and avoid
taking any measures that could lead to an increase of
violence. In the short term, we believe that it is
imperative that the Qassem rocket attacks from the
Gaza Strip against Israeli targets must cease
immediately and that the Palestinian Authority should
take the necessary measures to prevent new suicide
bombings or any other attacks against Israeli civilians
from happening. Recent statements by some leaders of
Hamas in this regard are quite worrying, to say the
least.
As we said before, Israel must cease all military
activities in the Gaza Strip and withdraw from that
territory. Likewise, - we repeat - Israel should cease
military operations in the West Bank and put an end to
unilateral measures that create facts on the ground,
such as settlement activities and the construction of the
separation wall.

We acknowledge that what happened in Beit
Hanoun may have a profound impact on the Palestinian
territories. Nevertheless, we hope that the
conversations between President Abbas and Prime
Minister Haniyeh on the formation of a Government of
national unity will continue. The platform of such a
Government must reflect the three principles set out by
the Quartet. We hope that, in spite of statements to the
contrary, the leadership of Hamas will respond
positively to the proposals made by the Palestinian
President and continue to engage in a meaningful
dialogue to resolve all of the outstanding issues.

We consider that the release of Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit also continues to be of the utmost priority.
We appreciate and recognize the efforts of the Egyptian
Government in this regard, and we hope they will bear
fruit. Members of the Legislative Council and the
Palestinian Government who are being held as
prisoners by Israel should also be released.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
be a reason of concern for my Government and for my
country. We reiterate that the crossings into and out of
Gaza should be kept open and that both parties should
take measures to implement the Agreement on
Movement and Access, signed almost a year ago. The
international community, on its part, must intensify its
efforts to provide emergency relief to the Palestinian
people in order to alleviate its suffering.

The long history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
shows us that military operations or terrorist acts are
not the right way to achieve a just and lasting solution
based on the notion of two independent and sovereign
States living side by side in peace and security. The
path of violence will only increase the resentment and
mutual mistrust and will strengthen extremist sectors.

We are fully convinced that the only path is that
of peace negotiations based on the resolutions of this
Council, the Madrid terms of reference, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative of Beirut.
The international community, in particular the Quartet
and the Security Council, should assume a more

proactive role, with the aim of assisting the parties to
resume such negotiations and to put an end to the
vicious cycle of killings, revenge and reprisals that
have darkened the Middle East in recent times.

Our responsibility is to act in an urgent manner,
and we must do it to the benefit of all peoples of the
region.

With respect to the draft resolution that is being
elaborated by the delegation of Qatar, we will put forth
our proposals, and we hope that it will be adopted by
the Security Council.

