Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence here of
the Deputy President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, to
brief the Council about the situation in Burundi. China
greatly appreciates the important role played by the
South African Government and His Excellency Deputy
President Zuma, as facilitator of the Burundi peace
process. China welcomes the positive results achieved
at the recent Summit of the Great Lakes Regional
Peace Initiative on Burundi.

China notes with appreciation that, thanks to the
joint efforts of all parties concerned and the efforts of
the international community, the peace process in
Burundi has made headway. The Transitional
Government of Burundi and the National Council for
the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD) recently signed a Global
Ceasefire Agreement, which indicates an important
step forward for the Burundian peace process.

We hope that all sides in Burundi can fulfil their
obligations in good faith and effectively implement the
provisions of the Agreement in order to bring about
comprehensive peace and reconciliation within the
framework of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi.

The peace process in Burundi still faces many
challenges. Certain anti-Government armed groups
have thus far refused to join the peace process. There
have recently been more armed attacks at Bujumbura,
resulting in loss of life and property damage. China
wishes to express its grave concern about these
developments. We call upon the relevant anti-
Government armed groups to bear in mind the
fundamental interests of the nation, to demonstrate a
spirit of national reconciliation and to speedily join the
peace process.

The African mission in Burundi is an important
attempt by African countries to solve their own
problems through their own efforts and has played an
important role in stabilizing the situation. Helping
Burundi achieve comprehensive peace is not only an
important task for the African Union, but also an
unavoidable responsibility of the United Nations. The
United Nations should enhance its coordination and
cooperation with the African Union and its support to
the African Union's mission in Burundi through joint
efforts to maintain the current favourable momentum
of the peace process in Burundi.

We note that, in his statement, Mr. Zuma
expressed the hope that the United Nations can play a
greater role on the issue of Burundi. China fully
understands this point and is in favour of seriously
examining this issue in the Security Council.

