Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank our
briefers today.

We know that transitions are crucial for countries
emerging from crisis and which, at that time, are
at risk of returning to conflict and losing political,
developmental, social and economic gains. We need to
get those transitions right as a top priority, in particular
as we in the Security Council see missions drawing
down.

Let me start by saying that we know that in order
for peace to endure, it must be locally embedded; it
must be based on national commitment to meeting
people's needs and overcoming their grievances.
Aligning mandate implementation with nationally
owned peacebuilding and development objectives from
the earliest possible point is therefore vital to nurturing
an enabling environment for effective transition.

Let me secondly touch on the importance
of integrated United Nations approaches. When
the Council decides to deploy a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, it does so in order to create
the space for national actors to restore security and
stability through a political process and/or to protect
civilians. While peacekeeping operations can contribute
to peacebuilding, they cannot in and of themselves
achieve political settlements, resolve the root causes of
conflicts or help national authorities to develop their
own capacity. We therefore need a holistic approach and
cross-pillar work in the field from the outset to address
these issues, which bring in humanitarian, development
and peacebuilding actors. In that regard, we urge the
Secretariat and United Nations leaders in the field to
ensure that the Secretary-General's March planning
directive is fully implemented.

Thirdly, let me talk about the importance of
partnership for effective transitions. Of course, the
most important partners will always be national
stakeholders, particularly Governments, civil society
and grass-roots organizations working to build peace,
and we should deepen those partnerships on the ground.
But I would also like to underline the importance of
coordination and cooperation with bilateral donors and
with regional and subregional organizations. In that
context, I welcome the words of Mr. Yero Baldeh from
the African Development Bank today.

I would like to acknowledge, as others have, the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
supported transitions. It was very good to see Foreign
Minister Trujillo Garcia here, whom many of us saw
quite recently, of course. During the transition in Liberia,
the Peacebuilding Commission demonstrated the value
of its convening power, bringing together the World
Bank, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, the Economic Community of West African
States and the country team to develop a plan and
division of labour to support the Liberian Government.

I was also very pleased to hear from Franck
Bousquet today. The partnership between the United
Nations and the World Bank is a particular priority
for the United Kingdom. The fragility, conflict and
violence strategy is an important basis for the Bank to
focus its efforts in fragile contexts, including by better
partnering with the United Nations to define strategies
for tackling the root causes of conflict.

Let me say a brief word, if I may, about the
anticipated transition in Darfur. I would like to start
by welcoming the political agreement reached by the
Transitional Military Council and the Forces of Freedom
and Change yesterday in the Sudan, which sets out a plan
for the transition to a civilian-led Government. This
is an important step towards fulfilling the legitimate
demands of the Sudanese people. The United Kingdom
will support the efforts of all sides to reach agreement
on outstanding issues. We will continue to support the
transition from peacekeeping, and remain hopeful that
the international community will have a willing and
legitimate national partner for peacebuilding. Given
the level of need in Darfur, it is clear that continued
international support will be necessary once the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
withdraws. We therefore look forward to receiving
options for a follow-on mechanism, as requested
in resolution 2479 (2019). After years of economic
mismanagement in the Sudan, there is clearly a need
for a more holistic approach to the situation.

Let me conclude by suggesting a few concrete
ideas for consideration in taking this issue forward.
First, regular reports of the Secretary-General could
focus more on the risks to successful transitions and
set out how the United Nations is working to align
mandate implementation with national peacebuilding
priorities. The Secretary-General and the Secretariat
could also include in those reports examples of how
United Nations missions are working to align mandate
implementation with national peacebuilding priorities
through the various United Nations integrated
strategic frameworks.

The Security Council could review, at the working
level, its use of benchmarks, in order to take stock of
what works and what does not, with a view to honing
this practice in future. The United Nations, the Security
Council and the broader international community
should consider how to make better use of data on overall
financing to improve our understanding ofthe so-called
financial cliff associated with transitions, and we, in
the Council, should be asking those questions during
our considerations as missions start their drawdowns.

The Peacebuilding Commission should consider
providing short one-page submissions to the Council
on peacebuilding priorities and challenges when
the Council is discussing countries on which the
Peacebuilding Commission is focused.

Finally, the Secretariat should consider how to
engage the World Bank in strategic assessment and
planning exercises.
