Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to start
by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Honore for her briefing to the Council. I am
glad to see her again after our visit to Haiti, and I
take this opportunity to thank her for the hospitality
afforded to the Security Council mission, as well as for
her contribution to its success.

Despite the climate of relative political instability
that still prevailed during our stay in Haiti, we are more
confident about the recent political developments in
the country. We therefore congratulate the Government
and the opposition for being able, through dialogue,
to overcome the then-prevailing political deadlock.
Ms. Honore has just updated the Council on recent
developments, confirming the improving climate in the
country.

We especially congratulate the members of the
recently established provisional Electoral Council for
the expeditious manner in which it established, even if
preliminarily, the dates for the general elections in July
and October 2015, and January 2016.

We returned from Haiti with a very positive
impression with regard to the important role played
by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The Mission has played that role since
its deployment, in June 2004. We therefore support the
decision in resolution 2180 (2014), as recommended
by the Secretary-General, to extend the mandate of
MINUSTAH until 15 October 2015. We are aware
of the challenges and responsibilities undertaken by
the Mission in order to respond appropriately to the
country's realities. For instance, in the aftermath of the
catastrophic earthquake and, more recently, with the
cholera epidemic, MINUSTAH played, and continues to
play, a determining humanitarian role in addition to the
other duties provided for in its mandate, in particular
in supporting the National Police in the management
of public demonstrations and in guaranteeing security.
There was a recent example of that during the political
impasse in the country.

It is also encouraging to note the support provided
by the military and police components of MINUSTAH
to the National Police in response to security threats,
particularly in the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince,
where there has been, since the beginning of this year,
an increase in criminality and violent clashes between
gangs vying for territorial control.

In that connection, the configuration ofthe military

and police components, set at 3,070 troops and 2,601

police, respectively, by resolution 2180 (2014), as well

as their withdrawal from several areas of the country,

have shown that the training and development of
various national institutions, including those involved

in the enforcement of law and order, are having a
positive impact. That has been further demonstrated
by the strengthening of the operational capacity and
the growth in the ranks of the Haitian National Police,
which comprises almost 12,000 Haitians out of the
established minimum of 15,000, and their deployment
across the country.

That also demonstrates that, despite the many
challenges ahead, including the upcoming electoral
process, Haitians are on their way to assuming
responsibility for managing their own destiny. It remains
crucial, of course, that MINUSTAH remains until
those challenges are fully addressed. The contingency
planning to ensure security during the electoral process
is further evidence of that reality.

On the economic front, we note with satisfaction that
the United Nations country team has been implementing
new initiatives within the framework of the four-pillar
2013-2016 integrated strategic framework aimed at
rebuilding the country institutionally, territorially and
socioeconomically. We commend the private investment
initiatives in the border areas with the Dominican
Republic through the high-level bilateral commission
established for that purpose.

With regard to human rights and gender, we
recognize the greater involvement of women, a number
of whom we met during our visit, in the area ofpolicing,
as well as the involvement of women and civil society in
the area of human rights. In that context, we encourage
the Government of Haiti to diligently pursue the merit-
based incorporation of more women in the Cabinet
and posts of high responsibility, as is the case with
the current transitional Government. The extension
of the mandate of MINUSTAH until 15 October 2015
aims at strengthening law enforcement institutions
and consolidating their operationalization, which is
essential to the stabilization of the country and the core
objective of the MINUSTAH mandate.

Angola has consistently supported political,
socioeconomic and security initiatives in Haiti.
We therefore reiterate our support for MINUSTAH
in its pursuit of priority objectives as well as the
implementation of reforms in key sectors in the country's
life. We urge the maintenance of dialogue among the
various political stakeholders as a contribution to
lasting peace aimed at ensuring the restoration of a
country that has gone through painful periods in the
past decades.

