Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Once again, I wish
to welcome you to New York, Mr. President, and to
congratulate you and the delegation of Uruguay on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. I also take this opportunity
to acknowledge the presence of the high-level
representatives of Spain and Ukraine. Malaysia deems
the convening of this open debate to be timely for
the reasons outlined in the informative concept note
(S/2016/22, annex) circulated by the presidency.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to the briefers, namely, Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, International Committee of the Red Cross
Vice-President Christine Beerli and the civil society
representative, Ms. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam. Their
briefings have brought much valuable insight to the
topic at hand.

I also wish to associate my delegation with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Malaysia remains deeply concerned that the
deliberate targeting of, and indiscriminate attacks
against, civilians are increasingly common features of
the situations and conflicts under consideration by the
Council. The fact that incidents of deliberate attacks
against humanitarian actors, medical personnel and
medical facilities in conflict zones have increased
is particularly deplorable. The growing scale of such
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, coupled with the unprecedented levels
of brutality and barbarism committed by parties
to the various conflicts around the world, indicate
the concerning trend of flagrant disregard for long-
established humanitarian norms and standards. That
recent level of impunity must not be left unchecked.

Civilians caught in conflict zones are subjected to
added suffering and trauma through displacement and
the denial of basic necessities. Women and children
are particularly at risk from sexual and gender-based
violence. The culture of impunity serves only to further
poison the already toxic animosity ofconflicts. There is
no lack of international laws or other applicable norms
to regulate the behaviour of States and non-State actors
in conflict situations, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians. What is lacking is compliance
with such standards by parties to the conflicts, on the
one hand, and the necessary political will on the part of
the international community, on the other, to decisively
address threats to the safety and security of civilians.
In that connection, we believe that the challenges
outlined in the report of the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the
report (S/2015/682) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel remain valid.

As the primary organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has risen to the challenge by pursuing
a robust normative agenda and framework for the
protection of civilians. The Council's focus on thematic
agendas, including the framework set up regarding
civilian protection, particularly children in armed
conflict and conflict-related sexual violence, reflect its
commitment and resolve in that regard.

At the same time, we also wish to acknowledge
the response shown by the United Nations system,
particularly the fact that an increasing number of United
Nationspeaceoperationsnowincludecivilian-protection
mandates. On that note, we fully endorse the view that,
in mandating its peacekeepers with the obligation to
ensure the protection of civilians, the United Nations
must ensure that peacekeepers are adequately trained
and equipped and receive the necessary logistical
and technological support to enable them to carry out
the mandated tasks effectively. My delegation takes
this opportunity to pay tribute to the brave men and
women who risk their lives daily to uphold and promote
that important mandate. In line with the principles of
inclusivity and national ownership, we also see value in
the Secretary-General's recommendations with regard
to expanding the involvement of local communities and
non-governmental organizations, as well as enhancing
the role of unarmed protection actors in implementing
civilian-protection mandates.

For the past five years or so, the Council and
the international community have been seized of the
deteriorating situation in Syria. In that time the Council
has taken certain innovative steps to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches civilian populations,
including through the adoption of resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014). In that regard, my delegation
has noted the proposals by Spain and New Zealand
concerning the issue of medical neutrality, which, as
we understand it, seeks to ensure that the principle
of neutrality extends to the medical personnel and
facilities that provide critical services in conflict
situations. We believe that those proposals constitute an
important and particularly relevant initiative with the
potential for broader application and implementation
across conflict situations. Malaysia stands ready to
work closely with Spain and other Council members
towards the realization of such an outcome. That serves
as a response to the United Kingdom's call for concrete
action.

In conclusion, Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its
belief that the vigour with which the Council pursues
the protection of civilians in conflict must hold true
for all situations. In that regard, we wish to recall
and highlight the plight of civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territories, who seem to be perceived as
being less than worthy of protection by the Council.
Palestine and its people cannot remain the Council's
Achilles heel indefinitely. Malaysia reiterates its call for
United Nations protection of the occupied Palestinian
territory, in line with international humanitarian law,
particularly the Geneva Conventions. Such protection
would go a long way towards ending impunity in the
occupied territory and towards peace and security in
the region, pending a final comprehensive settlement
aimed at ending the Israeli occupation. The Council
must send a clear message that impunity must cease
and that all parties, including State and non-State
actors, should be held accountable for violations of
international humanitarian law.

