Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I
would like to thank Executive Director Fedotov for
his briefing.

The scourge of drug addiction continues to claim
too many lives around the world, including in West
and Central Africa. The harm caused by illicit drug
cultivation, trafficking and consumption is linked to
organized crime, illegal financial flows, corruption
and, in some cases, even terrorism. Regardless of the
region or context, it is clear the corrosive impact of
transnational drug trafficking impairs the rule of law,
weakens public trust in Government and undermines
social and economic development.

While the primary responsibility for international
drug control policy belongs to the United Nations
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Security Council
also has a role to play in addressing the links among
drug trafficking, terrorism and international peace and
security. My country is certainly not immune to that
threat, as we, too, are facing a devastating opioid crisis
of unprecedented scale. The threat is a global one, and
no one country can or should have to face it alone.

In response to the challenge, President Trump
announced the Global Call to Action on the World Drug
Problem on 24 September. Endorsed by more than 130
countries, the framework calls on countries to reduce
drug demand, cut off the supply of illicit drugs, expand
treatment and strengthen international cooperation.
We urge all countries to work towards fulfilling that
important initiative because we know that successfully
confronting the challenge will require the efforts of
every country in the world.

In that regard, we applaud the Economic
Community of West African States for its regional
efforts to address drug trafficking, organized crime
and drug abuse through its regional action plan on
illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse
in West Africa for the period from 2016 to 2020. We
also commend the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) for its drug-control and anti-crime
technical assistance in Africa and throughout the world.

Today, I affirm the commitment of the United
States to also tackling that challenge. The United States
is investing significant resources in West and Central
Africa to counter drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime. I will mention briefly a few of those
important efforts.

The United States International Law Enforcement
Academy programme delivers specialized courses
for criminal justice officials from West and Central
Africa on counter-narcotics, anti-corruption, financial

crimes and border security, among other related topics.
Through three of its facilities, including the United
States West Africa Regional Training Center in Ghana
and the United States International Law Enforcement
Academies in Botswana, we have trained more than
2,100 criminal justice officials in 2018 alone.
In Ghana, the United States Department of
State's Bureau of International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs supports Ghana's police service
with $1.7 million to launch drug law-enforcement units
in four new strategic regions to strengthen its capacity.

In the Gulf of Guinea, we support the 2013
Yaounde process to address illicit maritime activity.
Partnering with INTERPOL, United States assistance
to that regionally owned framework includes nearly
$3 million to assist maritime law enforcement
agencies in Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin and
Nigeria. We support the efforts of those countries to
investigate maritime-based organized crime, improve
information sharing, strengthen maritime interdiction
and investigation capabilities. The United States
Africa Command also partners with those countries to
support maritime training and operations such as the
Obangame Express exercise and the African Maritime
Law Enforcement Partnership.

In Liberia, the State Department is spending
$2.4 million in support of a transnational organized
crime project to promote intelligence-led policing
and investigations, interdiction and seizures of illicit
drugs, organized-crime prosecutions and capacity-
building for security and law enforcement agencies.
The initiative, in partnership with UNODC, has
already led to increased drug-related interdictions and
more than 90 arrests associated with transnational
organized crime.

In Benin and Togo, the State Department has
invested over $4 million since 2012 to build the capacity
of magistrates to prosecute drug trafficking and
related cases through mentorship, technical assistance
and collaborative training sessions. Also in Benin, we
provide training and equipment to the national police
to stem drug trafficking across Benin's land borders
and waterways.

The United States also supports training in
evidence-based best practices for officials who work on
drug use prevention, treatment and recovery services
throughout the African continent. Only last week in
Nairobi, we supported a major international drug-
demand reduction workshop, with the participation of
more than 40 African nations.

In conclusion, the United States remains committed
to fighting the drug epidemic globally, including in
West and Central Africa. We look forward to working
with the Security Council, the region and our partners
to strengthen our communities, protect our families
and deliver a drug-free future for all.

