Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The open-ended
litany of terrorist attacks in cities and villages continues
to remind us of the threat of terrorist attacks to civilian
infrastructure and to civilian populations. This wave of
terror, which considers innocent civilians as legitimate
targets of violence, either directly or indirectly, through
the destruction of the civil infrastructure on which
we depend, must be counteracted by the actions by a
unified international community.

Recent conflicts in the area of ancient Mesopotamia
have had a devastating impact on ancient ethnic,
religious and cultural minorities that for millenniums
have inhabited the region. Parties to those conflicts have
purposefully sought to destroy the cultural fabric and
the historical rootedness of those communities in the
region by destroying their religious and cultural heritage
sites. The intentional destruction of the infrastructure
critical to the survival of those communities, such
as schools, hospitals, water supplies and places of
worship, has become a strategy to annihilate them
collectively, immiserating and eradicating them by
attacking the structures that give them a modicum of
communal existence.

It is the obligation of the international community,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
to protect civilians and their critical infrastructure
from the brutality and barbarity of terrorist groups.
Part of that obligation is to heighten public awareness
of that terrorist tactic and to urge States to maintain
a high level of critical infrastructure protection and
resilience, as well as public preparedness, in the event
of an attack, and to prevent, as much as possible, the
disruption of critical services and the loss of human
life. My delegation therefore believes that this debate is
a response to such a need.

More effective and lasting measures to protect
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks must
be based on policies that reject the unfettered pursuit
of profit and narrow geopolitical interests, even at the
cost of the destruction of critical civil infrastructure. In
that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate the Holy
See's appeal to weapon-producing nations to severely
limit and control the manufacture and sale of weapons,
ammunition and technologies to unstable countries
and regions of the world, where the likelihood of their
illegal use or their falling into the hands of non-State
actors remain a real and present danger.

The international community must also address the
role of organized crime in the sale or barter of weapons
capable of destroying critical infrastructure. States
should be urged to collaborate in that area, at both
the international and the regional levels, through the

sharing of information and best practices, coordinated
policies and joint border controls.

The world must act to prevent terrorists from
having access to financial support from terror
sponsors. The borderless nature of the terrorist groups
perpetrating the destruction of critical infrastructure
requires the international community to control the
cybertechnologies that violent groups use to recruit
new adherents, finance their activities and coordinate
terrorist attacks.

Pope Francis has spoken on a number of occasions
of our age as a time of war, namely, a third world war
that is being fought piecemeal, one in which we daily
witness savage crimes, brutal massacres and senseless
destruction, like the destruction of infrastructure
critical to the existence of entire populations.

The international community must come together
as one to put an end to this war fought piecemeal. Such
unity is necessary ifthe international community is going
to achieve the shared objective of protecting critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. Our common
goal will be achieved most quickly and effectively
through an unselfish sharing of critical information and
best practices and of resources and technologies among
States, in particular with those States that are the least
capable of protecting their critical infrastructure and
populations from terrorist attacks.

