Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.

We are pleased to note that the parties in Yemen
have generally observed the ceasefire agreement, which
has led to a lessening of hostilities in the past few days.
The Redeployment Coordination Committee, which
is led by the United Nations and includes all Yemeni
parties, is working in an orderly fashion, with ongoing
discussions on issues related to redeployment, such as
the timetable, location and modalities of verification and
supervision. Work has also begun on implementing the
agreement on the exchange of prisoners and settling the
situation in Taiz. However, while the overall situation
in Yemen is heading in a positive direction, challenges
remain. Persistent crossfire continues in Al-Hudaydah
governorate and the overall humanitarian situation
across the country is still severe. The Yemeni parties
agreed to reopen the Al-Hudaydah-Sana'a road, but the

agreement has not yet been honoured. Impediments to
humanitarian access remain. The parties concerned
must implement the Stockholm Agreement and
resolution 2451 (2018) in earnest and continue to work
on the following three areas.

First, the parties should strictly implement the
Al-Hudaydah ceasefire agreement and complete
the redeployment of their armed forces within the
established time frame. We have noted the Secretary-
General's proposal to establish a mission in Yemen
to facilitate and monitor the implementation of the
agreement, and China is ready to engage with all
parties on the matter. We hope that the Secretariat
will strengthen consultations with Council members
on specific arrangements pertaining to the proposed
mission while giving the views of the host country
and the countries of the region full consideration and
respect.

Secondly, it is imperative to push for a sustained
and effective process of dialogue and negotiation,
while preserving the gains achieved so far. The
Yemeni parties should meet each other halfway and
demonstrate greater goodwill towards one another.
Under the auspices of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee they should agree on confidence-building
measures without delay, including by making progress
on the prisoner-exchange agreement and other issues.
We look forward to seeing the next round ofpeace talks
convened without incident so that consensus can be
reached on the framework document for the political
negotiations and an inclusive solution arrived at as soon
as possible.

Thirdly, it is essential that the United Nations
continue to play its role as the primary mediator. We
would like to see the Yemeni parties working more
closely with Mr. Griffiths and remaining engaged in
the negotiating progress. The international community
must step up humanitarian assistance to Yemen, help
the country improve the humanitarian situation in a
sustained manner, meet the basic needs of the Yemeni
people and continue to create conditions that are
conducive to negotiations. The Yemeni parties must
work more closely with the United Nations to effectively
guarantee the safety and security of international
personnel in Yemen.

Political means are the only way to resolve
the Yemeni issue. All parties must safeguard the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Yemen and - based on resolution 2216
(2015) and other resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism,
as well as the outcome document of the National
Dialogue Conference - support efforts to reach a broad
and inclusive political solution through dialogue and
consultation. Together with all the parties concerned,
China is ready to continue to play a constructive role in
promoting the settlement of the Yemen issue.
