I would like to thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing. Estonia supports the Iraqi Government in addressing the political, security and economic challenges that the country is facing. We also stress the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and call on all actors to refrain from military action, which would threaten the stability of Iraq. We welcomed the announcement of early parliamentary elections to take place in June 2021. The recent ratification of the new electoral law was an important development in the preparations and is a precondition for conducting free and fair elections. The continued support and technical assistance of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is of critical importance. We acknowledge the multiple steps the Iraqi Government has already taken towards the implementation of structural reforms. We also call the Government to implement urgently needed economic reforms, including those proposed in the Government's white paper. The establishment of a permanent committee to investigate corruption is an essential step in countering corruption and enforcing the rule of law. Furthermore, additional measures to bring all armed forces under State control are necessary to increase stability in Iraq. We commend the Iraqi Government's announcement of its intention to adopt a national development plan for women, as it exhibits the commitment of the Government to advancing women's political, economic and social empowerment and participation. The Government's efforts to combat the coronavirus disease are welcome and we, the international community, have to support these efforts where that support is most needed. However, more attention should be paid to the impact of the crisis on vulnerable people, including women and children, who continue to be the most affected. It is a positive development that the number of attacks on demonstrators has decreased. However, it is worrisome that targeted killings of protesters have continued, as well as violations of freedom of expression, enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrests and detentions of journalists and civil society activists. We urge the Iraqi Government to ensure the protection of human rights, including freedom of expression and assembly, and to take concrete steps to hold perpetrators to account. The continued support to Iraq in its fight to counter terrorism 1s of the utmost importance. However, we would like to urge the Iraqi Government to halt the execution of prisoners under the anti-terrorism law. Finally, we commend the Iraqi Government's efforts in preventing missile attacks on diplomatic missions and personnel. However, we remain concerned about the continued attacks by Shia militias.
