The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. I think everybody here joins in thanking
the Secretary-General for his leadership and for all of
the help provided by the United Nations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/996, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2254 (2015).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State of the United States.

I want to begin by thanking the other permanent
members who joined together to help fashion the
resolution 2254 (2015) and spent time this morning
working with our colleagues in order to bring us here
this afternoon, plus the non-member, Germany, to
whom we are also very grateful for their participation.

I want to thank all of the members of the Council
for coming together at this late hour. I thank in
particular Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Envoy de Mistura for their leadership and commitment.
I also want to thank Foreign Minister Lavrov for his
collaboration and efforts in the course of both Vienna
conferences to produce the two Vienna communiques,
which are integrated into today's resolution.

By adopting resolution 2254 (2015) today, the
Council is sending a clear message to all concerned that
the time is now to stop the killing in Syria and lay the
groundwork for a Government that the long-suffering
people of that battered land can support. After four
and a half years of war, this is the first time that we
have been able to come together at the United Nations
in the Security Council to embrace a road forward.
During that time, one Syrian in 20 has been killed or
wounded; one in five is a refugee; and one in two has
been displaced. The average life expectancy in Syria
has dropped by 20 years.

We need to reverse the course. That is the
Council's goal here this afternoon: to put an end to the
indiscriminate bombing, the acts of terror, the torture
and the bloodshed. And our shared task is to find a way
to make that happen.

In support of that objective, President Obama has
three interrelated goals for my country. The first is to
support our friends and to ensure that the instability
created by the civil war in Syria does not spread further
beyond its borders. That is why we are providing a
record amount of humanitarian assistance, and it is
why we are doing more to help Syria's neighbours to
strengthen their capacity to safeguard their territory
and to defend against external threats.

Secondly, we are determined, with our coalition
and its partners, to degrade and defeat the terrorist
organization known as Daesh. In the past half-year,
the coalition and its partners have worked with Iraqi
forces in liberating Tikrit, freeing Sinjar, removing
terrorist commanders from the battlefield, cutting off
terrorist supply lines, hitting their oil facilities and
depriving Daesh of more and more of the territory
that it once controlled. Now we are intensifying the
pressure, helping our Iraqi partners to retake most of
Ramadi and squeezing supply routes into Mosul, and
we are pushing ahead into northern Syria, assisting
our partners along the Iraqi-Syrian border and in
their recruiting and propaganda efforts. Further, as
evidenced by the meeting of finance ministers that was
held right here in this very Chamber yesterday (see S/PV.7587), we are multiplying our efforts to cut Daesh
off from the revenue sources that support its depravity
and criminality.

But the truth is that nothing would do more to
bolster the fight against the terrorists than a broadly
supported diplomatic process that gives the Syrian
people a real choice - a choice not between Al-Assad
and Daesh, but between war and peace, between the
violent extremes and a newly empowered political
centre. That is why we have joined many represented
here today in support of an urgent diplomatic initiative.
Again and again, countries - not just at this table
today but in countless meetings in various parts of the
world - have reaffirmed the notion that there has to
be a political settlement. Well, this is the test. This
is why we join here in an effort that is broader and
more action-oriented than any ever before attempted
regarding Syria to isolate the terrorists and to put Syria
on the road to the political transition envisioned by
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and now
embraced by the international community in a Security
Council resolution.

As the Council's action today reflects, we have
made important progress in recent weeks - progress
that should give us all fresh grounds for encouragement.
Last month in Vienna, the United States and other
members of the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG) agreed on a series of steps to stop the bleeding
in Syria, to advance a political transition, to isolate the
terrorists, and to help the Syrian people to be able to
begin to rebuild their country.

Last week in Riyadh, with the support of His
Majesty King Salman and his Government, a broad
cross-section of Syrian opposition representatives came
together to form a high committee for negotiation. Under
resolution 2254 (2015), adopted today, the purpose of
those negotiations between the responsible opposition
and the Government is to facilitate a transition within
Syria to credible, inclusive, non-sectarian governamce
within six months. The process would lead to the
drafting of a new constitution and arrangements for
internationally supervised elections within 18 months.
I might add that Geneva never had those dates. It is
the Vienna process and the Vienna communique that
has produced the 6-month and 18-month time horizon,
and it is the Vienna process that has also embraced the
ceasefire concept and a set of principles and values
concerning the shape that a new Syria might be able to
take, as directed by Syrians for Syrians. It is our hope
that a nationwide ceasefire can go into effect, excluding
only Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and any other group
that we might decide at some time to designate.

I would close by saying that we are under no
illusions about the obstacles that exist. There obviously
remain sharp differences within the international
community, especially about the future of President
Al-Assad. We have emphasized from the beginning
that if this is to work, the process has to be led, shaped,
decided and implemented by the men and women of
Syria. It cannot be imposed from the outside, and we
are not seeking to do so. But we have also seen in recent
weeks - in Vienna, Paris and other capitals, and again
today here in New York - an unprecedented degree of
unity on the need to negotiate this political transition,
to defeat Daesh and then, indeed, to end the war. The
resolution that we have just adopted is a milestone
because it sets out specific concepts with specific time
frames. Accordingly, we need to work hard together to
help these political talks to go forward, to prepare for
a ceasefire and to encourage all the parties in Syria to
participate in good faith.

Let me just underscore the urgency of our task. Like

many representatives here, I have met with refugees in
and out of refugee camps. I have met with survivors,
as have others in this Chamber. I have met with
caregivers, as they have. I have met with many of the
people who have been on the front lines ofthis conflict.
I have talked to women who have struggled to hold
their families together, despite constant danger, bitter
cold, shortages of food and great peril. I have heard the
blood-chilling stories of doctors and relief workers who
have been dealing with humanitarian trauma on a daily
basis - month after month, year after year, and now
into the fifth year. I am aware, as is everybody in this
Chamber, of the atrocities that have been and are being
committed, even as we sit here this afternoon, and too
often against innocent civilians.

Looking ahead, we know that Daesh can never be
allowed to gain control in Syria, so we have a global
imperative here not only to deal with a terrorist entity,
but also to end the civil war and to bring legitimacy
back to the governance of Syria. President Al-Assad, in
our judgement - which is not shared by everybody, but
as the majority ofpeople in the ISSG believe - has lost
the ability to unite the country and to provide the moral
credibility to govern it in the future. So I shall just say,
not as a matter of ideology or of choice but purely as
a matter of reality and fact, given the situation on the
ground, that if the war is to end it is imperative that the
Syrian people agree on an alternative in terms of their
governance. That logic is compelling, and it provides a
unifying principle for most people in our efforts going
forward.

We have a lot ofdistance to travel - some would say
miles to go - but the truth is that, in the past two months
we have gone from a stand-still, from a non-existent
process, to holding three separate meetings of the ISSG
and now securing the Security Council's embrace of a
process. We have agreed on a plan of action, and the
Council's vote today is an important boost on the road
to a political settlement. It is a particularly important
step because it reaffirms this body's endorsement of
the Geneva communique concerning a transitional
governing body with full executive authority, and it also
endorses the progress and the statements that we made
in Vienna regarding a time line for the transition and
elections, and standards for that election - the highest
standards under the supervision of the United Nations
for a free, fair, transparent and accountable election. It
also brings fundamental values and principles that can
guide the shaping of Syria by Syrians for Syrians.

Let us proceed with confidence from here in the
determination to end this war, eliminate the terrorist
threat and enable the people of Syria to return safely to
their homes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation.


