Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to congratulate Turkey
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also wish to express our
gratitude to the Russian Federation for its presidency
of the Council last month.

On behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish to
thank President Robinson and Prosecutor Brammertz
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
for their briefings on the activities of the Tribunal. We
also thank President Byron and Prosecutor Jallow of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
for their briefings on the activities of the Rwanda
Tribunal.

Since the completion strategies of the two
Tribunals were endorsed by the Security Council, they
have worked hard to implement the strategies and
continue to make progress, as borne out once again by
the advances achieved during the reporting period. We
express our appreciation and acknowledgement of that
progress, but given the trials still under way in the two
Tribunals, the schedules set out in the completion
strategies will have to be pushed back. Of course,
many factors have contributed to the delay. We hope
that the two Tribunals will be more proactive in
building on past work by intensifying their efforts and
adopting an innovative approach to improving their
working methods so that a breakthrough can be
achieved. All available resources must be fully utilized
to improve the efficiency of the trial process and
thereby accelerate it.

In the meantime, we continue to believe that the
transfer of cases and accused to national jurisdictions
is an important step in the implementation of the
completion strategies. We are pleased to note that the
Tribunals have reaffirmed that idea in their reports. The
ICTR Prosecutor has made very specific suggestions in
that regard. We hope that the two Tribunals, and the
ICTR in particular, will step up their activities in that
respect so that the concept can be effectively
implemented, ensuring the transfer of as many cases
and accused as possible.

The Informal Working Group has continued to
study the question of the legacy and residual functions
of the Tribunals. I wish to thank the Ambassador of
Austria for his concise but comprehensive briefing on
the work being undertaken. The presidential statement
issued by the Security Council on 19 December 2008
(S/PRST/2008/47) referred to this issue, noting that the
proposed ad hoc mechanism should be small,
temporary, and efficient. That basic principle has
always guided the Working Group's consideration of
the matter. We are in favour of identifying a feasible
and economical plan on that basis. We also favour the
provision by the two Tribunals of advice and proposals
to the Informal Working Group during the current
reporting period. Some of their proposals are
constructive and reflect innovative thinking. We
reiterate our readiness to adopt a positive approach to
the consideration of any plan that would help speed up
the implementation of the completion strategies.

The Secretary-General shall submit, upon the
request of the Security Council, a report on the
administrative and budgetary issues related to the
residual mechanism. We are confident that it will
facilitate the ongoing work of the Informal Working
Group. We understand that the preparation of the report
is no easy task. We thank the Secretariat for its efforts
and look forward to receiving that document at an early
date.

The completion strategies, as endorsed by the
Council, are an overarching goal and should be
pursued at every phase of the process. In recent years,
the two Tribunals have made some progress in the
implementation of the strategies, but the work ahead is
enormous. We expect the Tribunals to continue to work
in that direction.

