Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her valuable
briefing on the seventeenth report of the Court to the
Security Council, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We welcome once again the efforts of the ICC to lay the
foundations for ensuring justice and avoiding impunity
under international law.

We commend the role ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor,
despite the great challenges it faces in carrying out its
responsibilities to monitor and bring to justice those
who commit crimes and violations, especially given
the difficult security situation in Libya, including the
military escalation around Tripoli that began in early
April. We share Ms. Bensouda's concern over the
escalation of the military clashes, which have resulted
in a large number of people being killed or injured
while thousands of civilians have been displaced from
the combat zones.

We cannot but commend the great role played by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Ghassan Salame at its helm, in striving to reach

a renewable temporary humanitarian ceasefire and
ensure humanitarian access to those who need it.
We once again urge all Libyan parties to exercise
self-restraint, respect international humanitarian law,
avoid targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure
and return to the United Nations-sponsored political
dialogue. We also express our concern regarding the
reference in the report of the Prosecutor to violations
against migrants in detention centres, in contravention
of international humanitarian law. Those violations
have escalated with the recent military operations.

We stress that the main responsibility for ensuring
justice in all Libya lies with the Libyan authorities,
which must exercise their sovereignty and jurisdiction,
in line with article 1 of the Rome Statute. The ICC must
therefore respect all national criminal jurisdictions in
Libya over cases before Libyan courts so as to ensure
complementarity between the ICC and the national
courts, given that the ICC is a body that complements
national criminal jurisdictions.

We are aware of the grave security challenges in
Libya that are hampering the ability of the Court's
experts to conduct the necessary investigations. We
welcome the assistance provided by certain countries,
international and regional organizations and civil
society organizations, in addition to the support
provided by the relevant Libyan authorities, UNSMIL
and the Office ofthe Prosecutor, which will undoubtedly
contribute to the effectiveness of its investigations in
order to achieve the mandate entrusted to it.

