Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
meeting. We thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and the
commanders of the peacekeeping operations in Haiti,
Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan and of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization for their briefings. We also welcome the
presence of the Military Adviser of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. The participation of the
commanders of all these operations is, to a great
extent, a reflection of the way in which the mandates of
peacekeeping operations have developed over the
history of the Organization.

We welcome the convening of today's meeting in
the hope that such meetings will become a regular
practice in the activities of the Security Council, taking
advantage of the annual meeting of commanders of
peacekeeping operations and fostering greater
coherence between what takes place on the ground and
what takes place within the Security Council. Clearly,
my delegation is most grateful to all the personnel of
peacekeeping operations for their invaluable work on
behalf of the international community to protect
international peace and security.

As a result of lessons learned in recent years, it
has been acknowledged that peacekeeping operations
must take account of certain fundamental elements if
they are to meet their primary objective of achieving
sustainable peace. Among these, we underscore the
following: the preparation of clear, credible and
achievable mandates with sufficient material, military,
police and civilian resources to carry out their
functions; the unequivocal commitment of the parties
involved to achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict;
the existence of a comprehensive peace agreement that
addresses the structural causes of the conflict; and the
understanding by the parties and the general population
of the benefits of achieving the mission's objectives,
which they must assume as their own.

There is consensus on the need to establish time-
bound objectives at all stages, including transition and
exit strategies; a comprehensive approach to
peacekeeping missions with priorities for
peacebuilding established at an early stage; and an
efficient planning and coordination mechanism which
includes the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and those entrusted with coordinating and
leading the military, civilian, financial and
humanitarian components of a mission. The conceptual
correlations are clear, and at times we end up repeating
the obvious. However, the difficulties faced on the
ground and the resulting need to adapt mandates which
can be multidimensional and extremely complex
require that the Security Council and the Organization
as a whole adopt pragmatic actions and strategies that
have impact in the short term.

My delegation is aware of the difficulties faced
by peacekeeping operations in complying fully with
their mandates, which include such diverse tasks as
supporting political dialogue between the parties,
strengthening human rights and the rule of law,
security sector reform and protection of civilians, in
addition to facing natural emergencies, organized crime
and, in some cases, attacks against their personnel.

The briefings we heard today indicate the
challenges in such diverse situations. In that sense, it is
essential to ensure a country's cooperation with the
peacekeeping operation throughout its stay, since a
successful transition to a peacebuilding phase depends
upon it. The cases of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) have provided us with lessons, but also
important questions for the future.

We also need to guarantee firm political support
by the United Nations, its representatives and the
Security Council for operations on the ground. The
legitimacy of the Organization is the main asset of a
peacekeeping operation. And often the actors on the
ground try to disregard this and involve the
Organization in the dynamics of the conflict as if it
were another participant in that conflict, often
hampering its freedom of movement, politicizing its
actions or placing it in risky situations, sometimes with
fatal consequences. Here, we underscore our rejection
of any attack against United Nations personnel and we
reiterate the importance of full respect for resolution
1502 (2003), on the protection of United Nations
personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel in conflict zones.

On the situation in Haiti in particular, we reaffirm
our support for the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
has without question been essential for the survival of
institutions and the people of the country in tragic
circumstances. This case has put the Organization and
its response capacity on the ground to the test. We
consider strengthening the police contingent of the
Mission, following the adoption of resolution 1927
(2010), to be an important step so that it can continue
supporting the Haitian authorities in strengthening their
own police force and providing them with the
necessary assistance, within the Mission mandate, to
ensure the maintenance of stability, as well as
continuing to provide assistance in strengthening
national institutions, electoral processes,
reconstruction, stability and social development.

In the case of the Sudan, as has been noted, it is
clear that the international community's attention must
be focused on preparations for the referendum.
Logistical and security support, which the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) can provide, is
essential for ensuring complete and peaceful
participation. Notwithstanding that and aware of the
resources available to UNMIS, we must not forget that
all efforts must include the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of the provision of humanitarian
assistance, since these are both complementary to the
success of the voting and the peace process.

The escalation of tensions following the holding
of elections represents a new challenge to the Southern
Sudan Administration and UNMIS as they head
towards the holding of a referendum. The role of
UNMIS military personnel will be key in coming
months, and that is why we reaffirm our full support
for the preparatory work now under way, in particular
the contingency and strategy plans outlined by Special
Representative Menkerios based on the priority
objectives.

In the Middle East, the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization plays an important role, and
it could be even more significant in the future given the
nature of the conflict in the region.

The Security Council must closely follow the
situations faced by a peacekeeping operation so that
timely changes may be made to the mandate, such as
on logistical and operational capacities, seeking always
to respond to events on the ground and, thus, to
provide tools and clear objectives for the work of
mission personnel. A peacekeeping operation is part of
the political solution to a conflict, but it does not
replace such a solution. Hence, it is also important to
bolster activities on the ground with parallel efforts to
strengthen preventive diplomacy, early warning,
conflict solution and mediation efforts, focusing
always on national priorities and national actors, thus
contributing to a country's development in order to
guarantee lasting peace and the well-being of its
people. Paying attention to these aspects must be one
of our priorities if we wish to stabilize conflicts and
guarantee international security.

