Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to reiterate Uruguay's steadfast commitment to
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and to upholding the principle
of independence of justice. My country recognizes
the significant contribution of these Tribunals to
international justice in cases of crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide, and their roles in
ensuring accountability and promoting reconciliation.

I shall refer first to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. We note with satisfaction the
continued progress of the judicial activities of that
Tribunal and the reaffirmation of the forecast that it
will finish its judicial work on time and achieve its
closure at the end of 2017. At the same time, we take
due note of the two situations that could affect that
forecast, to which President Agius referred. The first
refers to the three individuals accused of contempt of
court in the Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj case and the
arrest warrants issued in January 2015, which remain
pending. This situation has been highlighted by the
President and the Prosecutor of the Tribunal. The second
of them refers to the difficulties facing the Tribunal for
retaining its staff until the end of its work, in particular
officials with the greatest experience.

As current Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, we will closely follow
developments in both situations and are willing to
cooperate as far as we can to reach a solution. We call upon
all members of the Organization to actively contribute
to resolving these situations and share our belief that
the interests of international justice must prevail over
circumstancial political and financial factors.

I will now turn to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are pleased to
note the forecasts for the duration of various judicial
mandates are the same as those stipulated in the report
of 20 November 2015, including all updates. We take
note of the priority for the Mechanism of the search
and prosecution of the eight people accused by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who are
still on the run, as well as of the importance to that end
of inter-State cooperation. We also refer to the problem
of the reintegration ofpersons released or acquitted and
of the dialogue that the Mechanism has with the States
who have indicated their willingness to receive one or
more of such persons.

As Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, we take note with great concern
of the situation with regard to the case of the defendant
Agustin Ngirabatware and Judge Akay. The situation
is very delicate. We call on all the actors involved to
reach a solution for the benefit of justice and with the
due guarantees for all parties.

Before concluding, I want to thank the Office of
Legal Affairs and the Secretariat for their continued
support for our work, as Chair of the Group, and, on a
personal level, to highlight the great respect we have for
the authorities of the International Criminal Tribunals
who are present in the Chamber today.

