Mr. Mitri (Lebanon): Once again, the Security
Council is meeting in this Chamber. It has been one
long month since the Government of Lebanon began
urging - let us say passionately calling out for - a
ceasefire that would end the rain of bombs that has
devastated our country and end the reign of horror that
Israel has visited upon our people. For a month now, as
the world has continued to watch and as the
international community has continued to vacillate,
Israel has besieged and ravaged Lebanon, creating a
humanitarian and environmental disaster and shattering
our infrastructure and economy.

Israel says that this war is against Hezbollah, not
against Lebanon. Actually, the Israeli strategy of terror
is inflicted on all Lebanese. The indiscriminate murder
of more than 1,100 Lebanese civilians, a third of them
children, the massacres and the "cleansing" of villages
and the wanton destruction of our infrastructure and
economy are nothing short of criminal. One quarter of
our population has been displaced, many of them with
no homes to return to and most of them desperately
low on fuel, food and medical supplies, while homes,
hospitals, factories and warehouses have been
demolished.

The direct cause of more than 1,000 deaths and
thousands of injuries is the obscenely disproportionate
and unjustifiable Israeli retaliation. There are many
cases documented by human rights organizations that
reveal a systematic failure by the Israeli army to
distinguish between combatants and civilians. In many
cases, the timing and intensity of the attack and the
absence of a military target, as well as the subsequent
strikes on rescuers, suggest that Israel forces
deliberately targeted civilians. Even today, a few hours
ago, a convoy of evacuated civilians from the city of
Marjayoun, escorted by the Red Cross, was targeted,
killing four and injuring 16.

After its first call for a ceasefire, the Lebanese
Government offered to the Rome Conference and to the
Security Council a comprehensive seven-point plan
developed through a process of national consensus,
which received the unanimous approval of the
Lebanese Council of Ministers as well as the support of
political and religious leaders and significant
international support.

06-4649]

A ceasefire that is incomplete is not a true
ceasefire. A ceasefire that by its terms cannot be
implemented is no ceasefire. A ceasefire that retains for
one side the right not to cease firing is not a ceasefire.
Lebanon has urgently requested a ceasefire that has the
possibility of being implemented so that all hostilities
should immediately cease - and for good.

No one more than Lebanon wants to assure the
Council that we will not be here again in six weeks, six
months or even six years. The persistent invasions of
Lebanon demonstrate Israel's continuing belief that
military actions will remedy the causes of crisis in the
region. This pattern of invasions demonstrates the
continuing threat facing Lebanon and the need for a
political solution rooted in international law, not the
result of the use of force - a solution that will lead to
long-term stability, as set forth in our seven-point plan.

The people and the Government of Lebanon are
deeply appreciative of the efforts of so many in the
international community, most significantly, the efforts
of the Secretary-General and the members of the
Council, who have been working to bring to an
immediate end the ravaging of Lebanon. We
acknowledge all the valuable work expended by many
countries to reach a viable agreement. We appreciate
the genuine impatience of many with regard to the
delay in reaching agreement on the resolution.
Proposals to have a humanitarian truce were a case in
point. More important, we are grateful for the support
extended to our country and for the support that will
accompany us as we, hopefully, rise up from the ruins,
reconstruct and heal our injured country.

We appreciate the Security Council's
acknowledgment of the Sheba'a farms problem. We
hope that the Security Council and the Secretary-
General will, in the period ahead, take the necessary
steps to resolve that issue, thereby removing one of the
underlying causes of the conflict.

I am sure that Council members understand that
the Lebanese are eager to see a true cessation of
hostilities and expect a strong determination on the
Council's part to bring it about immediately. The
Lebanese, to be frank, are not confident in the Israeli
distinction between what is "defensive" and what is
"offensive". The end to military operations should be
unqualified.

The lifting of the blockade should also be
immediate upon cessation of hostilities. The

06-4649]

consequences of the blockade so far have been such
that the international community cannot allow the
humanitarian crisis to continue one more moment.
Humanitarian aid has been prevented from reaching
people in desperate need. Even today, Israel continues
to fire upon convoys of people attempting to reach
safety and help.

Our Government has decided to deploy the
Lebanese armed forces in southern Lebanon as the sole
military force, assisted by United Nations forces, the
moment Israel starts pulling back to the international
borders. To be sure, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) will have to play the determining
role that is defined by this resolution. Let me pay
tribute here to the UNIFIL personnel for all they have
done for the sake of peace and for all that has been
done to them.

To be sure, as I have said, UNIFIL will have to
play the determining role that is defined in this
resolution. The Government of Lebanon therefore
urgently calls on the troop-contributing countries to act
swiftly on the strengthening and enhancement of
UNIFIL, to enable it to perform its duties as stipulated
in the resolution just adopted: to assist, support and
accompany the Lebanese population and Lebanese
armed forces and to monitor not just the cessation of
hostilities but also the ceasefire.
For any political solution to move forward, it
must address the root causes of this war, including the
continued Israeli occupation of Sheba'a farms and the
perennial threat to Lebanon's security, as well as
Lebanon's struggle to regain full sovereignty over all
its territory. We believe that a political resolution
rooted in international law and based on the seven-
point plan will lead to long-term stability.

The international community has a moral and
political obligation under the terms of the Charter of
the United Nations and the accepted norms of
international law to defend Lebanon's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, as well as to protect the Lebanese
people under the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention
and its Protocols, which Israel has repeatedly and
wilfully violated.

If Israel were to realize that the peoples of the
Middle East cannot be cowed into submission and that
they aspire only to live in freedom and dignity, this
could also be a stepping stone to a final solution of the
wider Arab-Israeli conflict which has plagued our
region for 60 years. The 2002 Arab Summit in Beirut,
which called for a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace based on the principle of land for peace is the
way forward. A political solution cannot, however, be
implemented as long as Israel continues to occupy
Arab land in Lebanon, Palestine and the Syrian Golan
Heights and wages war on innocent people.

The Lebanese Council of Ministers will convene
urgently tomorrow to consider this important
resolution. We value the attention as well as the
decisions of the Security Council, which is entrusted
with preserving international security and peace. It is
essential that the Security Council act immediately to
put an end to the Israeli onslaught on Lebanon.

For the people of Lebanon today, as they look
into the future, the stakes could not be higher. That is also
the case, I believe, for the world. Success in bringing
peace and stability to Lebanon is a sign of the ability
and resolve of the international community to assure
the peoples of the world that a just peace can prevail.

