Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Fernandez Amunategui for his
briefing on the situation in Haiti.

In spite of the difficult challenges faced by the
country, it is encouraging that its leadership and
people, with the active support of the international
community, have been able to progressively stabilize
the situation. We hope that President Martelly will
continue to adopt genuine steps aimed at the swift
launching of a national dialogue process and the
sustainability of the current positive trends in the
country's development. My country calls upon all
political actors in Haiti to demonstrate maximum calm
and restraint and to resolve their disputes solely
through legal mechanisms.

The international aid provided to Haiti under the
United Nations is unprecedented in scale. We welcome
the efforts of the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the Caribbean Community, to
overcome the multifaceted crisis in Haiti.
My delegation shares the conclusion of the
Secretary-General contained in his report on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2011/540)
that the security situation in Haiti is gradually
improving, due in large part to the work of
peacekeepers and law enforcement personnel.
However, the political, social, economic and
humanitarian spheres of the situation in Haiti remain
difficult.

National law enforcement bodies are not yet
ready to bear full responsibility for the protection of
civilians. International efforts to provide
comprehensive aid to Haiti, in particular relating to
strengthening State institutions, should be continued in
order to ensure that, in the future, Haitians can
independently resolve all issues related to security and
restoring and guaranteeing sustainable development in
their country.

Leadership roles on defining priorities in those
areas should of course be played by national
institutions. A11 aid to Haiti should be provided based
upon unconditional respect for State sovereignty.

