Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on the report of the Panel of Experts on the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
23

S/l'VA437

 

Republic of the Congo. We welcome the addendum to
the final report of the Panel and wish to thank the
Chairman, Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem, for his
presentation today of the Panel's recommendations,
and him and his team for the work they have done. We
also welcome to the Security Council the Ministers of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
Zimbabwe and the United Republic of Tanzania and
the Adviser to the President of Rwanda. We appreciate
their participation in today's debate and thank them for
their statements. Their views will certainly be taken
into account in the further deliberations of the Security
Council on this matter.

Over the past two years Jamaica has constantly
emphasized the importance of the economic
underpinnings of various conflicts in Africa, and in the
Great Lakes region in particular, where the motivation
for profiteering and plunder of resources has been a
constant factor in the continuation of conflict. The
continued illegal exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo only serves to
perpetuate the conflict in that country, impede
economic and social development and exacerbate the
suffering of the people of the country. It is for that very
reason that we supported the establishment of the Panel
of Experts, with a mandate to follow up on reports and
collect information on activities of illegal exploitation
of natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including violation
of the sovereignty of that country, as well as to
research and analyse the links between the exploitation
of the natural resources and other forms of wealth in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
continuation of the conflict.

The report before us today clearly demonstrates
that there is a link between the exploitation of natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the continuation of the conflict. While we appreciate
the fact that some progress has been made in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
we recall the debate we had last month with the
representatives of the Lusaka Political Committee, we
are reminded in the report that the exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has continued unabated for the enrichment of a
wide range of actors, both foreign and Congolese. This
is an untenable situation that cannot be condoned.

We have also taken note of the Panel's further
emphasis on the exploitation of human resources by all

parties to the conflict, which, as the report stresses, is a
far graver phenomenon than the exploitation of
material resources. This aspect cannot be ignored in
our deliberations, as a violation of the human rights of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should not be tolerated. We must also insist that the
Security Council's resolutions and the relevant
international human rights and humanitarian
regulations are respected.

My delegation fully concurs with the Panel's
conclusion that in order to end the exploitation of
natural resources and to establish a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the two underlying
causes of the conflict must be addressed: the decline of
the Congolese State and its institutions and the
continued security concerns generated by the presence
of armed groups. As we have seen, the persistence of
these factors has served to undermine the very gains of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, and if left unchecked,
they will inevitably support the continuation of the
conflict.

It is in this context that my delegation believes
that careful consideration must be given to the Panel's
far-reaching recommendations. In the first place, we
concur that in the short term emphasis must be placed
on the areas of institution-building, restoring the rule
of law and re-establishing State authority. This will be
critical to confidence-building and to increased
stability. We note that some steps have been taken in
this regard, including the drafting of a mining code and
the development of a national budget implementation
plan. These measures, if carefully implemented, could
augur well for the re-establishment of State authority.

Secondly, as the Panel report underscores in
paragraph 154, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process is critical to bringing a lasting
solution to the peace process. We therefore agree that
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should
accelerate the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process in order to reduce the security
concerns as expressed by a number of States in the
region, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to a level that makes it possible for the
countries concerned to negotiate among themselves the
modalities of securing their borders without infringing
upon the sovereignty of any State.

Sll'V.4437

 
It is therefore clear that the need for MONUC to
be deployed throughout the country, especially in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
is critical.

Thirdly, my delegation agrees that at some future
date, all the concessions, commercial agreements and
contracts signed during the period 1997 to 2001 and
subsequently in the rebel-held areas should be
reviewed and revised to address and correct all
irregularities. We have taken note of the
recommendations in regard to the financial and
technical aspects of the continuation of the conflict,
and we commend the recommendations to the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund and other
international donors for their consideration. My
delegation supports in principle the imposition of a
moratorium as a part of a comprehensive mechanism
that would stem the incentive for profiteering and
plunder in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region as a whole. We believe that the imposition
of a moratorium should be targeted not only at the
countries and groups in the region, but also at the end
users, because what we want to ensure ultimately is
that the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo benefit from the exploitation of their resources.

Finally, my delegation supports in principle the
extension of the mandate of the Panel of Experts. We
recognize that the time constraints of its short mandate
limited the Panel's ability to present a more complete
addendum. We would also wish the period of extension
of the mandate to be used to refine further the
recommendations made in the Panel's report and to
assist the Council in operationalizing them.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
our belief that the situation in the Democratic Repubilc
of the Congo can be solved only through a regional
approaach. We therefore believe that the Lusaka
Agreement provides the only current framework in
which this can be addressed. We look forward to the
full implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and to
the ending of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

