The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.

Mr. Vale de Almeidazl have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union is an active member of
the International Syria Support Group, and we are
doing everything in our power to ensure the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016) and the provisions of the
Geneva communique. A Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political transition in accordance with the documents
I mentioned is needed to bring lasting peace to the
country, defeat Da'esh and all terrorist organizations in
Syria and enable Syrians to return to their homes in
safe conditions and contribute to the reconstruction of
their country.

Conditions need to be created urgently for serious
direct talks to agree on a broad, inclusive, non-sectarian
transitional governing body with full executive powers,
as stated in the statement of the International Syria
Support Group of 17 May. To that end, all parties to the
conflict need to respect the cessation ofhostilities, make
progress on the issue of arbitrarily detained persons
and work to ensure immediate, secure, sustainable
and country-wide humanitarian access to all people in
need. The level of humanitarian aid, including medical
equipment and supplies, needs to be significantly
enhanced to meet the needs of all vulnerable people,
including internally displaced persons (IDPs) and host
communities throughout Syrian territory.

Without real and significant improvements in the
conditions necessary for serious negotiations, both the
political process and the cessation of hostilities are
at risk.

The European Union condemns all violations of
international humanitarian law and attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure, in particular
against medical facilities, schools, markets and IDP
camps. The EU strongly condemns excessive and
disproportionate attacks committed by the Syrian
regime against its own people, including the starvation
of civilians through the besiegement ofpopulated areas.

The EU reiterates its strong support for transitional
justice and accountability for all serious human rights
abuses and Violations of international humanitarian
law, including any that may constitute a war crime
committed in Syria by any party, including Da'esh.
The EU renews its call to the Security Council to
refer the situation to the International Criminal Court.
The EU welcomes the renewal of the mandate for the
Commission of Inquiry and calls for the cooperation
of all parties, in particular the Syrian regime to grant
necessary access.

Serious negotiations are required to reach an
agreement by 1 August on a political transition. Only a
real commitment on both sides of the political track can
lead to an agreement.

The EU is stepping up its support to the Syrian
opposition, and in particular the High Negotiations
Committee, as the opposition delegation in the United
Nations-brokered talks in Geneva. The EU encourages
unity among opposition groups and welcomes the fact
that the opposition has intensified its coordination and
preparations for negotiating a peaceful solution to the
Syrian conflict.

The EU urges the Government delegation to finally
lay out its plan for truly implementing a genuine political
transition. Speeches such as that by Bashar Al-Assad
of 7 June that reject the political process, reject the
legitimacy of the opposition delegation and advocate
a military solution seem calculated to undermine the
Support Group process, and with it the best hope for
peace in Syria.

There cannot be lasting peace in Syria under the
present leadership, and until the legitimate grievances
and aspirations of all components of Syrian society
are addressed.

The EU is ready to increase its support even
more to both the humanitarian work and the political
negotiations, in full coordination with Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura. We are ready to rapidly provide
support to stabilization, reconstruction and the return
of refugees and internally displaced people to their
homes in safe conditions once a political transition
has started.

The EU would like to pay tribute to the victims of
the recent terrorist attacks in Iraq.

The surge of terrorist activities that we have
witnessed recently is a sign that Da'esh is losing ground
on the military front. However, every attack that results
in loss oflife is a breeding ground for further sectarian
tension, in a country and a region that require cohesion
and unity in the face ofa complex crisis.

The EU continues its firm support for Prime Minister
Al Abadi's efforts to build an inclusive Government
and for his programme of reforms. The EU commends
Iraqi progress particularly regarding stabilization. Only
a Government that can provide safety, services and
opportunities for all its citizens will be able to build a
strong, unified Iraq. The EU will continue to support
the Iraqi Government in that endeavour.

As far as the Middle East peace process is
concerned, we may have reached a critical juncture. It
is time for international initiatives to become a coherent
collective effort to revive the two-State solution. For
the EU, as outlined in previous Council conclusions,
there is no alternative to a negotiated two-State solution
that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty,
ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all
permanent status issues in order to end the conflict. It
remains the only realistic way of ending the conflict
once and for all. It offers the prospect of a secure State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition.

However, we are currently concerned that the two-
State solution could be slipping beyond reach. That is
why the European Union is united in its determination to
work alongside international partners and the region to
reinvigorate the Middle East peace process. That is the
very reason that the Middle East Quartet, in its report
published on 1 July, outlined the dangerous trends on
the ground imperilling the two-State solution. The EU
welcomes the publication of the Middle East Quartet's
report. The EU endorses the recommendations outlined
in the report as a contribution to creating the conditions
for the two-State solution, and asks the Secretary-
General to report on their implementation.

The EU expresses concern at the trends on the
ground and calls on the parties to swiftly engage with the
Quartet and other relevant stakeholders and implement
the recommendations in full. Such implementation
would demonstrate a genuine commitment to a peaceful
solution by rebuilding mutual trust and creating the
conditions for direct and meaningful negotiations that
resolve all final status issues. The EU stands ready to
support the parties in that process.

The EU welcomes also the joint communique on the
Middle East peace initiative adopted at the ministerial
meeting in Paris on 3 June. Inclusiveness is now
needed in the follow-up to the Paris meeting and the
Quartet report. Those major international initiatives
must proceed hand-in-hand and in a well-coordinated
and well-sequenced so that they constitute a coherent
collective effort to rescue the two-State solution, while
paving the way for direct talks.
The European Union also encourages discussion in
the context of the Arab Peace Initiative, which holds
out hope for a permanent regional settlement.

We are deeply concerned by the continuing cycle
of violence. Violence costs human lives. It causes grief
and resentment and exacerbates mistrust and mutual
recrimination, thereby undermining prospects for
a peaceful solution. While our thoughts are with the
families of the victims, we urge the parties to work
towards the de-escalation of tensions, to refrain from
actions in the form of incitement and provocation
that serve only to fuel further tension, and to observe
international humanitarian law and adhere to the
principles of necessity and proportionality in the use
of force.

We also recall that only the re-establishment of a
political horizon and the resumption of dialogue can stop
the violence. Security measures alone cannot stop the
cycle of violence. The underlying causes of the conflict
need to be addressed. Israel's ongoing settlement
policy, which is illegal under international law, and the
actions it has taken in that context, such as evictions
and forced transfers of populations, demolitions and
confiscations, including demolitions of EU projects,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threatens to make a
two-State solution impossible.

Palestinian unity is essential for a Viable Palestinian
State. President Abbas must be fully behind efforts
to achieve reconciliation, which is fundamental for
progress towards a permanent resolution and key to
improving the security of the Palestinians and Israelis.
Militant activity and the dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza feed the general instability and impede efforts to
achieve a negotiated solution.

We need bold leadership on the ground to reverse
those trends. That requires an end to both settlement
expansion and violence. The EU therefore regrets that
Israel's response has been the approval of hundreds of
additional settlement units in the occupied Palestinian
territory. A fundamental change of policy by Israel with
regard to the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly
in Area C, would significantly increase economic
opportunities, empower Palestinian institutions
and enhance stability and security for both Israelis
and Palestinians.

Palestinian leaders should consistently and clearly
condemn specific terrorist attacks. We encourage the
Palestinian leadership to show its opposition to the
incitement to violence and clearly distance itself from
such actions. In the interest of addressing the needs of
the Palestinian population, the EU urges all Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process, on the basis of the Palestine Liberation
Organization platform, democracy and the rule of law.
The EU calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce
a fundamental change in the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end
of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points,
while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns.

In conclusion, the EU will continue to work with
its Israeli and Palestinian counterparts, along with
the Quartet and other stakeholders, in the region and
beyond, in order to make progress towards a just and
lasting peace based on a two-State solution.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.


