Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Cameroon would like to express to Mr.
Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, its great appreciation for his
up-to-date and highly informative briefing on the
situation in Kosovo. We followed his presentation with
the greatest attention.

Speaking at the Council meeting on Kosovo of 30
June 2002, my delegation stressed the need to
capitalize on all the positive signs that had emerged
from the report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/779),
in order to consolidate the still-fragile outlines of a
rebirth of normal activity in Kosovo. We pointed out
that strengthening security, disarming all armed groups
and encouraging the return of all minorities should be
the priorities. Today, we note that, thanks to the
dedication of the men and women caring for Kosovo,
the implementation of those priorities is already
beginning to bear fruit.

We have also seen remarkable progress in
strengthening the rule of law throughout the territory of
Kosovo in the fight against insecurity and crime in all
its forms. My delegation supports the plan for regional
cooperation in the fight against organized crime,
which, however, cannot achieve the anticipated results
unless the police and justice services now being created
or restructured respond positively to the hopes placed
in them. In that regard, the current situation augurs
well for a promising future, although on the judicial
level it still requires increased cooperation among all
sociopolitical elements as well as among the
subregional authorities.

Mr. Steiner, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, told us after the
parliamentary and presidential elections that he felt the
time had come, in the context of the new phase of the
United Nations operation, to gradually transfer
authority in Kosovo to the institutions of provisional
self-government without prejudging the future political
status of the province. We gave him our support, as did
other Council members. We now reaffirm that support,
and we call upon the Kosovo authorities to respect
scrupulously their mandate, which is defined by the
Constitutional Framework. That is the only way for this
process to progress harmoniously and according to the
established programme.

Kosovo will be a province of law or it will not
exist. Recent incidents which led to highly regrettable
statements by the Kosovo authorities deserve to be
condemned with the utmost energy. The fragile rebirth
of a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo, under the
guidance of the United Nations, deserves to be
strengthened and strongly supported. Certainly, the
return to normalcy in Kosovo will be a long process in
which patience, perseverance and, above all, tact will
be the virtues necessary in order to bring Kosovo into
the great family of the Balkans, purged of its ancient
demons of hatred, violence and war.

To reach at that final stage, we must pass through
other crucial intermediary phases. One is the
organization of the municipal elections scheduled for
26 October 2002. We express our appreciation for the
process set up by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) with a
view to enabling wide participation in those elections,
including by voters outside Kosovo, all in a spirit of
order and transparency. At this stage, my delegation
cannot subscribe to any idea that would hamper the
laborious work under way to achieve reconciliation
among all the components of Kosovo's population. The
delegation of Cameroon appeals to all of sociopolitical
sectors to take part, without conditions, in this third
electoral phase. We should also like to take this
opportunity to say that my delegation noted
Mr. Steiner's invitation to Security Council members to

take part on the ground in the elections scheduled for
26 October.

The extension of UNMIK's authority throughout
Kosovo and respect for the rule of law are the aspects
that, in our View, deserve particular attention in future
United Nations action in that province. More than ever,
the success of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
depends on cooperation: the cooperation of all
sociopolitical components in Kosovo, the cooperation
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and the
cooperation of the international community, including
in financial terms.

Finally, my delegation reaffirms its appreciation
and encouragement to all international organizations
and to the members of UNMIK who are working daily
on the ground for the advent of true peace in Kosovo.

