Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Moroccan presidency for the initiative
to convene the this meeting to discuss the question of
inter-mission cooperation. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Ladsous and Haq for their
respective briefings.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
important way of maintaining international peace and
security. At present, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are facing a situation of increasing demand
while resources are being put under increasingly heavy
strain. The sudden outbreak of issues in hotspots and
their interconnectedness have made the situation ever
more challenging for United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

In recent years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations, especially those that enjoy geographical
proximity and whose mandates are connected in some
way, have, as called for by the situation on the ground,
cooperated in order to achieve complementarity in
the use of resources. Such cooperation has enhanced
flexibility in peacekeeping operations and achieved
certain positive results. However, at the same time,
inter-mission cooperation is also facing some specific
issues with regard to establishing mechanisms and
operating procedures. In that connection, I wish to
make the following four points.

First, China is in favour of international cooperation
according to the situation on the ground and as
required by a specific operation. However, specific
authorization should be obtained for such cooperation
from the Council beforehand, and it should abide by
the fundamental principles governing peacekeeping
operations, especially that of the consent of the host
country.

Secondly, in order to strengthen inter-mission
cooperation, it is important first and foremost
to ensure that the individual mandates are being
effectively implemented. The Secretariat, in preparing
for inter-mission cooperation, should first conduct a
comprehensive assessment of the situation on the ground
and carry out reasonable conceptual and planning
activities. The purpose of inter-mission cooperation
is to more effectively implement Council mandates.
It is therefore necessary to avoid a situation where
the capacity of an individual peacekeeping mission is
negatively affected as a result of such cooperation.

Thirdly, it is important to ensure that each
peacekeeping operation receives adequate financial
support and, at the same time, efforts should be made
to achieve the optimal use of resources through proper
cooperation among different missions.

China is in favour of the efforts by the Department
for Field Support to continue to implement global field
support strategy and to consolidate resources among
different missions in a timely and effective manner
so as to make optimal use of the limited resources for
peacekeeping.

Fourthly, in the course ofinter-mission cooperation,
the Secretariat should strengthen integrated coordination
so as to ensure that there is a seamless connection and
transfer among the various parties and between the
various steps. It is equally important to seek the views
of troop-contributing countries in a timely manner and
to strengthen contacts and communication with them.
With regard to specific developments of inter-mission
cooperation, the Secretariat should keep the Council
informed in a timely manner.

