Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): Portugal aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union. I would like to add some remarks
in my national capacity.

Let me begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate, which provides a
valuable opportunity for the Security Council to take
stock of resolution 2436 (2018) and address some of the
commitments and pledges made during the recent United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial. Recent years have
demonstrated that peacekeeping missions operate in an
ever-more challenging security environment. However,
that cannot weaken our collective responsibility to
ensure that United Nations peacekeepers are deployed
with the highest assurance of their safety in the
fulfilment of their mandate. Unfortunately, the past
10 years of United Nations peacekeeping have been
particularly tragic, as the number of fatalities have
been exceedingly high. In that regard, efforts taken by
the United Nations and its Member States throughout
2018 to improve the safety of peacekeepers led to a
considerable reduction in the number of fatalities last
year. We hope those efforts continue with the goal of
achieving a zero-fatality rate.

The Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the joint Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations are further evidence of our commitment to
enhancing the impact of peacekeeping, which depends
greatly on the training of peacekeepers.

As a troop- and police-contributing country,
Portugal sees training as a top priority due to its direct
impact, not only on the safety of our peacekeepers
and of the missions in which we participate, but also
in the conduct and fulfilment of mandated tasks. That
is why our military and police personnel meet the
highest standards of training, which includes models
in international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and focuses on areas such as rules
of engagement, the protection of civilians and sexual
exploitation and abuse. We also invest in predeployment
and in-mission training to ensure that our uniformed
contingents have the tools to operate in their specific
areas of deployment.

I would like to draw special attention to the role ofour
female troops in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, where they perform combat roles in a very
volatile and demanding security environment. We
stand ready to share our experience and best practices
as we find ways to increase the number and role of
women in peacekeeping in the light of the women and
peace and security agenda and the uniformed gender-
parity strategy. In that context, Portugal is committed
to working with the Department of Peace Operations
on the possibility of organizing mixed training courses
on capacity and leadership, with 50/50 gender parity
attendance.

Another positive experience that is worth
mentioning here is our participation in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, together with Belgium, Denmark and
Norway, where we have implemented the transport
aviation unit rotational concept. It is a clear case of
good cooperation among United Nations Members to
articulate our needs and capacities in a structured and
coordinated way.

Looking ahead, we believe that the Santos
Cruz report provides the most comprehensive set
of recommendations to promote the training and,
therefore, the safety and security of peacekeepers.
One of its main virtues is identifying ways for the
Secretariat and Member States to integrate policies in
different areas, including medical services, improvised
explosive devices and technological solutions. Such
synergies could go a long way in improving the safety
and performance of all peacekeepers.

Finally, we are ready and willing to share our
experience and lessons learned, namely, by assisting
in the training of contingents from other troop-
and police-contributing countries. In that regard,
and particularly in the framework of our defence
cooperation with members of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, we have been exploring
ways in which our collective accumulated knowledge
can constitute a deliverable to improve the safety and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers.

