Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I am
honoured to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its 28 member States. I thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/198) and Mr. Lacroix, Ms. Bachelet
and Ms. Viaud for their briefings. I especially welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.

The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate country Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well
as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.

Haiti has gone from a situation of latent fragility
to a fully fledged political and economic crisis that has
resulted since last July in a series of demonstrations
and riots against the elevated cost of living, owing
to inflation and the rapid depreciation of the local
currency, which culminated in February in 12 long days
ofblockades in the country. In addition, demonstrations,
generally peaceful in nature, were held to denounce
the management of PetroCaribe funds by previous
Administrations and demand accountability and an
effective fight against corruption.

Unfortunately, many of the protests were marked
by episodes of violence that caused deaths and looting,
despite the deployment of the Haitian National Police
(HNP). The HNP has generally succeeded in containing
tensions and limiting material damage in a context of
widespread instability. However, as a result of that
climate, the number of incidents involving armed gangs
has increased; some have been particularly serious,
with murders, rapes and violence, especially the one
that took place last November in the neighbourhood of
La Saline. An investigation is still ongoing following
accusations of the involvement of the security forces.

The European Union is concerned about the overall
situation in Haiti. Politically, the radical opposition
has exerted strong pressure in an attempt to force
President Moise to resign. Other political, civil society
and business actors have demanded the establishment
of a genuine national dialogue, which, unfortunately,
after several unsuccessful attempts, remains behind
schedule; some are waiting for a thorough reform of
institutions and their functioning, with the electoral
mandates under review.

On 18 March, the Chamber of Deputies of the
Haitian Parliament voted to dismiss Prime Minister
Ceant and his Government, to which they had given their
vote of confidence just six months ago. In that context,
and given the critical situation in the country, the
European Union considers it imperative that President
Moise and the incoming new Government engage in a
deep, inclusive and sincere political dialogue that can
identify and implement the necessary political solutions
to overcome the current impasse. It is important
that women be able to participate meaningfully and
equitably in that process.

The holding of legislative elections for the
Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, within the
time limits provided for in the Constitution, is also
essential. Respect for the legitimacy of democratically
elected institutions and the regular cycle of elections
appears, in parallel and in complementarity with
national dialogue, to be one of the essential conditions
for the functioning of democracy in Haiti. Structural
reforms are urgently needed to restore the country's
economy and finances and allow for properly inclusive
socioeconomic development.

As stated in the benchmarks for an exit strategy,
prepared by the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), a consensual
and far-reaching reform of the electoral system is
a key component not only in preventing further
institutional crises, but also in rebuilding a strong
link between elected officials and voters in order to
regain the people's confidence. It is essential that the
Haitian authorities and parliamentarians make every
effort to organize the parliamentary and municipal
elections in October 2019. We therefore hope that this
deadline will be maintained and prepared in the best
possible conditions.

The European Union remains a faithful partner
of the Republic of Haiti and committed to supporting
the country in this sensitive period, in cooperation
with the other partners, including in the indispensable
process of dialogue and reform. The European Union
is ready to continue its development cooperation in the
country and to facilitate the emergence of effective and
sustainable solutions to overcome the many challenges
that the country faces.
The European Union appreciates and supports
the work done by MINUJUSTH in support of the
development of the National Police, justice, the rule of
law and the defence and promotion of human rights.
However, we share the concerns expressed in the latest
debriefing provided Mr. J enca on 8 March, according to
which the security situation remains particularly fragile
and the progress on many benchmarks insufficient.

The persistent inability of the Haitian National
Police and national authorities to control gang-related
violence, with accusations of collusion and other
dysfunctions, is of particular concern. The European
Union is particularly concerned about the ability of
the HNP to conduct effective operations after the
withdrawal of MINUJUSTH. We therefore consider
it essential to complete the work of strengthening and
professionalizing the Haitian National Police while
preserving its autonomy and political neutrality. At the
same time, we must continue to stress the importance
of the reform and strengthening of justice and the
penitentiary system, as well as the consolidation of
human rights. MINUJUSTH's withdrawal is scheduled
for the same month in which the elections are supposed
to take place. In Haitian history, such a coincidence
has always marked a period of instability. It is
therefore an additional source of concern and it is all
the more important that the elections take place on the
dates announced.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the European Union's
appreciation for the contribution made by MINUJUSTH
to security, conflict prevention, the consolidation
of democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. However,
we believe that the structural economic, social and
financial causes of instability in Haiti have yet to be
overcome and that the political and security situation
remains very fragile. Special attention will need to be
paid to ensuring respect for human rights in the work of
the security forces and impartial justice for all.

It is therefore essential that the Haitian police
and judiciary be effectively prepared to assume all
the tasks currently carried out by the United Nations
Mission in the future. We believe that a gradual
transition of MINUJUSTH and the full exercise by the
Haitian National Police of its security responsibilities
on 15 October will be critical in that regard. The
European Union, along with the United Nations and
the international community, will support the Haitian
authorities in consolidating their commitment and
efforts to secure a better future in peace, democracy,
stability and well-being for the whole Haitian people.
