Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate the Republic of Indonesia
on its assumption of the Security Council presidency
in a wise manner for this month. We also thank the
Federal Republic of Germany for its efforts during its
presidency last month. I would like to welcome the
briefing by Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), whose presence has been noteworthy from
the beginning of her mandate.

My Government welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2470 (2019) to renew the UNAMI mandate
for another year. We appreciate the support provided by
the United States of America and other Member States
on the Security Council, as well as the collective efforts
and cooperation with which the negotiations on the
renewal were carried out. We also express our gratitude
to all members of the Security Council for their support
for the resolution.
My country's Government had submitted a request
to extend the mandate in order to meet the requisite
needs of all its citizens, which the United Nations
can help Iraq to fulfil, while maintaining the main
responsibilities and tasks of the Mission. That is what
happened with the adoption of resolution 2421 (2018),
in which the mandate was simplified and the text itself
was reduced in accordance with Iraq's needs at that
time (see S/PV.8285).

My country's Government hopes to work closely
with UNAMI to meet Iraq's needs in the upcoming
phase. We encourage the Mission to coordinate closely
with other United Nations agencies in Iraq, including
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme, in
order to ensure coordination and achieve progress in
humanitarian work, reconstruction and development at
the local, Government and national levels.

Despite the incomplete formation of the Cabinet,
my country's Government, which was formed based on
the independence and competence of its members, is
now able to implement its programme. There has been
progress on many issues, which are now being followed
up on, including in the areas of security, the military,
culture, the economy, social and human rights, as well
as opening up to neighbouring countries and States in
the region. Our efforts include the following.

First, we are safeguarding the gains made by the
Iraqi people with regard to security and stability,
proceeding with reconstruction projects, consolidating
unity and meeting needs by promoting service provision,
development and economic prosperity. The situation
is evolving positively at all levels in Iraq. When the
security situation improves, the political situation also
improves, which is related to the current consensus in
Iraq. If not for the cooperation shown by everyone, we
would not have defeated terrorism. We stand ready to
preserve that consensus, which reflects the political
unity in the country, including with regard to relations
between Baghdad and Erbil, which today are better
than ever and continue to be marked by cooperation.

Second, Iraq is experiencing security and stability,
especially in the liberated governorates. Security forces
have almost reopened all the roads in Baghdad that had
been closed since 2003, including in the Green Zone.

Third, the three presidencies and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs have been eagerly working to translate
the close relations between Iraq, its neighbouring
States and countries of the region into opportunities
and practical programmes. We have also reached
understandings based on common interests to set up
joint projects that will strengthen the economy and
promote investment in agriculture and industry and
generate large-scale job creation. Iraq will spare no
effort to promote security and stability in the region.
In an environment marked by rising tensions in our
region, we adhere to a policy of positive neutrality. We
have based that policy on our national security goals of
consolidating and maintaining the gains made in the
war against the Da'esh terrorist gangs.

Fourth, the number of displaced persons from
areas once controlled by the Da'esh terrorist gangs
has decreased from nearly 5 million to 1.8 million
The number of returnees to Nineveh governorate
has reached approximately 1.4 million, followed by
Al-Anbar governorate with 1.2 million returnees,
while approximately 534,000 people have returned to
Salahadin governorate.

Fifth, at the initiative of the President of the
Republic, the Council of Representatives is working on
the adoption of a law on Yazidi female survivors, aimed
at compensating them materially and morally as well as
ensuring their rehabilitation and providing them with
a secure and dignified life. In addition, it will take all
the steps necessary to reintegrate survivors into society
and rebuild infrastructure in their regions. The Council
of Representatives is also working on the adoption
of a law on combating domestic violence, which will
provide full legal protection for all victims of domestic
violence. The law is in line with the Iraqi Constitution,
which prohibits all forms of violence and abuse within
the family, as well as in line with international human
rights standards.

Sixth, cooperation continues with the United
Nations, in particular UNICEF and the country task
force on monitoring and reporting, in order to develop
a joint action plan to safeguard the rights of children
who have been affected by terrorist acts. Moreover,
we are cooperating with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to implement the action plan that
was launched in 2018.

Seventh, efforts are under way to mitigate the
effects of climate change through the use of national
and international resources that guarantee food and
water security, both of which are priorities for my
Government, owing to the impact of climate change on
both.
My Government is fully aware that much remains
to be done in order to meet the aspirations of the Iraqi
people. They aspire to achieve political reform, stability,
security and putting an end to corruption, which
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert termed "private networks".
They also aspire to end illegal earning activities, while
providing equitable economic opportunities for all.

Despite the defeat of Da'esh's terrorist gangs in Iraq
and Syria, the threat they pose remains. My Government
is working to combat their abhorrent ideology through
a comprehensive approach encompassing security,
ideology, development and legislation aspects. We are
working tirelessly to facilitate the prosecution ofDa'esh
criminal terrorists and issue legal sentences against
them for their crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes perpetrated in Iraq.

With regard to my Government's efforts to counter
terrorism, we have submitted a request to the Office
of Counter-Terrorism for assistance from the United
Nations programme related to prohibiting the travel
of foreign terrorists, with the aim of building Iraqi
State institutions and enabling them to overcome
the challenges and difficulties that Iraq has faced
pertaining to the collection of data and identification of
foreign travellers entering Iraq. Coordination involving
that request is still under way.

We have also adopted a strategy to combat violent
extremism leading to terrorism in order to eliminate
extremism and hatred, so as to lead to a society that
believes in coexistence, moderation and tolerance. We
urge all friendly and allied countries to develop new
legal systems to prosecute returning foreign terrorist
fighters. If a practical solution is not found, the Da'esh
terrorist group could re-establish its capabilities, undo
the status quo and launch large-scale terrorist attacks
throughout the world.

My Government also focused on developing Kuwaiti-
Iraqi relations during the period under consideration.
With the goal of overcoming obstacles emanating from
the past, we have built bridges and communicated with
our brothers in Kuwait to strengthen relations between
the two countries. In that context, meetings of the
seventh session of the Iraqi-Kuwaiti Joint Committee
were held on 12 and 13 May. We reviewed cooperation
between the two sides in all areas, in particular with
regard to promoting the economic and development
spheres. We also agreed to solve many pending issues
in the context of bilateral relations between our two
countries. Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi will visit
the sisterly State of Kuwait tomorrow.
Iraq welcomes presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/1, on prisoners, missing persons and the
return of the Kuwaiti property. Our delegation worked
side by side with our brothers in the Kuwaiti delegation
to draft the statement, which demonstrates that Iraq is
committed to the implementation of resolution 2107
(2013). We attach great importance to the search for
missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals and to
the return of their remains to their countries, as well as
the recovery of missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives.

In that context, a mass grave has been discovered
in the city of Samawah, with human remains having
undergone preliminary tests. We have shared the
results with the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the competent Kuwaiti authorities. We hope
those results will be positive.

In conclusion, we highly value the role of the United
Nations in supporting Iraq in all areas, particularly
with regard to displaced persons, projects to support
women and children in liberated and affected areas
and ensuring basic services, health care, education and
reconstruction. My country's Government is committed
to providing good working conditions for the UNAMI
and to ensuring cooperation with it by all the relevant
Iraqi authorities. We also look forward to continued
support for Iraq from sisterly, friendly and allied
countries in the upcoming recovery and reconstruction
phase. We again thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert and
her team for their commitment to cooperating with
my country's Government in carrying out UNAMI's
mandate in order to serve the interests and needs of
Iraq. We wish them every success in their endeavours.

