Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I extend my congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. We also express our
appreciation to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Mali. In addition, we would like to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
serious consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda today, which represents your first task since
assuming the presidency, and to express our thanks to
the members of the Council, in particular the members
of the Non-Aligned Movement on the Council.

On 28 September 2000, Mr. Ariel Sharon, whose
record is well known, took a provocative and insulting
step against Arabs and Muslims when he visited
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in occupied East Jerusalem with
the purpose of bolstering Israel's illegitimate claims to
control the third holiest site in Islam. Mr. Sharon was
accompanied during his visit by a huge number of
Israeli security forces, something that led to an
escalation of tensions and a sense of confrontation.
This resulted in clashes at the site of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and throughout occupied East Jerusalem.
Those clashes took place between Palestinian citizens
protesting Sharon's visit and Israeli security forces, and
caused injuries to vast numbers of Palestinian civilians.

On 29 September 2000, after Muslim Friday
prayers had been held at noon, large numbers of Israeli
security forces assaulted Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
attacked Muslim worshippers, thereby committing a
gross act of aggression against that holy place. These
events recall a similar act of aggression committed by
Israeli security forces against Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 8
October 1990, when those forces killed 20 Palestinians
and injured 150 Muslim worshipers.
The Sharon visit and the forced entry into
Al-Haram Al-Sharif by Israeli security forces resulted
in a large number of injuries and touched off massive
protests by Palestinian civilians in occupied East
Jerusalem and across the occupied Palestinian
territories. Those protests stemmed from our people's
conviction of the need to defend its holy sites against
Israeli aggression and from deep frustration at the
Israeli Government's policies and attitudes, which have
impeded any meaningful progress in the peace process
that would lead to a change in the status quo, despite
the genuine efforts made by many parties, including the
American Administration and the American President
himself.

It was surprising, therefore, that Israel, the
occupying Power, reacted to the protests by Palestinian
civilians as if what it had done earlier was not
sufficient in itself. Israeli security forces used
considerable military power, including snipers, live
ammunition, hand grenades and anti-tank missiles.
Later, helicopter gunships and moving tanks were
brought into the vicinity of Palestinian towns and
manned Palestinian police force posts.

Israeli soldiers deliberately killed a number of
Palestinian civilians, including a Palestinian child,
Mohammed Al-Durra, whose story is now well-known.
The Israeli security forces also caused severe pain and
suffering to, and inflicted serious injuries on, many
other civilians. Later, on 1 and 2 October, and to a
lesser extent on 30 September, certain members of the
Palestinian police force, having seen firsthand the
severity and brutality of the attacks mounted by the
Israeli forces against Palestinian civilians, engaged in
clashes with those forces, including Israeli Army
troops, using personal weapons, which resulted in the
death of an additional number of police officers.

That exchange of fire does not change the basic
nature of the events in question, which are in essence
acts of oppression and brutality by Israeli security
forces against Palestinian civilians. That campaign of
aggression resulted in 42 martyrs, including a number
of children under the age of 16, and injured more than
1,200 people, many of whom are in serious condition.
This appalling four-day toll, which does not include
today's casualties, proves beyond the shadow of a
doubt that the Israeli security forces deliberately tried
to inflict the greatest possible harm on the Palestinian
people, using their military machinery in an
unprecedented fashion.

The actions carried out by the occupying Israeli
forces over the past few days constitute a grave
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilians in Time of War of 1949. We
believe that certain members of the Israeli Army are
guilty of war crimes and must be brought to justice.
This is, of course, in addition to the destructive impact
of these actions on the peace agreements in place and
on the peace process.

But other serious events took place inside Israel
itself, not just in the Palestinian occupied territories.
Some Israeli Arabs staged demonstrations and protests
in solidarity with their brethren in the Palestinian
territories. In response, the Israeli Government and
police force took brutal action against this segment of
its population, resulting in the death of 10 citizens and
hundreds of injuries. We are talking about Israel itself
here, not the occupied territories. We are talking about
the Israeli Government, not the occupying Power. We
are talking about Israeli citizens, albeit of Arab origin,
not Palestinian citizens. This is yet more proof that
Israel bears tremendous responsibility for the
bloodshed of the past few days.

Some in Israel have tried to shift the blame onto
the Palestinian side, claiming that the Palestinian
Authority provoked its citizens. Only a gullible person
or a racist would make such an allegation - a person
blind to the manifestations of occupation, the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people and the failure of
the peace process to bring about genuine change in the
daily lives of the Palestinian people. Such a person
would have to be incapable of discerning the sense of
frustration and humiliation gripping our people because
of Israeli policies, including the attempt to profane our
holy sites. Only a racist person would believe that a
Palestinian citizen is inferior to others and can be
ordered to be killed. Only a racist person could not
understand that the Palestinian people have their own
dignity and rights, like all other peoples on the planet.

What has happened over the past few days and
the unprecedented actions of the Israeli side can be
explained in one of only two ways. The first possibility
is that Israel has decided to break the will of the
Palestinian people and to undermine the credibility of
the Palestinian leadership in order to force it to accept
concessions within the framework of the peace process.
The other possibility is that some Israeli military
officers have taken matters into their own hands for
personal or political reasons. The truth might be a
mixture of these two possibilities. However, we must
get to the heart of the matter and understand the facts
through an investigation of what happened. Those
responsible must be brought to justice. We must ensure
that there is no recurrence of these bloody events in the
future.

The Security Council has a very specific
responsibility. It must put an immediate end to Israel's
brutal campaign and to the occupying Power's
violation of international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention and relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as of the commitments undertaken
in the peace accords.

This is the immediate responsibility of the
Council, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. If the Council were to succeed in fulfilling
these obligations, as is our hope, it would indeed have
played an extremely crucial role, not only in addressing
the immediate grave situation as it is unfolding on the
ground and in upholding international law, including
international humanitarian law, but also in creating a
necessary favourable environment to enable the peace
process to be resuscitated and perhaps later to be
resumed with a view to achieving a final agreement
between the two sides. We sincerely hope that this will
be achieved.

