Ms. Bensouda: The purpose of the regular reports
that I am requested to provide to the Council is to update
it on developments and progress in the investigation
and prosecution of those alleged to be responsible for
the commission of crimes in Darfur. Following my
Office's investigations and submissions of evidence
to the judges, and their independent assessment, the
judges have concluded that the evidence provided to
them established that certain individuals in the Sudan
should be brought before the International Criminal
Court to answer charges, including allegations of rape.

To date, none of those individuals have been brought
to justice, and some of them continue to be implicated
in atrocities committed against innocent civilians. It is
becoming increasingly difficult for me to appear before
the Council to update it when all I am doing is repeating
the same things I have said over and over again, most of
which are well known to the Council. Not only does the
situation in Darfur continue to deteriorate, the brutality
with which crimes are being committed has become
more pronounced. Women and girls continue to bear
the brunt of sustained attacks on innocent civilians, but
the Council has yet to be spurred into action. Victims
of rapes are asking themselves how many more women
must be brutally attacked for the Council to appreciate
the magnitude of their plight. In the almost 10 years
that my Office has been reporting to the Council, no
strategic recommendation has ever been provided to
my Office, and neither have there been any discussions
resulting in concrete solutions to the problems we face
in the Darfur situation. We find ourselves in a stalemate
that can only embolden perpetrators to continue with
their brutality.

As I have stated previously on many occasions, we
must engage to define a new approach to the Darfur
situation. That requires strategic thinking and changes
from all sides. Faced with an environment where my
Office's limited resources for investigations are already
overstretched, and given the Council's lack of foresight
on what should happen in Darfur, I am left with no
choice but to put investigative activities in Darfur on
hold as I shift resources to other urgent cases, especially
those where trial is approaching. It should thus be clear
to the Council that unless there is a change of attitude
and approach to Darfur in the near future, there will
continue to be little or nothing to report to it for the
foreseeable future. The question for the Council to
answer is what meaningful purpose my reporting was
intended to serve and whether that purpose is being
achieved.

The recent allegations ofrape of approximately 200
women and girls in Thabit should shock the Council
into action. It is disturbing - and, indeed, it should be
a matter of great concern to the Council - that even as
my Office and the international community intensify
efforts to end the scourge of sexual and gender-based
crimes, the Government of the Sudan has denied full
access to Thabit, thus frustrating full and transparent
investigations into serious allegations of sexual and
gender-based crimes. The Council must demonstrate its
strong condemnation of the failure of the Government
of the Sudan to facilitate access to Thabit and should
demand unimpeded full investigations of these crimes
without delay. It is unacceptable that investigations of
such sensitive and serious crimes were conducted in a
situation in which perpetrators have effective control
over their victims in their homes and in their villages,
and where investigators can offer no protection to
victims after they have left the crime scene.

Following my appeal and the Council's support
for investigations of allegations of manipulation and
underreporting by the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, I thank the Secretary-
General for taking immediate steps to investigate these
allegations and for availing my Office of its executive
summary. It is my Office's hope that the Secretary-
General and the Council will take appropriate measures
to address the issues identified in the report and to
effectively implement its recommendations. It is worth
recalling that United Nations reports are an important
and unique source of public information that my Office
relies on for its activities in most situations, and it is
for this reason that any allegation of manipulation and
underreporting becomes a matter of concern to my
Office.
We have taken note of Mr. Omer Al-Bashir's travels
during this reporting period, which have been markedly
fewer. The question of Mr. Al-Bashir's travels remains
a matter before the Council, as does his status as a
fugitive from justice.

I share the Council's deep concern at the serious
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur and its
profoundly negative impact on civilians, in particular
children and women. As the Secretary-General has
rightly pointed out, sexual and gender-based violence
remains a pervasive feature of the conflict in Darfur,
as do attacks on human rights defenders, civil society
members and community leaders. These unacceptable
attacks are aimed at the foundations of communities and
as such are seriously corrosive of any future stability.
As such, they must stop.

Massive new displacements that have taken
place this year have compounded an already fragile
situation. Equally concerning is the ongoing pattern
of aerial bombardments and armed attacks on civilian
populations by militia/Janjaweed, and in particular
the ongoing involvement of the newest iteration of the
Janjaweed, the Rapid Support Forces led by Mohamed
Hamdan. My Office's factual indicators seem to
illustrate a similar pattern of indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks against civilians by the Rapid
Support Forces.

It is worth repeating once again, as has been done
many times before, that the Government of the Sudan, as
the territorial State, has the primary responsibility and
is fully able to implement the Court's warrants of arrest
consistent with its sovereign authority. Notwithstanding
this clear responsibility, it has consistently failed to do
so. At the same time, it has also failed to provide any
meaningful measure ofjustice at the national level.

I remain open to constructively engage with
the Council on the Darfur issue. What is needed is a
dramatic shift in the Council's approach to arresting
Darfur suspects. I appreciate the efforts being made
to ensure that the Council produces a substantive
response to the eight outstanding communications from
the Court. Likewise, I believe that concerted efforts to
promote cooperation with the Court may help to fill the
gap. In that regard, I call on all States and the Council
to find creative ways to support those among them that
may be most vulnerable to planned visits by Mr. Omer
Al-Bashir or other individuals against whom warrants
of arrest have been issued.

