Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Once again, we welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) as
a follow-up to the Security Council mission to the
countries of the Lake Chad basin from 2 to 7 March
2017. There is no doubt that negotiations on the draft
required some work. We worked as a trio, together with
the countries of the region and the penholder, to reflect
the objective of the visit and the sentiments expressed
by the Council during the series of meetings with a
number of stakeholders, including the leadership at the
highest level of some of those countries.

Before proceeding further, I should like to pay
tribute to the co-leaders of the mission, the United
Kingdom and Senegal, for the success of the mission,
which was aided by the meticulous preparation that was
done in advance. They deserve commendation.

We believe that the resolution in its current form
conveys the right message; that is why we decided to
co-sponsor it. We are also happy that the countries
in the region are here with us, and it is good that the
Council had the opportunity to listen to their views.
I am sure that Council members will agree that we
were unanimous in our appreciation of the interrelated
nature of the security and climate-change-induced
environmental challenges that the countries of the Lake
Chad basin region are facing and the major impact
that the fall in the price of commodities has had on
their economies.

It was also very clear to us that there was
no sufficient realization within the international
community of the magnitude of the serious challenge
faced by the region. We therefore expressed our firm
solidarity and support for countries in the region in
overcoming their challenges and underscored the need
for a comprehensive and holistic solution through
intervention oriented towards long-term development.
It is therefore only appropriate that the resolution
remain true to that sentiment, and that is what we tried
to do during the negotiations. That is also precisely
what countries of the region that enthusiastically
welcomed us during the visit - for which we must be
grateful - expected from the Council. We hope that
the resolution will live up to that expectation.

I must conclude by applauding the cooperation and
coordination among the four countries of the region in
combating Boko Haram, as exemplified in the activities
of the Multinational Joint Task Force.

