Mr. Crowley (South Africa): Allow me to add the
voice of my delegation to those of others who have
congratulated you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July, and to thank Ambassador Nelson Messone for his
excellent stewardship of the Security Council during
the month of June.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on Afghanistan (S/2011/381). We also
appreciate the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, in this debate.

My delegation welcomes the relatively positive
developments that have taken place over the past few
months in Afghanistan, particularly with regard to the
progress towards greater Afghan leadership and
ownership. These include progress in the
implementation of the Kabul process, momentum on
reintegration and reconciliation efforts, and
cooperation between Afghans and their neighbours.

Despite these positive developments, Afghanistan
continues to face critical challenges in its endeavour to
achieve stability and development. Key among them

are the security situation, the worsening humanitarian
situation, human rights deficiencies and continuing
civilian casualties. South Africa stresses that, given the
magnitude of these challenges, a comprehensive
strategy incorporating security, humanitarian issues,
good governance and socio-economic development is
required. In this regard, we would like to underscore
the central role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the
Government of Afghanistan and in coordinating
international assistance to the country. Crucially, the
continued role played by bilateral partners remains
indispensable.

We are particularly concerned over the attacks
directed against the United Nations and its personnel.
South Africa condemns in the strongest terms the
violent attacks against the United Nations operations
centre in Mazar-e-Sharif on 1 April, which resulted in
the death and injury of United Nations staff.

South Africa continues to welcome efforts to
strengthen political outreach activities. Political
dialogue and reconciliation among people and leaders
remain critical to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. We are pleased that the High Peace
Council has intensified its efforts to lead reconciliation
efforts. This, together with efforts to reintegrate
insurgents, including the Taliban, should be
encouraged.

My delegation remains concerned by the plight of
children caught up in conflict in Afghanistan, and in
this connection we strongly condemn the attack on a
school on Sunday by a suspected militant on a
motorcycle, who threw a hand grenade at the gates of
the school.

With regard to the role of women, my delegation
is of the view that Afghan women have a significant
role to play in securing the peace and stability of the
country. Their role in building a new Afghan society
should be welcomed.

National ownership and leadership remain crucial
to political security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. On its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country's
transition from conflict to stability and prosperity.
South Africa therefore continues to support the
presence and role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
In conclusion, we commend Special
Representative De Mistura for completing the
integrated strategic framework for a comprehensive
review of UNAMA's mandated activities and the
United Nations support to Afghanistan, and thank
UNAMA and its personnel for their efforts in executing
the mandate of the Security Council for a more
peaceful and stable Afghanistan.

