Mr. Hume (United States of America): We, too,
are very grateful for the briefings that we have
received. We are encouraged that there is at least some
information in the report that indicates that there are
elements of the situation that have been improving -
particularly the decrease in political violence and in
human rights abuses.

The United States Government condemned the
May coup attempt. An attack against a democratically
elected Government is an attack against the will of the
people and cannot be condoned. But we equally
condemned human rights abuses, including numerous
cases of extra-judicial violence on the part of the
Government following the attempted coup. In our view,
the Council should hold President Patasse to his pledge
of 8 June. The trials of those allegedly involved in the
coup attempt will be held under transparent conditions
in the presence of international observers.

The second point I would like to make is one that
has just been made and relates to the need to aid
refugees. From our Embassy in Bangui, we understand
that there are 25,000 refugees who fled the Central
African Republic, of whom a very small number were
involved in violence associated with the coup attempt.
We believe that the Government of the Central African
Republic must demonstrate to those refugees, through
its actions, that they will not be harmed if they return.
For these refugees to return home, the border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be open. It is
equally important that there be no hampering of the
distribution of aid to refugees.

The third point I would like to address relates to
the strengthening of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA). First of all, to the extent that the
proposals before us can be implemented within existing
resources, we would encourage early action. In terms
of where we go beyond that, we have conveyed the
additional proposals to Washington. In some cases we
will seek additional clarification on renewing and
extending the mandate of BONUCA. The mandate will
remain in place until December, and obviously as we
get closer to that date we will be able to look at this in
a more practical way.

Fundamentally, the possibility of increasing the
resources for BONUCA depends on the commitment
on the part of the Government of the Central African
Republic to work with BONUCA and to demonstrate
progress in improving the domestic political dialogue.
Frankly, we have yet to see the kind of serious
commitment from the Government that would be
needed to move that forward.

