Mr. Nin Novoa (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the New Zealand presidency
for convening this informative, high-level meeting to
address the challenges of one of the main threats to
international peace and security, namely, the current
conflict in Syria, on which we have focussed since the
very beginning. Uruguay particularly appreciates this
meeting because we are convinced that the Security
Council can do much more to mobilize the necessary
political will with a view to achieving negotiated long-
term solutions for the Syrian people.

Every three months, the Council meets to analyse
the situation in the Middle East. At each of those
meetings, all Council members emphatically express
the urgent need to find solutions to the crisis. Also at
those meetings, my country has stressed the serious
humanitarian crisis facing the Syrian people and the
need to move towards sustainable political solutions.
We have agreed on the need to take measures in that
regard. However, we meet again today to discuss what
more we can do and should do.

We are concerned that, despite the efforts made at
the international level, we have not achieved effective
solutions to respond to the current conflict. We have
not been able to overcome the obstacles to achieving
lasting peace, or to end the suffering of millions of
people. After five years of conflict, we continue to
witness the loss of thousands of innocent lives. We
have seen violations of all human rights of the civilian
population. We have observed the use of warfare
tactics such as hunger. We have struggled to overcome
existing obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid
to those most in need. Worst of all, we have witnessed
indiscriminate attacks on civilian targets, including
hospitals and schools.

Those who have been able to flee are unable to
return to their homes. Their lives have been destroyed,
families have been separated and their futures erased.
They do not understand economic, political or strategic
interests. They want solutions, actions, measures and
firm political commitments.

That is why we are here today: to shoulder the
responsibility that has been assigned to the Security
Council. The Syrian population needs an urgent
response from every one of us meeting here. We
must therefore renew our commitment, set aside our
differences and commit to a negotiated solution that will
make possible a way out of the current crisis. Dialogue
requires that all stakeholders respect their obligations
under international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. It
is imperative to respect the provisions of the Council's
resolutions.

Just over four months ago, the Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of hospitals
and humanitarian personnel in situations of armed
conflict. However, despite the fact that the resolution
was co-sponsored by more than 80 United Nations
States Members, hospitals continue to be bombed.
No mistake can justify such action while the most
vulnerable continue to be attacked.

Now and forever, we condemn the increasing use
of chemical weapons against the civilian population,
which is one of the most flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law, and we repudiate the
use of barrel bombs that do untold harm to the local
populace. Those who are responsible must be identified
by the Joint Investigative Mechanism. In that context,
I reiterate Uruguay's firmest condemnation of the
activities ofterrorist groups operating in the region. We
are convinced that there can be no justification for such
acts, be it political, ideological, philosophical, religious,
ethnic, racial or of any other nature. Similarly, we are
concerned about the growing destabilizing impact of
these groups in the conflict in Syria, which adversely
affect the ability to achieve sustainable solutions to the
aforementioned conflict.

We therefore consider it essential that, together
with the political efforts being exerted in the Syrian
conflict, the commitment to the implementation of
effective and efficient measures against the financing of
terrorist groups be renewed, with a comprehensive and
long-term approach. Similarly, greater efforts should be
made with respect to arms trafficking, regulating trade
and ensuring the effective implementation of the Arms
Trade Treaty. This decision requires the commitment
of all States of the international community, which we
humbly request.

We must continue to support the work and efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan
de Mistura. It is essential to restore the dialogue
between the parties so as to reach without further
delay a political, peaceful and Syrian-led solution that
takes nothing but the interests of the Syrian people
into account. Uruguay stresses the importance for this
process to enjoy the support of the United Nations and
the key actors in the conflict.

In that regard, we are deeply concerned about
the fragility of recent ceasefire agreements. We are
convinced that without the strict compliance of all
stakeholders, a long-term political solution that ensures
peace for the Syrian people will not be possible.
Similarly, the uninterrupted delivery of humanitarian
assistance is essential, and guarantees for such effective
delivery are linked directly to the aforementioned
ceasefire. There can be no humanitarian action without
a ceasefire. We must not forget that the commitment to
peace and security in the region and with the Syrian
people is now a shared commitment.

The shocking images that continuously bombard
us with the horror of this conflict remind us of the
primary role of the Organization and of what we should
be doing. It is in our hands. We can and must do more.

