Mr. Tanin: As reflected in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/407), the past period in Kosovo was
generally characterized by a decline in both the
quality of actions and the tenor of political discourse
between Pristina and Belgrade. In March, tentative,
but important, meetings of the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union (EU) were held at the technical
and political levels. That working atmosphere was
affected when Marko Duric', Director of the Serbian
Government's Kosovo office and Belgrade's lead
negotiator for the EU-facilitated dialogue, was arrested
after entering northern Kosovo, against the advice of
Kosovo authorities, to attend a session of President
Aleksandar Vueie's internal dialogue. During the
arrest, stun grenades, disabling gas and other acts of
physical force were deployed, resulting in a number
of injuries, including to an attending Minister of
the Government of Kosovo, two municipal leaders,
journalists and other attendees. Mr. Durie was then
theatrically and improperly paraded through a street
in Pristina before being expelled from Kosovo. Many
Kosovo Serbs, already unsettled by the unsolved
murder case of Oliver Ivanovic' in Mitrovica in January,
perceived such events with apprehension.

Following the incident, political figures from
both sides engaged in an escalation of rhetoric that led
to further setbacks in the effort to continue the EU-
facilitated dialogue. The Kosovo Serb caucus, Serbian
List, announced its intention to withdraw from Pristina's
governing coalition. Moreover, it stated its intention
to unilaterally form the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities, setting a deadline of
20 April, which, however, was subsequently recanted.
Whatever factors drove the series of reciprocal taunts,
the results seemed close to precipitating the collapse
of the Government in Kosovo. The waters were only
calmed again with intensive efforts, including with
some support from external parties. Most important,
significant efforts made by Prime Minister Ramush
Haradinaj and his Government, including protracted
discussions with the Serbian List and other parts of the
coalition, as well as the opposition, have helped to keep
the channels of communication open.

There has been discussion over many months about
the prospects ofa shift in the essentially frozen positions
of both sides through the new EU focus on the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and on wider regional
engagement. Despite those expectations, recent rising
political temperatures have hampered the advancement
of the dialogue, which requires sufficient political will
from both sides to bring a new level of engagement to
bolster the process. There is no other viable option.
However, for that to happen, there is a clear need to
exercise leadership to stand up to challenges, even with
short-term political costs. A new focus by Brussels, at
all levels, provides a mutually beneficial opportunity
for Pristina and Belgrade to leave the current difficult
moment behind and take the dialogue to the next stage
of real progress. Moreover, member States of the
European Union have set an ambitious calendar for
the region, including the EU-Western Balkans summit
in Sofia later this month - the highest-level regional
summit since 2003. Additionally, the next crucial
meeting of the Berlin process economic forum in July,

alongside many other initiatives this year to engage
the Western Balkans more intensively, would help all
to navigate cross-currents and take advantage of a
new commitment.

As much as top-level political assurances remain
essential, commitments made in negotiations are
unlikely to endure without some impetus for confidence
among communities and individuals at the grass-roots
level. To create the atmosphere for reason and good-
faith compromise to prevail, engagement is needed
across all levels, which remains a main priority of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I am pleased to inform the Council
that I have just come from the United Nations Kosovo
trust-building forum, held in Ljubljana from 6 to 8 May,
which I opened alongside Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita. We were joined by representatives of the
United Nations Kosovo team, the European Union,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Over 100 community leaders
from throughout Kosovo came together to discuss ways
to address common challenges caused by mistrust and
stale political approaches, some 20 years after the
height of conflict.

The starting point of the forum was simple: not
to reinvent or reinterpret the past, but to illuminate,
guide and pursue a more positive path for the future.
Motivated and energetic individuals from across
Kosovo society debated the prospects for trust-building
through a wide range ofpositive action and cooperation.
The main thematic areas were media accountability,
access to impartial justice, economic growth, access to
public services, religious coexistence and educational
reform. Multiple focus groups worked to strengthen
understanding across community divides. The resulting
outcomes identified by participants provide a road map
for measures to be implemented in Kosovo. Assistant
Secretary-General Keita stressed that the forum was
a proactive attempt to further the sustaining peace
agenda, engage in prevention at the local level, as well
as link political and developmental frameworks. I urged
all leaders to organize the future, rather than mourn
the past, and to move forward with more compassion,
understanding and clarity in advancing trust in the
areas of work they identified during the forum.

Important for Kosovo's European perspective,
the Kosovo Assembly ratified the 2015 agreement on
territorial delineation with Montenegro. That issue has
been singled out by the European Union as a necessary
step for Kosovo's integration with the EU, including
visa liberalization, for quite some time. While the
international community appreciated that achievement,
it has been underlined that the strengthening of the rule
of law and human rights and visible progress in the
fight against corruption and organized crime remain
major issues in meeting the aspirations of the people of
Kosovo for their European perspective.

It is also important to acknowledge the approval
of a new draft of the Kosovo criminal code, which
introduces stricter penalties for offences related to
corruption and misuse of official duty. That positive
initiative complements ongoing efforts to depoliticize
and enhance the performance of the judiciary. We also
share the analysis about the effective application of
human rights and the rule oflaw in Kosovo, as recently
presented in the European Commission's annual
progress report. It is in that context that Kosovo's rule
of law institutions continue to be a major focus of both
internal and external attention, as EULEX is preparing
a significant reconfiguration that will transfer direct
responsibility to the Kosovo court system for cases
heretofore handled with EULEX in the lead.

Concerning the protection of cultural heritage, I am
pleased to note that the Implementation and Monitoring
Council, tasked with overseeing the treatment of
special protected zones surrounding religious sites,
has restarted its work. It is a timely development, as
there have recently been attempts to undermine the
judgements of Kosovo courts, as well as of those of
the Monitoring Council, regarding construction near
the Visoki Deeani Monastery, in western Kosovo. The
international community will continue to closely watch
the Government's actions in that case.

UNMIK continues to prioritize its own work in
the areas of confidence-building, human rights and
limited, but essential, aspects of support for rule-of-
law and justice institutions. Crucial to the Mission's
efforts are the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and the youth, peace
and security agenda. On 5 March in Kosovo, in
collaboration with UN-Women, the Mission hosted
the eighth Global Open Day on Women, Peace and
Security. Focused on women's political participation,
the event brought together more than 150 women
political leaders from the central and local levels,
including parliamentarians; Government officials;
representatives of the international community, civil
society, academia and women's organizations; and
youth activists. The Global Open Day recognized the
need for women's full and effective participation in
leadership at all levels of decision-making in political,
economic and public life. It also underlined the fact
that women's political participation is indispensable to
gender justice so as to end inequality, subordination,
hierarchical status and asymmetries concerning
political power. The event was central to the Mission's
recently adopted gender framework strategy and part
of a number of other important initiatives throughout
Kosovo commemorating International Women's Day.

The youth, peace, and security agenda is also of
paramount importance to UNMIK. Later this week, the
Mission, while working together closely in cooperation
with UNICEF and the United Nations Development
Programme, will host the second United Nations Youth
Assembly in Kosovo. The event will bring together
180 young leaders from diverse backgrounds alongside
officials, civic organizations and business leaders.

In the multifaceted areas of the Mission's
recalibrated work, UNMIK works fully in line with the
core principles of Secretary-General Guterres' reform
agenda and the guidance ofthe Council. Our efforts are
aimed at sustaining peace; ensuring that we remain at
the forefront of monitoring and analysing the situation;
and reinforcing strategic cooperation with members
of all United Nations entities, as well as international
partners, in complementing the efforts of Kosovo's
institutions. I thank the members of the Council for
their continued support for our efforts and their support
to the EU-led dialogue aimed at the normalization of
relations and increased cooperation between Pristina
and Belgrade.

