Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her ninth report
and for her briefing, and to affirm France's support
for the Prosecutor, and for the International Criminal
Court (ICC) as a whole.

France reaffirms its commitment to resolution
1970 (2011), which referred the situation in Libya to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, thereby
saving a considerable, indeed incalculable, number of
human lives. The resolution also constitutes a symbol
of the Council's support to an institution whose noble
mission is to ensure that, as the preamble to the Rome
Statute states, the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community as a whole do not go
unpunished.

A careful perusal of the Prosecutor's ninth report
makes it clear that there are three ways in which the
Security Council should continue to work to ensure
that Libya, which is currently going through a period of
instability and uncertainty whose chief victims are the
Libyans themselves, can get back on the road to peace
and justice. The first is by encouraging the Libyan
authorities to continue above all to cooperate with the
ICC. That cooperation is crucial to ending a long period
of impunity in Libya and enabling the Court to fulfil the
mandate entrusted to it by the Statute and the Council,
and it will help to build a judicial system in Libya that
respects the rule of law.

Acting in accordance with the Rome Statute and
resolution 1970 (2011), Libya has requested that Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Senussi be tried
in Libya, based on the principle of complementarity.
The Court has jurisdiction to try Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
has requested that he be surrendered to it. However,
it found the Abdullah Al-Senussi case inadmissible,
and thus amenable to Libya's demands. At this point,
the Prosecutor's report believes that it would not be
useful for the Court to undertake a new investigation
of those decisions. Libya must comply with the judges'
decision on this key issue, as the Pre-Trial Chamber
recalled in its decision of 10 December 2014 and as the
Prosecutor's report also emphasizes. France therefore
calls on Libya to continue its consultations with the
ICC in order to remove obstacles to implementing the
decision to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the Court.

France is pleased that in its resolution 2213
(2015), of 27 March, the Council heard the Court and
the Prosecutor's message loud and clear, noting the
decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber dated 10 December
2014 and emphasizing strongly the importance of the
Libyan Government's full cooperation with the ICC and
the Prosecutor. The Council also called on the Libyan
Government to cooperate fully with and provide any
necessary assistance to the International Criminal
Court and the Prosecutor as required by resolution 1970
(2011). We are pleased to note that, despite the instability
prevailing in Libya, the Office of the Prosecutor was
able to talk to its Libyan counterpart and implement
the memorandum of understanding signed in November
2013, on sharing tasks between the Court and the Libyan
authorities. France urges Libya to continue those efforts
to share information and cooperate.

The second task is to ensure that the multiple
crimes committed since 15 February 2011 do not
go unpunished. In that context, France would like to
highlight the section in the report that emphasizes that
crimes attributable to members of Daesh fall prima
facie within the jurisdiction of the Court on the basis
of resolution 1970 (2011). France, which recently
organized an open debate in the Security Council on
the situation of victims of ethnic and religious violence
in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419) and, along with
other members of the Council, urged for a referral to
the ICC, can only encourage the Prosecutor to continue
investigating such acts, some of which may constitute
war crimes or crimes against humanity.

The third and last step is to provide practical
support to the Libyan authorities, particularly in
the area of justice and rebuilding the rule of law. On
this last point, the Council remains convinced that
the only solution to the Libyan crisis is a political
one. The efforts of Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya in general,
to achieve a ceasefire and an inter-Libyan agreement
can contribute to peace and stability and to establishing
the rule of law in Libya. For that it is essential that the
Council continue to provide support to United Nations
mediation efforts, and in particular to establishing a
Government of national unity as soon as possible. That
requires that we collectively send a strong messages
to the parties involved and consider using sanctions
against provocateurs.

