Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me, as my predecessors have
done, to congratulate you and your brotherly country
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. I am confident that your experience
and wisdom will successfully guide the deliberations of
the Council. We would also like to thank your
predecessor, Mr. Cunningham, the deputy
representative of the United States, for his outstanding
steering of the deliberations of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait and to look into
ways of improving the humanitarian situation in Iraq,
as well as of implementing all Security Council
resolutions related to Iraq and of settling of the
situation in the wake of the conflict that beset the Gulf
region, as mentioned in document S/2001/597 dated
18 June 2001.

It is no secret to you, Mr. President, or to the
members of the Security Council, or to the whole
membership of the United Nations, that the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia spares no effort in consolidating
security and stability in the Gulf region and in
establishing an environment conducive to economic
development and fruitful cooperation between
neighbouring countries. This is why our relations with
all countries are based on good mutual relations, on the
principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of
others, and on the peaceful settlement of conflicts. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia deeply believes in the
brotherly bonds binding Arab countries and in
humanitarian principles, and is truly keen on achieving
and guaranteeing the security and stability of the region
through good neighbourly relations and respect of the
Security Council resolutions.

This is precisely why we have taken the initiative
in proposing a settlement for the situation in Iraq. The
Saudi initiative was that of the Committee of Arab
Action emanating from the consultative ministerial
meeting of the Arab foreign ministers held in Cairo on
28 January 1999 to put an end to the suffering of the
Iraqi people. In that meeting, we called for a re-
examination of the sanctions regime. We also called for
an overhaul of this regime to put an end to the
suffering of the Iraqi people by enabling Iraq to import
all its basic humanitarian needs, medical supplies,
foodstuffs and educational material, without requiring
the prior consent of the Council. This would enable
Iraq to provide for its basic livelihood in a dignified
fashion and would start the necessary economic
development process.

On the other hand, Iraq is required to fulfil all its
international financial obligations, such as reparations,
as well as payments for costs incurred due to the
constant monitoring of banned weapons in Iraq.
Sanctions should be restricted to the acquisition of
arms, military equipment and dual-use materials as
stipulated in relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially the resolutions relating to the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction, be they nuclear, chemical
or biological, and of any other military potential that
might endanger the sovereignty, safety, security and
stability of neighbouring countries. This requires an
effective long-term monitoring programme based on a
number of checks and balances defined by credible,
efficient and neutral international monitoring agencies.
This would guarantee the fulfilment of the task in an
efficient, impartial manner. The end result of the
activity would be the alleviation of the suffering of the
Iraqi people and the assurance that revenues would not
be used for any other illicit purposes.

Our initiative has highlighted the necessity for
Iraq to fully abide by its obligations regarding Kuwaiti
and non-Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing persons,
as is mentioned in relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially in paragraph 30 of resolution
687 (1991).

Our initiative aims at putting an end to the
suffering of the brotherly Iraqi people and to
guaranteeing the security, safety and stability of
neighbouring countries. Furthermore, our initiative was
adopted by the League of Arab States and was rejected
by Iraq. Iraq has also rejected the Arab initiative
agreed to by the Arab leaders during the Amman
Summit, held on 27 and 28 March 2001. It has become
abundantly clear to the international community that
the continuation of the international sanctions imposed
on Iraq is due to policies adopted by the Iraqi
Government, such as the non-implementation of some
of the major aspects of relevant Security Council
resolutions.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia feels empathy with
the suffering of the brotherly Iraqi people and wishes
to highlight its support for putting an end to their
suffering, for enabling Iraq to obtain the necessary
materials to achieve this goal and for lessening the
constraints on civil trade, all in conformity with the
resolutions of the Security Council and without
affecting the security and safety of neighbouring
countries.

We wish also to stress that Iraq must prove its
good intentions with concrete actions, and must refrain
from provocative or aggressive action towards Kuwait
or other neighbouring countries, by the terms of
resolution 949 (1994). Strict Iraqi compliance with and
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait
and full cooperation with the United Nations and its
agencies constitute the best way to resolve this crisis,
to build confidence and to restore security and stability,
thus paving the way for cooperation to the benefit of
the countries of the region.

Here again, I want to reaffirm that we wish to
preserve the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq, and that we look forward to Iraq's return to the
fold of the international community, once it has
implemented the Council's resolutions, as a responsible
member playing a constructive role in the international
arena through the efforts of its able and dynamic
people.

