Mr. Mercado (Philippines): I wish to join other
delegations in thanking High Commissioner Lubbers
for his comprehensive briefing to the Council on the
challenges facing refugees and internally displaced
persons, especially as they relate to the peace and
security of camps and settlements and internal and
cross-border peace and security situations.

I should like to touch on the issue of refugee
security. More often than not, refugees live in a
constant state of insecurity, with respect to both their
personal safety and socio-economic conditions.
Refugees and internally displaced persons constitute
one of the most vulnerable groups in the world today,
because, although they have been resettled to places
that offer immediate safe haven, they are nonetheless
exposed to many threats to their lives. Moreover,
exploitation of the vulnerabilities of refugees can give
rise to serious security-related concerns for host States
and their immediate neighbours.

The safety of refugees within their camps, for
instance, is increasingly becoming a matter of concern.
Because of their vulnerability, refugee camps can
easily be infiltrated by insurgents and criminal
elements that use such camps to harbour them. Since
the safety of the refugees is the primary goal, the
civilian character of refugee camps should be
maintained as much as possible.

However, while it is desirable to separate armed
elements from civilian refugee populations, the task of
maintaining the civilian character of refugee camps
may not be that easy. In some cases, a number of
refugees could secretly arm themselves to provide
added security for the camp. In other instances, armed
groups may be refugee-friendly and act as the
protectors of a certain refugee area against other armed
aggressors.

The blurred lines between the civilian and
military character of camps may expose their
population to an increased likelihood of attack by
opposing forces. Thus, maintaining the civilian
character of refugee camps has become a priority
security issue. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has emphasized
the need to separate civilians from armed individuals in
refugee camps. This, however, may not be easy to
accomplish, due to the complex situations I mentioned
earlier.

Would UNHCR therefore have recommendations
on how to address the different security situations in
refugee camps?

