Mr. Bale (Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French):
Today's Security Council meeting is taking place within
the historical context of the five-year anniversary of
the signing of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, in keeping with the spirit of
paragraph 24 ofresolution 2389 (2017). I therefore thank
you, Sir, for associating this commemorative meeting
with the dual chairmanship of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), which was entrusted to
President Denis Sassou Nguesso. Accordingly, we have
been afforded the opportunity to share the region's
vision with Council members.

I am grateful to Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General Said Djinnit, whose detailed briefing throws
light on the tragedy unfolding before our eyes, but hope
for a prosperous future remains possible through the
regional cooperation mechanism that is the Framework
agreement. Five years following the signing of the
historic Addis Ababa agreement on 24 February
2013, the time has undoubtedly come to assess the
level of commitment of each of the signatories to that
instrument, which foreshadowed much hope, especially
as symbolized by the end of the Mouvement du 23
mars rebellion.

Today's meeting is part of the momentum of the
work of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, in particular that of its seventh ordinary summit
of Heads of State and Government and eighth high-level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework that were
held in Brazzaville, Republic ofthe Congo, on 19 October
2017. The ICGLR summit considered the political and
security situation in the region within the broader
theme, entitled "Fast-tracking implementation of the
Pact to facilitate stability and development in the Great
Lakes Region". Among other things, I would mention
the summit's adoption of the recommendations of the
Self-financing Mechanism of the Regional Initiative to
Fight against Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
which is an essential tool for successfully combating
the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Great
Lakes region. The aim is to eradicate that scourge
and ultimately achieve sustainable natural-resource
management, which is one of the six pillars ofthe Great
Lakes Regional Strategic Framework.

The conclusions of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism meeting could be summarized as follows:
neutralization of negative forces; repatriation of
disarmed combatants; and engagement of political
dialogue and processes in the region. The Special
Envoy laid out for us the remedies we intend to
implement to tackle those scourges. The Special Envoy,
WHO works closely with the countries of the subregion
and whose regular consultations are appreciated by
the Chair-in-Office, has delineated all of the issues
in a comprehensive manner. I would ask the Council
to allow me to limit my remarks to a synopsis of the
activities of the combined presidency of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism and the ICGLR.

Since the holding of the seventh ICGLR summit and
the eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region on 19 October 2017, in Brazzaville, the
Chair-in-Office of the two bodies has been constantly
monitoring the political and security situation in the
countries of the region. The particular attention paid to
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is undoubtedly commensurate with the country's
strategic position in the Great Lakes region.

Five months after the seventh summit of Heads of
State and Government of the member countries of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
efforts have been made to stabilize the subregion.
Developments in the region, and particularly in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, have led the
ICGLR to hold two tripartite meetings: in Brazzaville
on 9 December 2017 and in Kinshasa on 14 February
2018. Those summit meetings were held under the
auspices of the current Chair-in-Office of the ICGLR
and the Regional Oversight Mechanism, President
Sassou Nguesso, together with the leaders of the
Republic of Angola and the Democratic Republic of
Congo, President Joao Manuel Goncalves Lourenco
and President Joseph Kabila Kabange, respectively.
They also met in Luanda for a third tripartite summit.

These tripartite consultations made it possible
to consider the political and security situation in
the subregion, and in particular the evolution of the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The worrisome security situation in eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo was also at
the centre of their exchanges, which ended with a firm
condemnation of the activism of the armed groups. The
consultations, sometimes extended to include civil-
society participants or other stakeholders, enabled the
Chair of the Regional Oversight Mechanism to hold
talks on 9 January in Brazzaville with the President
of the Conference episcopale nationals du Congo,
Cardinal Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya, at the head of a
delegation of Catholic bishops, following the repression
of the Catholic demonstrations that had taken place on
31 December 2017 in Kinshasa.

On 10 January 2018, the Chair of the ICGLR,
drawing on the conclusions of the most recent summit
on the stabilization and development of the region,
drew the attention of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, to the need
for a decision on the neutralization of negative forces
following the recommendation on the strengthening of
the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with a view to adapting it
to the new challenges linked to the fight against the
negative forces operating in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in order to maintain military
pressure and intensify operations against the armed
groups, in particular the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
and the Kamuina Nsapu, which continue to destabilize
the country.

Furthermore, during the period under review, it
must be acknowledged that the first electoral process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo made notable
progress. Since the publication of the electoral calendar
on 5 November 2017, the alignment of the country
around the holding of elections on 23 December 2018
has been strongly established.

But those advances must not obscure the many
challenges that could compromise the success of the
process. Thy include respect for the road map by the
political class as a whole, the financing of the elections
and the logistics essential to their realization, the
difficulties in mitigating the demands ofthe opposition
now taken up by the Catholic Church and other religious
denominations, and the strengthening of the country's
security in relation to the activism of armed groups.

We are entering the critical phase of the process.
We therefore urge the political class and civil society
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to properly
assess what is at stake by showing greater responsibility
and the ability to go beyond themselves by privileging
the general interest, in order to guarantee a peaceful
electoral process. In this undertaking, the international
community has a part to play in providing support and
assistance that could prove decisive. Consequently,
with foresight and respect for the sovereignty and
independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the parties to the Framework Agreement and the
guarantors must honour their commitments, particularly
in the regional and international mobilization efforts
in favour of peace and stability in the country and, at
the same time, work towards the implementation of the
electoral road map.

In Kenya, while the commitment made on 9 March
2018 by President Uhuru Kenyatta and opposition
leader Raila Odinga to reconcile the country is to be
welcomed, the reconciliation process must nevertheless
be sustained with the support of the main actors.

With respect to the follow-up of the implementation
of the road map of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, the
Chair of the ICGLR and Regional Oversight Mechanism
and his colleagues have deplored the persistence of
violence in the Central African Republic and reiterated
their call to the international community to increase
its support for the process of stabilization and national
reconciliation. The armed groups are called on to cease
all hostilities and participate in the peace process

under the aegis of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.

The Chair of the ICGLR and the Regional Oversight
Mechanism is following with great attention the dialogue
process being led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). He supported the efforts of
the High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan
and South Sudan, and all African Union mechanisms
supporting the progress achieved by IGAD in the
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan of August 2015.

In Burundi, oversight of the process has allowed
us to take note that a constitutional referendum is
scheduled for May 2018. However, the process of
dialogue led by the East African Community, currently
in a jam, will have to be relaunched under the impetus
of the mediator, President Museveni, and the facilitator,
former President Mkapa. The involvement of the
African Union, which has maintained dialogue with
regional leaders on ways and means to promote the
East African Community's efforts, is being followed
with great interest. It is worth noting that the release of
740 prisoners, a majority of whom were sentenced for
participation in the insurrectional movement of 2015, is
a reason for appeasement in the sociopolitical crisis in
the country. With regard to relations between Rwanda
and Burundi, the Chair of the ICGLR and the Regional
Oversight Mechanism is continuing his efforts to
alleviate tensions and improve relations between the
two countries.

Theproblems ofpeace and securityinthe Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region,
which have been the setting for conflict for decades,
are undoubtedly linked to those of development, one
conditioning the other. Starting now, we should be
thinking beyond electoral deadlines, which cannot be
an end in themselves. Making lasting peace and stability
in the region, which is the aspiration of its peoples, also
requires means other than electoral consultations. As
we have said, and we can only agree with the obvious:
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is undoubtedly
the nerve centre of the Great Lakes region, and it is not
in vain that it constitutes the cornerstone of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. It is our duty to
help it to regain lasting stability so that it can play the
role to which its immense potential predisposes it and
so that it can be deployed as a catalyst for integration, a
vector of peace and stability.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
with its Regional Oversight Mechanism, remains an
essential mechanism for achieving lasting peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the region. That is why the international community
as a whole must mobilize around the efforts of the
countries of the region in the context of strengthened
and coordinated cooperation. The implementation of
the Framework agreement requires greater political
commitment on the part of the signatories to give it
substance and life.

In conclusion, I would like to assure Council
members of the continued commitment of President
Sassou Nguesso, in his triple capacity as current
Chair-in-Office of the ICGLR, Chair of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, and President of
the Republic of the Congo, a country party to the
Framework agreement. He will support any initiative
that helps to coordinate our actions and to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations to serve the noble cause of peace, in
particular in the Great Lakes region.

