Mr. Sengwe (Zimbabwe): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. May I
also express our thanks and appreciation to Sir John
Weston, Ambassador of the United Kingdom, for the most
able manner in which he steered the work of the Council
during the month of January.

The Council is today considering a question of
paramount importance to the Government and the people of
Zimbabwe and, indeed, to the people of the whole southern
African region. In this regard, my delegation wishes to
express its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and most revealing report on the situation in
Angola. Our thanks go also to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, who has
continued to conduct the process of dialogue in Angola
with abiding patience and optimism. May I also reiterate
the Zimbabwean Government's sincere appreciation for the
crucial role played by the Governments of Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America,
which together constitute a most functional consultative
troika on the question of Angola.

When the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe
addressed the General Assembly at the Special
Commemorative Meeting on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, he drew a most fitting
analogy between southern Africa's current fortunes and the
experiences of a fifteenth-century Portuguese seafarer
named Bartolomeu Dias. When this Portuguese navigator
experienced ferocious storms as he rounded the southern tip
of Africa, he described it as a region of storms. However,
when his King realized what the captain had achieved, he
rechristened the area one of "good hope".

Buoyed by the recent triumphs of peace in
Mozambique and South Africa, and with our hopes
further raised by the ongoing peace process in Angola, we
are convinced that southern Africa has truly become a
region of good hope after having navigated its way
through recent perilous storms. Although the Angolan
coast is not yet clear, we are heartened by the most
welcome landmark progress made by the Government of
Angola in implementing its commitments in the historic
peace process. We encourage the Government of Angola
to build on the momentum it has so courageously
gathered.

My delegation urges UNITA to rise to the
expectations of the people of Angola and the international
community and to hasten the process of quartering and
disarming its troops. We also encourage UNITA to live
up to its own public commitment by proceeding with the
orderly and large-scale movement of its troops to the
quartering areas without further delay or interruption, in
strict adherence to the new timetable agreed upon on 12
January 1996 and in full cooperation with the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. 111). My
delegation, like others represented here this morning, is
convinced that the quartering of UN ITA troops, as a first
step, is a crucial component of the peace process.

It should also be remembered that the attainment of
political and economic stability in the southern African
region can be realized only when the people of Angola
turn their swords into ploughshares and peace is restored
in that country.

In accordance with its commitment to the United
Nations peace-keeping effort and to its confidence in the
resolve of the brotherly people of Angola to seek peace,
the Government of Zimbabwe committed troops and
civilian police to UNAVEM. III. We wish to commend all
countries contributing troops to UNAVEM. III, and the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole, for coming to the aid of the Angolan people in
their hour of need. It is our conviction that the extension
of the mandate of UNAVEM. III is a prerequisite for the
success of the peace process in Angola.

There can be no doubt, however, that the success of
the peace process in Angola ultimately depends on the
people of Angola themselves. We therefore once again
encourage both the Government of Angola and UNITA to

 

heroically resist the temptation to seek comparative
advantage over each other and, instead, to seize this
opportune moment to make a lasting investment in peace,
for which current and future generations will for ever be
indebted to them.

