Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express our pleasure at seeing you,
Mr. President, presiding over the work of the Security
Council during the month of April, precisely at a time
when the situation in the Middle East is undergoing an
almost unprecedented deterioration. My delegation
trusts in your experience and wisdom in leading the
work of the Council in an expeditious and resolute
manner.

The news that continues to arrive from the
occupied Palestinian territories remains horrifying. Not
even censorship and the ham-fisted manipulation by
those who control the media at the global level have
prevented the daily arrival of some of the horrible
scenes of destruction and death that appear as if they
were already something usual in our lives.
Unfortunately, we the Member States of the United
Nations remain aware of the inability of the Security
Council to carry out the functions so clearly ascribed to
it in the Charter of the United Nations with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

The situation is deteriorating moment by moment,
and nothing happens. Bombs and bulldozers are being
used to destroy the headquarters of the presidency of
the Palestinian National Authority inch by inch, and
nothing happens. Dignity is trampled underfoot and the
physical integrity of President Yasser Arafat is placed
in danger - someone whom for many years we have
hosted in the Organization and to whom we have
accorded the well-deserved rank of head of State -
and nothing happens. There are emergency closed-door
meetings in the Security Council to try to resolve the
situation, and nothing happens. Early in the morning of
Saturday, 30 March, the Council adopted resolution
1402 (2002) - a resolution pallid and ambiguous as
few others have been. Despite the emergency nature of
the situation, the timid provisions of the resolution
continue unimplemented, and nothing happens. It looks
as though resolution 1402 (2002) will suffer the same
sad fate of earlier resolutions - such as resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978) - whose full
implementation has been pending for many years
without the Council adopting the necessary measures to
insure full compliance with their provisions.

The pretexts and justifications being brandished
to justify that situation clearly indicate the moral
duplicity of those who threaten, or use, paralysing
vetoes. Those of us who are here have seen how the
double standard is applied in the Council, as well as the
different degrees of emergency and speed in the
adoption and subsequent implementation of
resolutions, as if the lives of some human beings were
less valuable than those of others.

In recent days, we have been listening to how the
issue of terrorism is manipulated and how oppression
and the illegal occupation of territories are justified
under the right of self-defence. This must be
denounced and rejected as firmly as possible. There are
no valid pretexts to justify massacres, selective
assassination, mass detention, extrajudicial execution,
the forced exile of Palestinians from the land of their
birth, attacks on religious sanctuaries that serve to
provide refuge to threatened civilians, torture and
denigrating and inhuman ill-treatment. Nothing can
justify an entire people being denied the full enjoyment
of its most elementary rights as a nation.

The Security Council, and its permanent members
in particular, must put an end to the ongoing policy of
the Government of Israel to ignore the Council's
resolutions, including an end to the illegal occupation
of Arab territories. Nothing will ever be resolved if we
do not act with firmness, courage and resolve. The
world cannot remain a passive spectator of the tragedy
that continues to unfold day by day in the Middle East.

Never before has there been greater justification
for the demand for the immediate deployment of an
international force mandated by the Security Council to
ensure effective compliance in the field with
resolutions that have been adopted after strenuous
efforts to overcome the veto barrier. The policy of
aggression against the Arab peoples, the Palestinian
people in particular, must cease. The illegal occupation
of Arab territories must cease. The disproportionate
and desperate use of violence against civilians,
Palestinians and Israelis alike, must cease. The
language of force and terror, be it expressed in isolated
incidents or through state terrorism under a different
name, must be silenced.

Cuba believes that the only path towards the
genuine and lasting peace that all desire is negotiation,
mutual respect and the effective support of the entire
international community for those efforts. My
delegation reiterates its support for the legitimate
struggle of the Arab peoples and for that of the
Palestinian people in particular towards the realization
of its aspirations as a people and a nation, including its
inalienable right to build its sovereign and independent
State with its capital in East Jerusalem.

At the same time, Cuba demands that the Security
Council fully assume its obligations in order to prevent
once and for all the consummation of the genocide that
is unfolding behind walls of silence and in the absence
of the delegation that should be here listening to these
words and taking them carefully into consideration.

