Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Kingdom of Spain
and its Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Mr. Garcia Margallo, for presiding over the Security
Council this month and for convening today's open
debate at the ministerial level on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. I also
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing at the beginning of this meeting.

The Council is meeting today to debate an item on
its agenda that is discussed in open debate on a quarterly
basis, namely, the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. This meeting is being held at a
time when the region is witnessing worrisome turns and
developments, all under the shadow of the violation by
the occupying Power, Israel, of the sanctity of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the killing of many innocent people.
There is no doubt that the exacerbation of the crisis
will continue until Israel abides by the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
which is applicable to all the occupied Arab territories,
including occupied Palestinian land.

Such confrontations have led to the killing of
many Palestinians and to the injuring of many others
by the Israeli occupation forces in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip. The Kingdom of Bahrain, in the face of
such deplorable acts, expresses its strong condemnation
of the continued aggression and the ongoing breach of
international law, as well as of the flagrant violations of
humanitarian and moral norms. Such illegal, inhumane
acts are likely to snuff out any possibility for peace, as
well as to further fuel tensions, violence, extremism and
hatred, which will not build human relations or build
bridges of respect, as called for by all religions. Indeed,
such acts will not lead to building peaceful societies that
uphold dignity, culture and peaceful coexistence. There
is no doubt that for Israel to terrorize the Palestinian
people by using violence and brutal force will do grave
harm to the peace process and will place additional
obstacles in the path of any peaceful settlement.

International intervention is urgently required to
put an end to Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people, to provide appropriate protection and to avoid
any setbacks that could lead to further deterioration
and bring harm to the entire region. The international
community should create the environment necessary
for the resumption of negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis, in order for them to take up fundamental
issues in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and internationally agreed terms of
reference.

The position of the Kingdom of Bahrain is firm
when it comes to Palestine. It is a position based on
fundamental pillars, namely, the need to implement
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions; to respect the international terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative; to apply the two-
State solution; to establish an independent Palestinian
State within the pre-1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital; and to lift the unjust and illegal
siege of the Gaza Strip. In that regard, the international
community must shoulder its responsibility to ease the
suffering of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip.
Without question, a peaceful settlement to the problems
of the Middle East must include an end to Israel's
occupation of Arab and Palestinian lands held since
1967, including East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan;
the total withdrawal by Israel from remaining occupied
Lebanese lands, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions; the establishment of an
independent and fully sovereign Palestinian State; and a
just solution ensuring the return of Palestinian refugees
to their towns and villages, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (111). We stress the need to
implement the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and for unconditional respect for
the principles of international legitimacy.

