Mr. Lancry (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to address the Council.

The draft resolution just voted on and not adopted
reflects, unfortunately, a one-sided View of the nature
of the last six months of violence. The reality, as the
last 24 hours have gruesomely reminded us, is that the
double-edged sword of this conflict cuts both ways. In
Hebron yesterday a 10-month-old baby girl, Shalhevet
Pass, was shot and killed by a Palestinian sniper armed
with a telescopic rifle, which, I hasten to add, is a
weapon generally available only to official Palestinian
security personnel. Today the city of Jerusalem fell
under the dark cloud of terrorism. Two separate
terrorist bombings, one of them on a public city bus,
killed at least one person and wounded nearly 40
others.

These tragic incidents perpetrated by those with
no regard for the noble principles we seek to uphold in
this Council must not go unmentioned. We do a great
disservice to the mandate of this Organization, as well
as to the memory of the innocent civilians whose lives
were taken by the enemies of peace, by failing to
loudly condemn such atrocities.

We are therefore disheartened that this draft
resolution employs terms that reflect a purely
Palestinian viewpoint. There is no mention of Israeli
casualties - of the 70 Israelis who have been killed by
terrorists since September. There is no clear call upon
the Palestinian side to refrain from unilateral actions.
There is no condemnation of Palestinian terrorism, or
specifically of Chairman Yasser Arafat's departure
from his signed commitments to renounce violence and
terrorism as a tool to achieve political objectives.

To our dismay, it appears that there is nothing the
Palestinians have done in six months of murder,
abduction, bombing and mortar attacks, let alone in the
last 24 hours, that is worthy of reproach. Is it possible
that, after all the debate in the Council and after three
separate terrorist attacks in a single day, Israel must
continue to shoulder all the blame and all the
responsibility?

As we have stated before, Israel remains opposed
to the establishment of a United Nations force in the
region. Chairman Arafat has the ability to protect the
lives of his people himself. I wish to emphasize yet
again that the moment Chairman Arafat issues a public
call to end the terrorist campaign, once he returns in
earnest to the negotiating table, and when both in word
and in deed he acts to reinvigorate the spirit of peace,
Israel will take whatever steps possible in order to
accelerate the return to normal relations between us
and the Palestinians. Indeed, we have already taken
steps to that end, as the situation allows. More
comprehensive measures could be implemented once
the Palestinians demonstrate a firm commitment to
control the situation.

More importantly, the current Palestinian
initiative represents a blatant attempt to obscure their
strategic choice to engage in violence and terrorism.
Thus, the Security Council must not endorse such a
choice by coming to the aid of those who initiate
hostile confrontations. Moreover, such a step, while the
intifada continues, has the potential to actually escalate
the violence and further destabilize the region by
solidifying the Palestinian refusal to put down their
weapons and compromise for peace. If the international
community wishes to see a return to dialogue and
negotiation and the ultimate realization of the
legitimate aspirations and needs of both parties through
a peaceful process, it must insist that the Palestinians
stop the violence that they have initiated and refrain
from actions that may be construed as endorsing the
violence. We therefore take positive note of the fact
that the Council has not taken such an action.

We look forward to a time when we can return to
the process of negotiations with the Palestinians as
partners and not as adversaries, to a time when
dialogue has once again replaced weapons as a means
of addressing the outstanding issues in this conflict.
For in this way, and only in this way, will we arrive at a
just and lasting solution to the conflict that will spare
future generations the pain and misery we have both
experienced over the past six months.

