Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to thank
France for convening this important meeting, which
has provided us with many constructive and valuable
proposals. We hope that today's debate will help to
further mobilize the international community against
the actions of Daesh and other terrorist groups in the
Middle East.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. However, I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.

Let me start by expressing our grave concern over
the situation of Christian, Yazidi and other religious
and ethnic communities in the Middle East, especially
in Iraq and Syria, whose very existence and survival
is seriously threatened. We have seen horrific acts of
violence and unspeakable barbarism committed in
the name of religion by Daesh and associated groups
against individuals belonging to disfavoured religious
and other minorities. We strongly deplore those actions
as well as the destruction of precious religious and
cultural heritage. The actions of Daesh constitute
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, and may constitute a crime against
humanity and genocide, for which there must be
accountability. In that regard, we believe that the role
of the International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity is indispensable.

We highly commend the efforts of the United
Nations and other international organizations and
non-governmental organizations, in raising awareness
of, documenting and reporting violence and crimes
against minority communities in the region. We
believe that more concerted efforts are needed to
combat all forms of religious fundamentalism and
manipulation of religious beliefs for terrorist purposes.
In that context, we fully support the initiative to
prepare a comprehensive action plan on preventing
violent extremism and to create a panel of experts, as
announced today by the Secretary-General. We believe
that the action plan should encompass security aspects,
humanitarian actions, sociopolitical inclusivity, the
fight against impunity, the fight against discrimination,
and the preservation of ethnic and religious diversity.

It is of vital importance to protect and preserve
lives and the tradition of intercultural, interethnic
and interreligious coexistence in the region. Those
centuries-old traditions are treasures of mankind;
various religious minorities in the region are part of
our common human heritage. Judaism, Christianity
and Islam were all born in the Middle East, are
inextricably linked to one another, and have a long
celebrated tradition of coexistence. The situation in the
Middle East is very complex, but it is important to keep
the focus of the international community not only on
security issues, but also on the suffering of religious
and other minority groups. We cannot ignore the fact
that Christians in the Middle East are increasingly
being targeted by Islamist fundamentalists, and that the
Christian population of the Middle East has decreased
dramatically and continues to do so.

Croatia supported the Joint Declaration Supporting
the Human Rights ofChristians and Other Communities,
particularly in the Middle East, issued at the twenty-
eighth session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva
on 13 March. It was the first time that the plight of
Christians was specifically addressed by the Human
Rights Council. It has to be stated clearly that Islam
cannot be used as an ideological excuse for Violence
against Christian and other minorities, or any other
religion for that matter. Aziz Hasanovic, mufti of the
Islamic community in Croatia, has said recently that the
terrorists who use Islam as an excuse are harming and
abusing their religion. They betray the faith, the essence
of which is love, dialogue, coexistence and offering
assistance to people in need. Hatred and exclusivity of
any kind have no place in Islam. Therefore we should
all, regardless of our faith and beliefs, unite our efforts
to fight against those who distort and abuse any religion
as justification for their terrorist acts. We all have to
work together for the sake of peace and respect for the
dignity and rights of every single person, and the values
of diversity and peaceful coexistence.

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong support
and solidarity with the persecuted religious and ethnic
minorities of the Middle East.

