Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing and presiding over
this very important high-level meeting dedicated to the
future of Iraq and the Iraqi people. Let me express also
my thanks to the Secretary-General for his valuable
report (S/2010/606) and his briefing on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), as well
as to the Foreign Minister of Iraq, Minister Zebari, for
his statement.

Speaking on today's topic - Iraq - as an
example of positive achievement in bringing peace and
stability, allow me to commend the role of the United
Nations, the United States and the wider international
community in bringing peace and stability to my
country, Bosnia and Herzegovina, in 1995. Today
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, and our remembering today
the early demise of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke -
the architect of the Dayton-Paris Peace accords - is a
part of Ambassador Holbrooke's legacy.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is pleased to
acknowledge the significant improvement of the
overall situation in Iraq. Iraqi institutions have been
strengthened despite all the difficulties and challenges
on the ground. The recent transfer of ownership of the
security sector to the Iraqi forces is a very important
achievement for the further enhancement of Iraq's
sovereignty and stability.

However, we remain deeply concerned about the
security situation in Iraq and strongly condemn the
recent coordinated deadly attacks targeting different
religious communities. We want to emphasize that only
by providing security to every Iraqi citizen can one
guarantee the security of specific communities.
Therefore, Bosnia and Herzegovina urges all actors in
Iraq, national and international, to redouble their
efforts in the protection of civilians and to bring the
perpetrators of those horrible crimes to justice.

This year, with the assistance of the international
community, Iraq organized successful elections, and
we are pleased to learn that Iraqi political leaders are
very close to forming their Government, which will
provide new and encouraging momentum. Genuine
progress in that regard will help put the country on the
path towards democracy, national reconciliation and
long-term stability, as well as towards the improvement
of the security situation.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Iraqi people for its strength, its courage
and its firm determination to build a democratic and
unified country despite the immense suffering and huge
losses they have experienced over these past two
decades.

Iraq has accomplished significant progress in
resolving outstanding Chapter VII issues by fulfilling
obligations mandated by the Security Council's
resolutions. To that end, Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the lifting of some of the restrictions imposed
by the Security Council, which will permit Iraq to
restore the international standing it held before
resolution 661 (1990). We base our support on the
following achievements.

First, Iraq has fulfilled all its obligations in
compliance with the international non-proliferation and
disarmament regimes. It has also signed the Hague
Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation,
acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention and
joined the Executive Council of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and has signed
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

Furthermore, despite the current political vacuum
due to the process of Government formation, Iraq
voluntary accepted to apply the additional protocol to
the comprehensive safeguards agreement pending its
ratification. We strongly believe that the council of
representatives will set a high priority on its
ratification. We welcome the adoption of resolution
1957 (2010), removing outstanding restrictions relating
to disarmament imposed on Iraq in resolutions 687
(1991) and 707 (1991).

Second, we commend the efforts and the strong
commitment of the Iraqi Government in regard to
closing remaining contracts in the oil-for-food
programme. The Iraqi Government has achieved great
progress in that regard, and we support resolution 195 8
(2010), terminating the residual activities of the oil-
for-food programme. This includes the transfer of all
remaining funds from the Iraqi account created
pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003) to the Development
Fund for Iraq (DFI), with the exception of the funds to
be used by the United Nations for residual activities of
the programme and for the provision of
indemnification to the United Nations.

Third, we welcome the progress towards the
establishment of successor arrangements for the
transition of the DFI. We also reiterate our support for
the extension of the DFI and the related legal
immunities. We therefore consider that the requirement
established in paragraph 21 of resolution 1483 (2003)
should continue to apply. We will support decisions
that will help to ensure that oil revenue will continue to
be used transparently in an accountable manner, and in
the interest and for the benefit of the Iraqi people.

Furthermore, those positive developments
represent an encouraging environment for further
cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait. Bosnia and
Herzegovina expects that Iraq's fulfilment of its
outstanding obligations - mandated by the Security
Council resolutions related to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti citizens and third-country nationals, Kuwaiti
archives and Iraq's land and maritime boundaries -
will be priorities for both countries in the coming
period. In that connection, we strongly welcome
regional dialogue and the development of relationships
between Iraq and States in the region based on
partnership and cooperation.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina is very sensitive
to the issue of refugees and internally displaced
persons and would like to reiterate the importance of
resolving that issue. We call upon UNAMI to redouble
its efforts, in coordination with the Iraqi Government,
to help create conditions conducive to safe, dignified
and, in particular, sustainable refugee returns.

The continued strengthening of democratic
institutions, national reconciliation, the protection of
human rights and the creation of new job opportunities
will certainly help the process of returns, but they will
also reinforce Iraqi institutions and the whole of Iraqi
society. UNAMI has an essential role in advising,
supporting and assisting the Iraqi people and the
Government to achieve that goal.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly supports the work of
UNAMI and highly commends the dedication of
UNAMI staff to bringing stability and prosperity to the
Iraqi people.

