Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Thomas Markram, for his informative briefing.
The position of Kazakhstan on the issue remains
firm and consistent. The use of chemical weapons is
absolutely unacceptable in any circumstances. Strongly
condemning such actions, we firmly support the
collective efforts of the Council to counteract such
flagrant violations, and are determined to prevent them
from happening in the future. We would like to share
the following observations on the report before us
(S/2018/283, annex).

First of all, we are pleased that during the reporting
period there some progress was made towards the
destruction of the remaining two chemical weapons
production facilities. We call on the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the
Government of Syria and the United Nations Office for
Project Services to accelerate the measures, as long as
current circumstances are favourable.

At the same time, we are concerned about the lack of
progress in clarifying all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We urge the Government of Syria and the OPCW to
cooperate more closely and to maximize interaction in
order to resolve all the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies. If some assistance is required from
the Council, the parties should request it with practical
proposals on how to intensify such cooperation. At the
same time, they should outline concrete obstacles that
prevent them from achieving the necessary results.

In that regard, the OPCW is supposed to provide
full reports on the work of the Declaration Assessment
Team. Likewise, we expect it to update us on the work of
the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic,
especially on studying all allegations on the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. We note simultaneously
that the Council has not yet restored its investigative
potential. We hope that the two penholders will make
exhaustive attempts to find common ground so as to be
able to proceed further.

The last disturbing factor for us is the continued
threat of the use of chemical weapons in Syria and the
alarming allegations. We have to prevent at all costs such
destructive terrorist acts against the innocent Syrian
people. Proactive steps are essential, recognizing that
such acts undermine all international efforts to achieve
a comprehensive solution to the military and political
crisis in Syria. The Security Council remains the main
organ responsible for preserving peace and security and
relentlessly searching for a peaceful solution to crises
and conflicts throughout the world. Unilateral military
actions, beyond the legitimate decisions of the Security
Council, are not an option.

It is extremely important and necessary to overcome
all differences among the members of the Council that
prevent the complete elimination of the threat of use of
chemical weapons in Syria. It is equally vital to remove
all impediments to conducting an independent and
impartial investigation to identify those responsible
for chemical crimes. Kazakhstan is committed to
ensuring that the Council works constructively, and
encourages the members to prevent the politicization
and polarization of the Council. To do so only militates
against a unified response to current challenges
and threats.
