Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by welcoming Mr. Angelino
Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy. I also seize this opportunity to
congratulate him on Italy's chairpersonship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2018. I wish him every success in his
presidency. I would also like to thank him for his
valuable and comprehensive briefing today.

The recurrent annual briefing of the OSCE is
commendable. It reaffirms the commitment of the
organization to promoting cooperation with the United
Nations in order to maintain international peace
and security. In that context, the State of Kuwait, as
a non-permanent Security Council member, looks
forward to strengthening cooperation between
the Council and the League of Arab States. Such
cooperation should be framed within an institutional
context, similar to the cooperation that the Council
enjoys with the African Union and the European Union.
We also call for an annual briefing from the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, similar to that we
have received today.

Experience has proven that, in the light of the
heightened armed conflicts and the difficulties and
obstacles it faces in certain situations, the United
Nations needs the support of regional organizations,
pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter. It is clear
that regional and subregional organizations are the
most qualified and cost-effective entities in helping
to understand the realities of some conflicts. They are
also the best equipped to analyse information related to
the maintenance of peace and security in their regions.

The Arab States, particularly those on the
Mediterranean, share the same concerns and challenges
of the OSCE, including illegal migration, trafficking
in persons, terrorism, transnational organized crime,
counter-terrorism, extremism, racism and hatred of
religions. Here, I emphasize that violent extremism
and terrorism are threats to all values and cultures and
not limited to any religion, race, culture and identity,
as they also disregard human rights. We must all
therefore strengthen our cooperation and redouble our
efforts in order to overcome those challenges. In that
context, I reaffirm that the State of Kuwait is keen to
foster international cooperation in combating violent
extremism and terrorism by adhering to all relevant
Security Council resolutions, in addition to cooperating
with United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
including the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism.

As the geographically largest regional security
organization, the OSCE adds significant value to our
common pursuit of international peace and security.
Its activities cover Europe, Asia and Euro-Asia and
are complementary to those of the United Nations. The
OSCE has greatly contributed to United Nations efforts,
particularly during the three pre-conflict phases of
early warning, preventative diplomacy and mitigation
efforts, while also working towards peaceful settlement
and contributing in the efforts to rebuilding peace.

We cherish the hope that OSCE efforts will tangibly
contribute to overcoming long-standing crises that need
radical solutions, such as those in Nagorno Karabakh,
Georgia and the Balkans, in addition to addressing the
conflict in Ukraine, which is entering its fourth year.
We hope that all relevant parties will fully implement
resolution 2202 (2015) and the 2015 Minsk agreements
so as to achieve a comprehensive and balanced solution
to this issue through dialogue, in particular within the
Normandy format. We commend the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission for its efforts in that regard,
including the facilitation of dialogue among all parties
to the conflict.

In conclusion, we wish Minister Alfano every
success during his term as Chairmperson-in-Office of
the OSCE in achieving Italy's foreign policy aims and
priorities, which he outlined in his briefing, as they are
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations in the maintenance of security,
stability and peace in the world.

