Mr. Rock (Canada): Before anything else, permit
me to express on behalf of the Government and the
people of Canada our sense of horror and our
condemnation of the brutal and barbaric act of
terrorism that today has taken the life of the citizen of
the Republic of Korea in Iraq. We also express our
sincere condolences to the family of the victim and to
the people of Korea in this difficult hour.

Madam President, it is a pleasure to see you
presiding in this Chamber. I thank you and your
Government for the initiative of putting this important
subject on today's agenda and for the very helpful
paper that you have provided to members.

Madam President, your paper, coupled with the
publication yesterday of the report of the Panel of
Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil Society
Relations appointed by the Secretary-General
(A/58/817) underlines the importance of our collective
and ongoing consideration of the role of civil society in
post-conflict peace-building.

Canada welcomes the recommendations of the
Panel, in particular its recognition of the need for
stronger mechanisms to permit interaction between
non-governmental organizations and members of the
Security Council. We are pleased at the trend towards
more frequent resort to the Arria-formula meetings. We
welcome the recommendation for Security Council
seminars with non-governmental organization (NGO)
participation, and we support it. It seems to us that
such sessions can enable NGOs to make timely and
effective interventions when the Council is dealing
with a range of issues and a range of countries. Recent
conflicts have demonstrated the importance of civil
society organizations having access to the Council to
highlight concerns, especially with respect to violations
of international law and of human rights.

Access by NGOs to the Security Council is
essential not only in the context of active conflicts but
also in cases of fragile peace. The involvement of civil
society organizations has proven essential in a number
of contexts, many of which have been referred to by
my colleagues in their presentations this afternoon. The
range of areas in which civil society organizations has
been helpful is truly impressive. Whether it has been in
disarmament, demobilization or reintegration efforts or
by actually developing ceasefire or peace agreements,
whether it has been in post-conflict confidence-
building or peacekeeping, it is clear that they have a
unique contribution to make.
In addition to galvanizing global support for
causes such as the Ottawa Convention banning anti-
personnel landmines or the creation of the International
Criminal Court, civil society organizations have also
been instrumental in generating sustained international
attention on issues such as the plight of children
affected by armed conflict; women, peace and security;
and the proliferation and misuse of illicit small arms
and light weapons. In each of those areas, civil society
organizations have galvanized efforts to take concrete
measures at the national and international levels.

While the number of inter-State conflicts has
declined in the last 25 years, we have seen a
proliferation of civil conflicts within States, and
civilians are paying the heaviest price for that change.
In that context, peace-building from the top down is a
recipe for failure. Stable futures must be built from the
level of the community up. Involvement of civil society
is therefore a natural and fundamental element if those
efforts are to succeed.

In that respect, one area that Canada would draw
to the attention of the Council is the vital role of
women in conflict prevention, in humanitarian action
and in the process of peace-building. Understanding
and addressing gender differences and inequalities is
fundamental to both building sustainable peace and
identifying effective responses. For that reason,
Canada's efforts to build sustainable peace place great
emphasis on the inclusion of women as equal partners
in all aspects of conflict prevention and resolution and
in peace-building.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is, of
course, a landmark. We all know about its impact. That
resolution not only provides us with a framework for
supporting the participation of women, including
displaced women and local and international women's
groups, but it also obliges us to use that enormous
resource. Canada stands firmly behind those
commitments, and we will continue to work with our
colleagues to consistently make women's equal
participation in all post-conflict peace-building efforts
a reality.

(spoke in French)

Before concluding, I should like to emphasize
another important aspect of the peace-building process,
one in which civil society plays a pivotal role and in
which women's participation is particularly crucial -
that is, democratic institution-building.

Democratic governance is key to building a
society that can manage conflict without resorting to
violence - a society in which opposing points of
views can be expressed, debated, and even passionately
disputed, without undermining the system as a whole; a
society in which differences can be managed
peacefully.

In fragile post-conflict situations, institutions and
procedures designed to manage differences and
potential conflicts in a non-violent manner and in a
spirit of compromise are particularly essential.

As is highlighted in the Panel's report, one of the
key principles of representative democracy is
connecting citizens to the decisions that affect them
and ensuring public accountability for those decisions.
In post-conflict societies, if citizens are not connected
to their Government; to the peace processes that will
deeply affect their future; or, no less importantly, to
one another, new sources of grievance and conflict will
emerge.

(spoke in English)

Time and again we see that leadership and
advocacy for democracy comes from civil society at
the local level. When that is complemented with
support from, and dialogue with, the international
community, effective and positive energy is
demonstrated for post-conflict peace-building.

As the General Assembly has already
acknowledged, civil society is a powerful force for
peace-building and conflict prevention. Let us together
ensure that its full potential is mobilized in the cause of
sustainable peace, the search for which unites us all.

