Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan): I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and all the new
members of the Security Council on the assumption of
your duties. We are, of course, grateful to you, Mr.
President, and to the members for the gracious gesture
of allowing non-members to take the floor first on this
subject, and my delegation thanks you warmly for it. I
would also like to offer our appreciation to
Ambassador Lavrov for the dedicated manner in which
he handled the Council's affairs during the month of
December.

I anticipate that a number of delegations will,
during the course of the day, have us believe that the
thematic debate is largely redundant, in view of the
comprehensive discussions that flowed from the
development of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone mandate in September 2000
and the issuance of the Brahimi Panel report. It will
probably be said that we have spoken enough; what
remains now is for us to implement Security Council
resolution 1327 (2000) and General Assembly
resolution 55/135.

My delegation would agree absolutely on the
need for the speedy implementation of the two
resolutions. However, we would also join you, Mr.
President, in seeing a need to review the topic again,
and we intend, with your kind permission, to make one
observation and to follow it up with a proposal.

For lack of time, we will also restrict our
comments to the relationship between the Council and
the troop contributors, not because we deem the
Secretariat's role here as unimportant - far from it -
but because we believe that before we can formulate
procedural mechanisms, we must first build some trust
and understanding between the Member States of this
Organization.

When we speak of strengthening cooperation
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), we assume that two distinct
communities exist: the Council and the contributors; or,
put another way, we suppose that members of the
Council are themselves not the contributors of troops.
Obviously, this is not the case when peacekeeping,
whether conducted by the United Nations or any other
organization, is viewed in general terms or when
participation in it is examined through a long historical
lens. It is well appreciated that almost all Council
members have, at one stage or another, contributed
very significantly to United Nations, as well as to
other, peacekeeping operations on the ground.

When this assumption of there being two
communities does have resonance, and it resonates
strongly, is when specific United Nations peacekeeping
operations mounted today are recognized as being
exceptionally dangerous; that is, when the risk of death
and injury to United Nations peacekeepers is higher
than is normally the case. In almost all of these cases it
is also now widely accepted that United Nations
battalions, and not monitors or specialists alone, should
be part of the mission's operational tapestry if the
United Nations is to accord some sense of security and
stability to the country or region under consideration.

If United Nations peacekeeping is examined
today in broad statistical terms, we see the following.
By the end of the year 2000, and specifically in
November 2000, out of 189 Members of the United
Nations, less than half - 88 to be exact - were
contributors, including 14 members of the Security
Council. Twenty-seven countries were contributors of
formed units, including nine members of the Security
Council, and by formed units I mean anything from
platoon up; and out of 189 Member States, 22 supplied
the United Nations with battalions, but only two of
them were Council members.

So our discussion today, focusing as it does on
the relationship between the Council and troop
contributors, makes sense only in the context of
dangerous operations, requiring in most instances the
injection of United Nations battalions to provide a
more secure environment. Now, of course, we
recognize that some members of the Council have
never shirked the responsibility of sending their
battalions into harm's way in the service of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, the distribution of the risk
burden is still very uneven. With a small number of
Member States outside the Council shouldering the
lion's share of risk, one cannot but feel there is
something desperately wrong and immoral about all of
this.

Over the last decade, Jordan has consistently been
one of the largest contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping, having dispatched fully equipped
battalions that are self-sustaining to some of the most
dangerous and unforgiving areas of conflict, and we
have suffered our fair share of casualties; and yet we
are one of the smaller and poorer countries in the
world, still owed millions of United States dollars by
the United Nations for both current operations and
operations that have long ceased to exist.

My delegation does not intend to elicit any
sympathy or be boastful about this. It would be
improper for me to do so given the enormous sacrifices
made by other Member States speaking here today. But
while we are prepared to serve with others, anywhere
and everywhere, we are not prepared to be the servants
of others, obeying blindly, unquestioning.

The preferred solution to the problem before us is
not one of strengthening cooperation between the
Council and the troop contributors in a manner that
only reinforces the status quo - that is, the existence
of two communities - but, as Bangladesh has argued
recently, of assuring ourselves that a respectable
number of those serving on the Council themselves
become troop contributors when the Council mandates
the more dangerous United Nations-run peacekeeping
operations. It almost goes without saying that the price
of privilege - the privilege of serving on the Council,
the privilege of acting on behalf of the rest of us non-
members in matters relating to international peace and
security - should include the sharing of risk in the
field.

We therefore appeal most respectfully to the
members of the Security Council that, when
considering a difficult mandate for prospective United
Nations peacekeepers, they lead us by example, and be
first in line to offer troops. With that, you can be
assured, Mr. President, a great many of us will be sure
to follow. Not only would our Secretary-General then
surmount his current problem of finding the required
number of peacekeepers for the more dangerous
missions, but the neat and clear-cut distinction between
Council and troop contributors would happily fade into
irrelevance.
Until we reach this preferred situation, my
delegation will continue to be realistic, though. We will
continue to defend strongly the position long held by
the Non-Aligned Movement on the need for more
effective, institutional consultations between the
Security Council and the TCCs. In this regard, we
believe the responsibility for the creation of a more
meaningful partnership lies principally with
whomsoever holds the presidency of the Council and
rests on the execution of sheer common sense.

Ultimately, we consider the forging of such a
relationship important only insofar as it is a temporary
measure until we reach a point when, one day, many
more of us will be willing to share the risks of
deploying United Nations troops into an uncertain
environment.

We propose that, in one year's time, the then
President of the Council consider the possibility of
holding of a second open meeting on this subject, to
gauge how successful we have been in fulfilment of
these aims.

