Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): At the outset, I
wish to thank Peru, as the President of the Security
Council this month, for organizing this open debate on
a very important topic. We also thank the Secretary-
General of the United Nations for his tireless efforts in
continuing to focus the attention of the international
community on the issue of children and armed conflict.
We thank Special Representative Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive
Director of UNICEF, and the representative of Save the
Children for their briefings this morning and for their
noble work in the promotion and protection of the
rights and well-being of children around the world.

Before I continue, my delegation would like to
associate itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

Thailand welcomes and supports the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and deems the issue of
children and armed conflict to be one of truly grave
concern for the international community. Thailand's
commitment to this issue was reaffirmed by our
ratification early this year of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict.

Thailand welcomes the progress made in
implementing resolution 1612 (2005), and also
welcomes the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2006/826) to give equal
care and attention to children in armed conflict in all
situations - including as regards sexual violence
committed against children in situations of armed
conflict. We also believe that, given an issue of such
high complexity as children and armed conflict, the
entire United Nations must be involved in a system-
wide manner. In addition to the role of the Security
Council, the roles of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council must also be fully
recognized.

We also feel that for there to be effective and
sustainable disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration of child soldiers and children affected
by armed conflict, additional resources must be
mobilized and effectively spent. We also believe that
national ownership and the involvement of society as a
whole are prerequisites for success in addressing the
situation of children in armed conflict. More important,
our collective efforts must be carried out on the basis
of a rights-based approach.

While we support the work of the Special
Representative, we nevertheless wish to emphasize
that, in undertaking her work and in compiling reports,
the Special Representative, as well as the United
Nations agencies concerned, should exercise the
utmost care to ensure the full accuracy of reports.
Unverifiable allegations should certainly be omitted
from reports.

My delegation has a particular concern about
paragraphs 60 to 62 of the report. We wish to stress
that Thailand has no child soldiers or any situation of
children in armed conflict. Over time, Thailand has
made its best effort to render full protection to children
affected by armed conflict from neighbouring
countries. Paragraphs 60 to 62 contain inaccurate
information. In particular, the Working Group
mentioned in paragraph 61 was not set up by the
Security Council. Naming it the Thailand Working
Group of the Security Council on Children in Armed
Conflict is definitely misleading. Thailand has
conveyed this concern to the United Nations agencies
in Bangkok, as well as to the Office of the Special
Representative, and appreciates the fact that a
corrigendum will be issued promptly to address the
concern.

In conclusion, Thailand remains fully committed
to rendering any possible cooperation to the Office of
the Special Representative, the Secretary-General and
the United Nations agencies concerned in our
collective efforts to end the suffering of children in
armed conflict around the world.

