The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank the Senegalese presidency and His Excellency
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal for having organized this debate at a crucial
moment.

By 2050, at least one in four human beings will live
in a country where the lack of fresh water is chronic
or recurrent. Climate change will only aggravate these
difficulties, especially in basins shared by several
countries. It is particularly important to coordinate
water management for the more than 260 international
watercourses and transboundary aquifers, which are at
least as numerous.

(spoke in English)

Access to water can exacerbate communal
tensions. Competition for scarce water resources in
Darfur and Afghanistan has contributed to tensions. In
Peru, the extractive industries' impact on water is the
most common driver of protests and violence against
companies by local communities.

Armed conflicts can themselves affect access
to clean water, for example through the deliberate
destruction of water facilities, attacks against power
plants that provide water supplies, and the collapse of
water treatment and sewage systems. These impacts
are often compounded by the breakdown in water
governance and delivery networks that typically
occurs during conflicts. Air strikes against water and
electrical facilities in Syria, and the contamination of
groundwater resources in Gaza, are further examples
of the negative impact of armed conflict on water. We
have also seen warring parties seek to control dams
and dikes. Controlling strategic dams on the Tigris
and Euphrates rivers has been at the centre of military
operations carried out in Syria and Iraq by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant.

Despite these serious challenges, we must also
recognize the potential for cooperation around shared
water resources. Three-quarters of United Nations
Member States share rivers or lake basins with
their neighbours. Shared water has historically, and
sometimes rather improbabiy, brought adversaries
together and served as a crucial confidence-building
measure in both inter-State and intra-State conflicts.
In the second half of the twentieth century, more
than 200 water treaties were successfully negotiated.
International river agreements have enhanced security
and stability in river basins. The 1960 Indus Waters
Treaty between India and Pakistan has famously
survived at least two wars and numerous clashes and
diplomatic crises. In the Nile Basin, last year's signing
of a declaration of principles by the Governments of
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan, followed more recently
by various formal and informal dialogues, has been
a vital confidence-building measure. And in the
Senegal River basin, riparian States - including Mali,
Mauritania and Senegal - have had a long history of
benefit-sharing, providing a cornerstone for regional
stability and peace.

The United Nations has actively promoted the
potential of water for cooperation. The work of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia on hydro-diplomacy is
one notable example. The Centre uses its good offices,
convening power, analytical capacity and partnerships
with regional organizations to promote dialogue and
build trust. The United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe's Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes
strengthens transboundary water cooperation and
sound water management. It is now open for accession
to all United Nations Member States, offering the
opportunity to create a global framework for dealing
with transboundary water issues.

More generally, the United Nations actively
promotes mediation and dialogue as effective tools
for preventing and resolving disputes over water and
natural resources. The United Nations Department of
Political Affairs and the United Nations Environment
Programme have published a useful guide containing
practical strategies and best practices in this area.

Across all these efforts it is also important to
recognize the central role played by women in local
water management. Decisions over water allocation can
have a significant impact on their well-being and safety,
and that of their children and families. For this reason,
women often and rightly advocate for water issues to be

directly addressed within peace agreements, as we saw,
for example, with the Darfur peace process.

(spoke in French)

To mobilize concerted diplomatic action, the
President of the World Bank Group and I convened
the Global High-Level Panel on Water. This initiative
promotes the global and cooperative development and
management of water resources, to which Senegal's
contribution has been crucial. I encourage Council
members to find ways to support the implementation of
the Group's recently adopted action plan.

(Spoke in English)

Water challenges affect us all. Let us use this
Security Council meeting to highlight the value of
water as a reason for cooperation, not conflict. And let
us commit to investing in water security as a means to
ensure long-term international peace and security.

