Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic Conference): I should like to extend to you, Sir, my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, Ambassador Eitel, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, for his able performance in
steering the work of the Council during the month of
August.

On behalf of the Secretary-General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), I thank
you for calling upon me to address the Council on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories.

At the outset, let me say that I wish I were speaking
under better - instead of what have become bitter -
circumstances. For we in the OIC had joined forces with
the international community in supporting the peace
process in the Middle East in full measure, despite some
of the disadvantageous elements that the relevant
agreements carried affecting Palestinian interests. We
were even beginning to feel hopeful about the future of
peace in the area because of the few achievements that

 
had already emerged from the early stages of the
implementation of the Oslo accords, and we were prepared
to continue to lend our full support towards the attainment
of the agreed goals and objectives of the peace agreements.

Regrettably, our hopes, together with those of the
well-wishers in the international community, are shattered
by the unfortunate turn of events in Palestine, the
responsibility for which must lie with Israel and Israel
alone. For what has brought about the turmoil is the sum of
a series of violations of various elements of the peace
agreements by Israel and blatant acts of aggression by the
Israeli authorities against the Palestinian people, the results
of which we are witnessing today: hundreds of dead and
seriously wounded Palestinians and Israelis. Unless the
Israeli violations are checked immediately, the situation
threatens to get out of control and to assume a much
greater dimension than we have witnessed so far, thereby
rendering irreparable damage to the peace process.

The unfortunate state of affairs emerges from the
hesitation that the new Israeli Government is openly
showing about the principles and foundations of the peace
process, about the principle of "land for peace" and about
honouring the commitments that the country and its people
have made solemnly, in black and white, under the peace
agreements. Thus, instead of ushering in an era of peace,
tranquillity and economic and social development, what the
new Government of Israel is bringing in, with impunity, is
an era of insecurity and restlessness coupled with economic
and social chaos.

If not this, then what else can be expected from such
troublesome activities as the inexplicable delay of as long
as six months in the redeployment of the Israeli army in
Hebron; the unilateral suspension of negotiations; the
demolition of Palestinian homes; the continuing blockade
imposed upon the City of Al-Quds al-Sharif and other
Palestinian territories; the attempts to alter the demographic
set-up of Jerusalem, thereby replacing the Arab-Islamic
identity of the Holy City with the artificial judaization of
the place; the authorization to Jews to invade the Islamic
precincts of the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is the third
holiest site for Muslims after Mecca and Medina; the
restrictions placed on the functioning of the Palestinian
institutions; and now the latest: the opening of an entrance
to the tunnel extending under the western wall of the Al-
Aqsa Mosque in occupied East Jerusalem, thereby
constituting a serious threat to the security of this important
shrine.

In order for the peace process to be allowed to work,
it is imperative for all sides to create a climate of
confidence and to show, by their actions, their resolve to
pursue the implementation of the accords as a whole,
without being selective. The Palestinians, despite the
obstacles being placed in their way, are doing all they can
to abide by the provisions of the peace agreements. It is
now up to Israel to do likewise if it genuinely seeks and
deserves peace.

Here, a well-known saying comes to mind: "If a
nation wants to keep another nation in the ditch, it can
only do so by staying in the ditch with it." Today, nobody
needs to be reminded of this more than the present
Government of Israel, and our sincere message to them is
the following: If you want to breathe the air of peace,
tranquillity and a secure environment, then change your
attitude and ways towards the peace process and the
Palestinian people, and you too will very soon be out of
the ditch.

In the spirit of our solidarity with the peace process
in the Middle East, we condemn the continuing atrocities
that are being inflicted by the Israeli authorities on the
Palestinian institutions and people in flagrant disregard of
the peace agreements and human rights. In particular, we
condemn the latest act of the opening of an entrance to
the tunnel under the esplanade of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque and demand its immediate closure by the
Government of Israel.

We also strongly urge that, while encouraging
bilateral discussions between the Palestinian authorities
and the Government of Israel aimed at defusing the
present explosive situation brought about by Israel in
Palestine, the Security Council resume its responsibilities
for the maintenance of peace and security in Palestine,
including in the first instance measures to close the tunnel
extending under the western wall of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque.

The Palestinian people, at this crucial period in their
history, expect and deserve more support from the
international community. We therefore appeal to all
Member States actively to pursue their support for that
people and their national authority so as to give them the
means to overcome the ordeal through which they are
going, to establish firmly their national institutions and to
continue to take an active part in the peace process, to
which they remain deeply committed.

 

We in the OIC believe in speeding up the peace
process and aim at putting it back on track with a View to
establishing a just and comprehensive peace in the region
and restoring the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to return, their right
to self-determination and their right to build their own
independent State on their national soil with Al-Quds al-
Sharif as its capital, as well as a complete and speedy
Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan and
occupied Lebanese territories.

In conclusion, I should like to assure the Council that
as soon as the necessary measures to restore peace and
security in the area have been undertaken, improving the
environment for the resumption of the peace process, the
OIC and its 53 member States, representing the very serious
concerns of more than one billion Muslims all over the
world, will also reinforce their wholehearted support of the
peace process in fulfilment of their collective desire to see
peace and tranquillity return to the area.

