The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Council. I welcome His Excellency Prime
Minister Maiga.

We have all been shocked by the recent surge in
violence in central Mali, particularly the killing last
weekend of at least 160 civilians in the village of
Ogossagou in Mopti province. It appears to have been
a premeditated massacre, in which whole families,
including mothers and young children, were hacked to
death with machetes in their homes, which were then
set on fire. And while it may be the worst attack so
far, it is not the first. I want to express my deepest
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Government and the people of Mali, and I wish the
injured a speedy recovery.

Impunity only fuels the cycle of violence. This
attack must be investigated urgently and its perpetrators
brought to justice. I urge the Malian authorities to step
up efforts to end the violence and bring back peace and
stability to central Mali. But as these attacks become
deadlier and more frequent, we must decide what the
international community can do to better support the
Malian authorities and protect all of Mali's people,
including the Fulani, who were targeted in the massacre.

The security situation is deteriorating rapidly,
particularly in the centre of Mali. Terrorist and
militia groups are taking over more territory and have
become more agile and mobile. The expansion of
extremist movements has exacerbated long-standing
intercommunal tensions between ethnic groups over
access to land and water. The proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the arming of ethnically based
self-defence groups have increased violence against
civilians. If those concerns are not addressed, there is
a high risk of further escalation that could lead to the
commission of atrocity crimes. Last year there were
more than 240 attacks on civilians, representatives of
the Malian Government and national and international
forces, up from 183 in 2016. The number of people
forced to flee their homes increased from 40,000 a year
ago to 123,000 in February 2019, and cases ofthe use of
improvised explosive devices in central Mali more than
tripled, from 29 in 2017 to nearly 100 in 2018.

We owe Special Representative Mahamat Saleh
Annadif and his military and civilian staff our
gratitude for the work they are doing in this extremely
challenging and dangerous mission. Eighteen Blue
Helmets from Chad, Guinea and Sri Lanka lost their
lives in Mali in the past 18 months. I want to express my
deepest condolences to their families and friends, but
their sacrifice will not be in vain. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) has enhanced its capacity to respond
to attacks, even when heavily outnumbered. But as
extremists expand their activities and use increasingly
sophisticated weapons, the Malian and international
forces must also step up and strengthen their response.

MINUSMA works in close coordination with the
Malian defence and security forces and the international
forces present in Mali - the Joint Force ofthe Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the French Operation
Barkhane. I welcome the recent operations led by
Barkhane and the G-5 Sahel, and the Council is aware
of my view of what is needed to make the Joint Force
fully operational.

(spoke in English)

While the security situation is deteriorating,
there have been some important steps in the past six
months towards accelerating the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
More than 1,400 former combatants in Gao, Kidal
and Timbuktu have joined the Malian army as part
of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, which is an important sign
of commitment. Interim administrations have been
established in all five northern regions. Discussions
on enhancing the participation of women in the peace
process are under way. The Government has launched
a comprehensive political and administrative reform
process laying the groundwork for dialogue on how
Mali's institutions can best serve the interests of
its people. I encourage the Government to promote
reconciliation and intercommunal dialogue, aimed
at ensuring inclusivity, strengthening resilience and
creating social cohesion from the ground up.

I welcome efforts by the Government to make
this process as broad as possible by including political
leaders from across the spectrum, the signatory
movements and armed groups, experts and members of
civil society. The recent meetings initiated by President
Keita with the leaders of the democratic opposition,
including Souma'ila Cisse, show a willingness on both
sides to rise above partisan politics and support the
reforms. I urge all Malian parties to redouble their
efforts, address differences through dialogue and
listen to the voices of the Malian people, so that those
gains can be irreversible. I also urge the international
community to continue its support.

While we must do more to support the Malian
authorities and improve security across the whole
country, military approaches alone will not solve
Mali's problems. We can only prevent increased
violence and instability by tackling root causes such
as poverty, climate change, competition for resources,
underdevelopment and the lack of opportunities for
young people. Some 2.4 million people in Mali need
food assistance. There are just three health workers
for every 10,000 people in the northern and central
regions. More than 800 schools have been closed and
nearly a quarter of a million children have no access
to education.

MINUSMA and the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes have now adopted an integrated
strategic framework that will help to prioritize tasks
and define responsibilities to support broader and
longer-term sustaining peace efforts by the Malian
Government. There are several important international
initiatives under way, including the Alliance for the
Sahel, launched by France, Germany and the European
Union, which aims to invest €9 billion across the region
by 2022. The G-S Sahel held a successful partner and
donor conference in Nouakchott in December. While
I welcome such initiatives, they are insufficient.
I call upon all to strengthen efforts to address the
root causes of instability and insecurity in Mali
through humanitarian aid and support for sustainable
development, including programmes on climate change
mitigation and adaptation.

The situation in Mali is a test of the international
community's ability to mobilize in support of peace
and stability. That is not a question of charity. It is
one of enlightened self-interest. Security in Mali has
an impact on the entire Sahel, which in turn affects
global stability. The entire Sahel region faces severe
transnational challenges, from climate change and
drought to growing insecurity, violent extremism and
the smuggling of people, weapons and drugs. The
Council is aware of the growing threat to stability
in Burkina Faso. We cannot stand by while the
humanitarian situation deteriorates, development gaps
increase and security risks become unsustainable. I call
on all national, regional and international actors to step
up efforts to tackle the multiple threats facing Mali and
the entire Sahel region. Investing in peace in Mali is
investing in global security.

I urge our continued full support to MINUSMA,
the United Nations humanitarian and development
agencies and all partners on the ground. However, that
support will never be sufficient. There is no substitute
for political will. I call on the Government of Mali, the
leaders of the political opposition and the signatory
movements to redouble their efforts to overcome the
challenges the country faces. Now is the time to work
together to bring back peace and stability to Mali.

