Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Two days ago, this
Council, after almost five years, finally adopted a
resolution on the situation between Palestine and
Israel. At that meeting, my delegation acknowledged
that the resolution that we adopted was not perfect
because it ignored many significant issues that this
Council must address. These include the continuing
illegal settlement activity in the Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. The siege of Gaza continues. In
Hebron, Israeli settlers have attacked Palestinian
homes and farms. Violence against Palestinian and
Israeli civilians has not ended.

However, what the resolution did was to remind
the parties of their previous undertakings and to
recommit them to the obligations that they had
previously undertaken. Palestinian and Israeli leaders
alike have already committed to what they see as the
final outcome of their negotiations - a settlement that
will result in the emergence of an independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State living side by
side in peace and security with Israel and its other
neighbours. That settlement will resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and end the occupation that began
in 1967. That commitment has been made in the past
and continues to be the basis of the current
negotiations.

New declarations and undertakings are no longer
required. What remains is the need to implement the

steps taken to reach such a settlement - a settlement
that will be based on the undertakings of the parties,
their neighbours and the international community, such
as the Arab Peace Initiative. It is thus imperative that
both sides ensure that their actions and
pronouncements be calculated to advance the quest for
peace. Unjustified and illegal acts by Israel - such as
its siege of Gaza; continued incursions into the West
Bank and, recently, in Gaza; and the expansion of
illegal settlements, military checkpoints and the
separation wall - contribute to the continuing cycle of
violence.

We recognize the legitimate security concerns of
Israel, but we do not condone the disproportionate use
of force to achieve that security. Israel's right to self-
defence does not entitle it to violate the rights of
innocent civilians, particularly those who have been
living in inhumane conditions under its military
occupation for more than 40 years.

As we said two days ago, the resolution we
adopted will face two crucial tests. The first will be
whether the parties will implement its provisions; the
second test will be for the Council to ensure that its
resolutions are implemented. If its resolutions should
be ignored, that would further erode the credibility of
this Council.

