Mr. Salim: I am honoured to have this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I am
particularly pleased, Sir, to do so under your
presidency. I am aware of the significant efforts made
by your country in the search for an end to the conflict
in Darfur and the achievement of a just and durable
settlement. I am particularly conscious of the active
support given to both my colleague and friend Jan
Eliasson and me by the United States and other
international partners in the discharge of our mandate
as Special Envoys of the United Nations and the
African Union on Darfur.

I am not a stranger to the Security Council as far
as the issue of Darfur is concerned. During the Inter-
Sudanese Peace Talks on Darfur held in Abuja in 2005
and 2006, during which I was the African Union
Special Envoy and Chief Mediator and which
culminated in the signing of the Darfur Peace
Agreement, I had occasions to brief the Council. This
time, however, I do so jointly with Special Envoy
Eliasson, manifesting our teamwork and eloquently
displaying in practical terms the growing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
our collective quest for peace and security and, more
specifically, in our collective determination to
contribute to ending the tragic conflict in Darfur. As
Mr. Eliasson rightly observed, 12 days ago both of us
had the opportunity to brief the African Union Peace
and Security Council in Addis Ababa.

In his presentation today, Special Envoy Eliasson
has given a detailed and elaborate account of our joint
activities. Those include intensive consultations, road
maps, work plans, programmes and strategies that the
Special Envoys, assisted by the Joint Mediation
Support Team, put in place, with the full support of
regional and international players, aimed at bringing
the parties in conflict to the negotiation table. I fully
share what he has said.

Sixteen months ago, the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
entrusted us with a specific mandate, namely, to
re-energize the political process. In other words, we
were to create propitious conditions for the parties in
conflict - that is to say, the Government of the Sudan
and the armed movements - to engage in a more
inclusive political dialogue leading to a more
acceptable, and therefore more durable, political
settlement of the Darfur problem. During this period,
we travelled many times to Sudan. In particular, we
visited Khartoum, Darfur and Juba.

In Darfur we visited extensively several different
areas to meet with the leaders and commanders of the
armed movements. During those visits we consulted
extensively with stakeholders, including signatories
and non-signatories to the Darfur Peace Agreement,
traditional leaders, leaders of political parties,
representatives of internally displaced persons, civil
society organizations, women's and youth groups and
intellectuals. One of the shortcomings of the Abuja
Peace Talks was to confine the entire process to the
Government and the armed movements. This time, we
were determined to rectify that by ensuring that the
broadest range of stakeholders were involved, or at the
very least consulted.

In Khartoum, during our consultations with
Government leaders and officials at various levels,
while welcoming the Government's preparedness to
enter into negotiations, we urged them to take concrete
measures to allay the concerns and fears of the
movements, which have a very deep distrust of the
Government. We underscored the fact that the
Government has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of security, and consequently should take
deliberate and sustained steps aimed at de-escalating
violence, including exercising restraint and refraining
from aerial bombardments, which invariably have
terrible consequences on innocent civilians. We also
urged the Government to be more proactive and
flexible on the fundamental issues that constitute the
current divide between them and the movements in
respect of the future dispensation of Darfur.

In Juba, we also met on several occasions with
top leaders and officials. We supported and encouraged
their efforts aimed at promoting the unity of the
movements. We did so because, first, we believe that,
as part of the Government of National Unity, the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) can, and
should, play an important and constructive role in the
achievement of a just and lasting settlement of the
Darfur crisis. Secondly, we believe that the SPLM's
own experience and its historic relations with some of
the movements in Darfur would be helpful in
encouraging them towards the process of negotiations.

We spent a considerable part of our time, energy
and the limited resources at the disposal of the joint
mediation encouraging and supporting efforts by the
movements aimed at bringing about unity, or at the
very least the attainment of common positions. We did
so in the firm belief that such unity would contribute
immensely to the peace process and that, conversely,
continued fragmentation was inimical to peace and
stability in Darfur. In our efforts and initiatives we
interacted and consulted closely with regional partners.
We also had the support of international partners.

The Arusha consultations in August 2007
provided a ray of hope. Regrettably, however, that
optimism was shattered with the division that occurred
within the leadership of the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) soon thereafter. Subsequent to the
commencement of the Sirte process in October last
year, and drawing from the lessons of Sirte, which,
inter alia, necessitated the postponement of the talks
due to the absence of some of the major players, efforts

08-3959]
were intensified aimed at forging some degree of unity
and cohesion. The emergence of five groups - instead
of having to deal with about two dozen factions or so -
is to be welcomed. Of course, ideally we would have
liked to have the situation that prevailed at the
beginning of the Abuja Talks, namely, only the Sudan
Liberation Movement and the Justice and Equality
Movement. Regrettably, however, for the present that
remains a mere ideal. Furthermore, it is important to
recall that the process of fragmentation within the
movements started in earnest while the Abuja Talks
were still taking place.

The reality on the ground is therefore that there is
still division among the movements, and in some
instances within them. Another sad reality is that some
of the movements are not prepared, or are unwilling,
not only to enter into substantive negotiations but are
even against taking part in any formal or informal
talks. Some insist on preconditions that are clearly
unacceptable, even though some of their legitimate
demands as such should form a basis for negotiations.
Others claim an exclusive monopoly on representation
and are dismissive of all other movements. Still others
seem to vigorously pursue a military option, as
manifested by J EM's unfortunate attack on Omdurman,
which has drawn universal international condemnation.

To compound the situation, the process of
fragmentation has not been completely halted. In short,
the political process has reached an impasse and, as it
was stressed in a meeting we held with regional and
international partners earlier this month in Geneva,
there is a need to rethink the strategy on the way
forward. As the Security Council reflects on this rather
gloomy picture and considers the way forward, I
believe it is important to take into consideration the
following factors, among others.

The number one concern of Darfurians - as
eloquently expressed to us whenever we met with
them, in towns or villages, whether in Government
areas or in rebel strongholds - is the question of
security. There is fighting involving the Sudanese
armed forces and some of the movements. There is
fighting between some movements themselves. There
is the terror that continues to be unleashed by the
Janjaweed. And there is the sheer banditry and
criminality perpetrated by some armed groups. It is
indeed no exaggeration to assert that Darfurians in
general have been eagerly waiting the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), and have great expectations that its
full deployment will make a great difference in their
daily lives. Such a deployment will certainly go a long
way in helping to create a favourable climate for the
launching of the peace process.

It is therefore all the more regrettable that such a
deployment has been agonizingly slow in the face of
numerous difficulties, some due to the position of the
Government of the Sudan on such matters as the
composition of the force and others due to the failure
of the international community to act decisively. We all
recognize that what is needed in Darfur is a robust,
well-equipped force with a reasonable mobile capacity.
In this connection, I believe that it is a sad commentary
that notwithstanding the existence of thousands of
helicopters it has not yet been possible to obtain two
dozen or so helicopters for UNAMID. And yet the
international community at large has repeatedly called
for the rapid deployment of a robust UNAMID.

Given these circumstances, it is, in our opinion,
important to be vigilant so that the euphoria of
expectation among Darfurians does not yield to
despondency. At the same time it is evident that
UNAMID per se, even when fully deployed with the
necessary equipment and logistical backup, will not
translate into peace and stability in Darfur. The hybrid
force will need the cooperation of all the parties in
order to effectively discharge its responsibilities.
Above all, it will need a peace to keep; hence the
crucial importance of the political process.

The situation of insecurity in Darfur is made
worse by the tense and deteriorating relations between
Chad and the Sudan. In the interests of the peoples of
both Chad and the Sudan, it is crucial that this situation
be defused. The various accords reached between the
two countries, including the latest one agreed upon in
Dakar, cry out for implementation. Clearly, without the
reduction of tension between these two neighbours and
the normalization of relations, it is inconceivable that
there can be a lasting solution to the conflict in Darfur.

Another issue of grave concern which requires
urgent attention and action is the flow of arms into
Darfur despite the existence of an arms embargo. The
Security Council should look into this and should close
whatever loopholes exist.

On 16 November 2006 a high-level meeting
involving a number of States and institutions, including
the representatives of the Government of the Sudan and

the representatives of the permanent members of the
Security Council, was held at the headquarters of the
African Union in Addis Abba. That meeting was jointly
chaired by the then Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the then African Union
Commission Chairperson, President Alpha Oumar
Konare. It decided on a number of key issues including
re-energizing the political process and the creation of
an African Union-United Nations hybrid force. In
Geneva, in June, a proposal was made and generally
accepted, subject to appropriate preparations,
recommending the holding of a high-level meeting to
be convened by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
AU Commission Chairperson Jean Ping to chart the
way forward. It is recommended that the participants at
the meeting should include the Foreign Ministers of the
permanent members of the Security Council,
representatives of the Government of the Sudan and
regional and international partners. Given the current
situation in Darfur, with its repercussions in the whole
of the Sudan and in the region, this proposal, in our
opinion, merits serious follow-up so that it can be
realized as soon as possible. As a new approach is
required in dealing with this crisis, such a meeting
would provide a unique opportunity for reflection,
consideration and possible action.

Given the enormity of the challenges that lie
ahead, the need to have someone following events on
daily basis and engaging the parties on a more regular
basis is self-evident. That is why Jan Eliasson and I
very much look forward to the appointment of a
common AU-United Nations chief mediator, who will
be based in Khartoum. He will need the active support
of the United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. He will certainly
have the full support of the two Special Envoys and the
Joint Mediation Support Team. Even more crucially,
however, he will need the support of the Government
of the Sudan and the movements. In the meantime, it is
important to underscore the need for both the United
Nations Security Council and AU Peace and Security
Council to be actively engaged in the process and to
send the right signals and strong messages to the
parties. They should encourage those who support the
peace process and effectively discourage all those who
constitute an obstacle to peace.

It is now five years since the armed conflict
erupted in Darfur. These have been five very difficult
years for the people of Darfur, who have seen tens of

thousands of their compatriots, including their wives
and husbands, their mothers and fathers, their children
and grandchildren, killed or maimed and millions more
displaced in camps for internally displaced persons or
as refugees. The challenge before the United Nations
and the African Union is how to put an end to this
catastrophic conflict, contribute to lasting peace and
thereby enable the Darfurians to live in dignity, free of
constant threats to their lives. Peace, security and
stability in Darfur are crucial not only for the people of
that western region of the Sudan but for the Sudan as a
whole, inasmuch as the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is vital for the entire
country.

Equally challenging is the task of reducing
tension in the region and promoting normal relations.
The international community, and more particularly
those countries and institutions with comparative
advantages, should use their influence with the Sudan
and the region to assist in the efforts to end the conflict
and promote peace, security and development. But
ultimately, the responsibility is that of the Sudanese
people themselves.

