Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory has continued
for almost a century. Instead of learning lessons
from the protracted history, the complexities of the
Palestinian question have increased with time, just as
have the efforts aimed at entrenching the occupation
and deeming it an irrevocable fait accompli.

The international community repeatedly agreed
and reached consensus on what is called the two-
State solution - an Israeli State and a Palestinian
State - based on the borders ofJune 1967, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the capital of the Palestinian State. Such
a solution envisages two States living side by side in
peace, where citizens enjoy equal rights, irrespective of
their origin, ethnicity or colour.

We have seen international resolutions adopted by
the Security Council and the General Assembly, as well
as by various entities and international organizations.
We have seen piles and piles of political and legal
documents that are incontestable and, unlike other
cases, unambiguous. We have fully internalized such
prescriptions of solutions, just as have those who are
closely following the question or even those who are
not necessarily directly related to it. Despite the long
history and heritage of politically and legally binding
prescriptions, and the fact that human nature and
conscience reject injustice and favour people's right
to self-determination, we continue to meet, deliberate
and discuss issues that should be obvious and that have
been on the list of the agenda of the Security Council
since its inception.

The urgent need to end the occupation - the most
protracted and entrenched in modern history - should
not become taboo, nor tantamount to provocation.
Moreover, it must not interpreted as a measure
directed against one group of people or another. To
the contrary, the resolution of the Palestinian question
and the restoration of land and liberty to the original
owners, who continuously suffer behind walls in the
West Bank or under siege in the Gaza Strip, is the
optimal means for the Israeli people to live in peace
with its Arab neighbours, peoples and countries. Such
countries continue to offer their hands in peace, and the
unprecedeted positions they have adopted demonstrate
their readiness to establish good neighbourly relations
with Israel through the Arab Peace Initiative.

On 14 October, members of the Council listened to
speakers from different parts of the world - the United
States of America, Belgium and even Israel - under
the Arria Formula. The meeting confirmed once again,
that Israeli settlement activities do not only constitute
obstacles to peace and the two-State solution, but they
are the very crux of the crisis. The Palestinian question
is first and foremost a question of a territory that was
occupied by force. It is a question of a people whose
right to live in dignity in their homeland was usurped.
The meeting also showed us what we should understand
and appreciate, and by that I mean pro-peace Israeli
voices. Those voices understand that it is impossible
for the occupation to continue and for there to be
coexistence while there are ongoing attempts to force a
fait accompli by dismembering Palestinian land, acting
on the policy of home demolition and displacement
of families or discriminating in the implementation
of laws. Those are the voices that understand that no
people can exist at the expense of the rights of other
people.

I am confident that the call for peace made by Israel
at the United Nations expresses the feelings of a wide
sector of the Israeli people, if not the majority. We, as
Egyptians and Arabs, are determined to urge that sector
and the Israeli people as a whole to continue to march
for comprehensive and just peace in the region - the
same march that began years ago with the signing of the
Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty.

The picture remains bleak. The Palestinians
continue to suffer under the yoke of the occupation
and its practices and violations. However, it is possible
to salvage a settlement provided that there is genuine
will. If there are additional calls from Israel for the
restoration of Palestinian rights, it would then behoove
all of the friends of Israel to adopt the same approach,
particularly the influential, major Powers that bear a
significant share of the responsibility for the situation.
Those Powers provided cover and immunity to the
Israeli occupation. And while we encourage and are
fully committed to all the current initiatives to salvage
the two-State solution and the peace process, and while
we are determined to continue to communicate with the
Palestinian and Israeli parties in the coming period, the
friends of Israel must also realize that we, as Arabs and
Egyptians, hope they respond sooner than later to the
calls for peace put forth by Palestinians and Israelis.
We urge them to work to that end and react favourably,
both in and outside of the Security Council, to save
Israeli and Palestinian generations from a future that is
very difficult to predict.

