Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's debate. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his in-depth briefing
and assessment.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of Venezuela and
Uzbekistan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

Last month (see S/PV.7908), we listened to
Mr. Mladenov present the first report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). We regret the fact that that briefing on the
implementation of the landmark resolution was not
officially published and circulated in writing as per
standard practice. We believe that it is crucial to have
this report secured in writing to ensure the effective
monitoring and accountability of the parties to the
conflict, in line with the goals of resolution 2334 (2016).

As one of the sponsors of resolution 2334
(2016), which was adopted last December with the
overwhelming support of Council members and the
international community, we reject any attempt to
undermine its implementation. We also oppose any
attempt to dilute or sideline the question of Palestine
in the Council, including in today's open debate. We
believe that if the Council is sincere in fulfilling its
mandate for maintaining international peace and
security, it should not turn a blind eye to the undeniable
realities on the ground. In fact, the Council should pay
more attention and take effective action on the long-
standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

As Mr. Mladenov, the Special Coordinator,
reported, the settlement expansion by Israel continued
in the first quarter of 2017. That is in total disregard
of international law, the 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice and various Council
resolutions that have clearly defined Israeli settlements
as illegal. Furthermore, settlement activities threaten
the territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State and
undermine the two-State solution and, consequently,
peace in the region.

Only aweek after the briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), Israel announced its decision
to build a new settlement on the occupied Palestinian
territory - the first new settlement in two decades. We
commend the Secretary-General's swift condemnation
oflsrael's decision in that regard. The decision also came
on the heels ofthe passing ofthe so-called regularization
law by the Israeli Parliament on 6 February, which
effectively legalized illegal outposts built on privately
owned Palestinian land in contravention of relevant
international law. Once again, those actions put into
question Israel's sincerity about working together with
Palestine towards a two-State solution. But the Security
Council remained silent despite the flagrant breach of
its own resolution. Malaysia reiterates it call for the
Council to shoulder its responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations and act accordingly to maintain
international peace and security by taking effective
actions against illegal settlement activities.

In anticipation of a written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), Malaysia
looks forward to a report that is objective, independent
and free from intimidation or attempts to obscure facts
and evidence on the ground. The report should be based
on international law, international standards of human
rights and the relevant United Nations resolutions, as
well as the values and principles of the Charter.
Lastly, as this year marks a half-century of Israel's
illegal occupation of Palestine, Malaysia stresses the
urgent need for the Council to address the root cause
of the problem and end the occupation rather than
continuing to focus on the symptoms of the conflict.
The Council needs to go beyond condemning sporadic
attacks and acts of violence and should address the
bigger question of what generates, fuels and breeds such
anger, frustration and despair - all of which threaten
international peace and stability - in the first place.

Malaysia reiterates its firm commitment to working
together with the international community to push for a
just, comprehensive and final settlement to the conflict
that would see the establishment of an independent,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State based on the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security.

