Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
France for its initiative in convening and conducting
today's meeting. We would like to also thank the
Secretary-General for his participation, and we note the
briefers' valuable contribution to our discussion.

We have studied the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/821) carefully and share his concern regarding
the ongoing lack of respect for international law during
armed conflicts. Children are particularly vulnerable
in the face of such Violations, and there can be no
justification in cases where children or schools are
deliberately targeted, or where children are recruited
or used as human shields or suicide bombers in acts
of terror. The international community must provide a
coordinated response to such challenges.

Children also need emergency assistance in places
where active fighting has already ended. In Syria, the
de-escalation measures that have been established
within the framework of the Astana process and the
successes that have been achieved in fighting terrorism
have enabled us to make significant progress on the
humanitarian front. In carrying out this work, we keep
children's needs front and centre. The humanitarian
convoys bring food and medicine, but they also have
schoolbooks and even toys. We are also organizing
efforts to rebuild and rehabilitate schools and hospitals.
Recently in Horns, the Russian military, which is
continuing to fight terrorism in Syria at the invitation
of the Government, literally raised a secondary school
for 700 pupils from the ruins. In September and
October alone, our doctors provided medical attention
to approximately 400 Syrian children, while those who
needed complicated procedures were sent to Russian
hospitals. These and other efforts are being carried
out against a backdrop of humanitarian disaster in the
utter ruin that is Raqqa. Those responsible for that
state of affairs prefer not to talk about the plight of
children and attempt to distract attention from it with
established ploys. We agree that the united efforts of
the international community on the humanitarian front
would help us get results on the ground sooner.

We support the intention of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to cooperate
with Member States. Most countries affected by armed
conflict are making enormous efforts to improve the
situation with regard to the protection of children, but
they often need help from the international community.
These kinds of efforts would be a lot more effective
if constructive dialogue was established with the
State concerned.

This year there has been a new approach to the
preparation of the report. We found the inclusion of
the sections on achievements and concerns interesting.
However, we have questions about the change in the
format of the annexes that list the parties to the conflict
that have committed violations against children. In
particular, we believe that clarification is needed on
the criteria used to determine who took measures to
improve the protection of children and who did not.
It would seem that putting parties in one category or
the other does not always reflect the real situation on
the ground where ensuring the safety and protection of
children is concerned.

There is a whole range of standards in international
humanitarian law aimed at protecting children and
civilian infrastructure in armed conflict. We believe
that at the moment there is no need to change or add
to the existing international legal norms, including
through so-called soft law guidelines. We think that
what we need to do above all is focus our efforts on
improving the effectiveness of our implementation of
the documents we already have. We would also like
to suggest that the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's annual report, just like the efforts of the
Security Council, should focus primarily on approaches
that have been developed and approved within the
framework of the United Nations.

Our delegation has traditionally supported the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children in Armed Conflict. We support
maintaining its integrity and independence. We hope
that in the future the efforts in this area will be based
on the principles of impartiality and objectivity. In that
regard, ensuring that the information in the Secretary-
General's reports is accurate and reliable is extremely
important. There should be no place for politicization
and double standards in these matters.

As usual, we have a few words to say about the
statement by the Ukrainian delegation. Their attempts
to use any opportunity to spread false allegations
about Russia is hardly news, and we will therefore
not comment on what was said today. We are more
concerned about what is going on in Ukraine, with the
connivance of Kyiv's patrons, which is the authorities'
establishment of totally unacceptable and openly
discriminatory measures. For example, legislation is
being passed that will deprive thousands of Ukrainian
children whose mother tongue is Russian of the
opportunity to be educated in that language, in what is
clearly their punishment for the fact that their origins
do not conform to Kyiv's anti-Russian policies.

With regard to south-eastern Ukraine, we would
like to draw the Council's attention to the fact that
since the start of a conflict initiated by Kyiv, civilian
structures, including schools and hospitals, have
been systematically and indiscriminately shelled by
Ukrainian artillery forces. In some cases, such as that
of the shelling of School No. 63 in November 2014,
in which two children died, there is reason to believe
that the Ukrainian army targeted the school quite
deliberately. There have been many cases in which
schools have been fired on, and their targeting by the
Ukrainian armed forces has been documented in reports
by United Nations observers and human rights activists.
They also note that the Ukrainian Government's
establishment of special residence permits for the area
of conflict is preventing children from getting access
to health care and education. KyiV's blockade also has
obvious consequences for the situation of the children
of Donbas.

The future of children in eastern Ukraine and
throughout the entire country is directly dependent
on the restoration of peace. We are all well aware that
the way to achieve that is through the implementation
of the Minsk agreements. We hope that Kyiv will
stop sabotaging them and finally acknowledge
the importance of fulfilling the commitments it
has undertaken, as well as its duty to comply with
international humanitarian law.

