Mr. McNee (Canada): My Government is pleased
to see that after 34 days of violent conflict, there is
now a ceasefire in Lebanon. As we saw this weekend,
however, this ceasefire is fragile. Nonetheless, we are
confident that the Governments of both Israel and
Lebanon are committed to a true cessation of
hostilities. The two Governments understand that both
the Israeli and Lebanese people need security and
stability above all.

The Government of Canada has already
responded positively to the urgent appeal to support
Lebanon. On 16 August, Canada announced the
creation of a $25 million Lebanon relief fund to
respond to humanitarian, early recovery, stabilization
and reconstruction needs, in order to help people
rebuild their lives. This new fund will build on
Canada's previous allocation of $5.5 million to address
immediate humanitarian needs. Canada has also
actively supported humanitarian agencies to reach
civilians in need, including the transport by sea of
humanitarian personnel and over 140 tons of relief
items.

Canada stands behind the Lebanese Government.
Reconstruction efforts must ultimately be led by the
State - not Hizbollah.

All Member States share an obligation to ensure
that resolution 1701 (2006) is respected, including
agreements with both Governments on its
implementation, and that a full arms embargo is
enforced. We all also share a collective responsibility
to see that obligations under international humanitarian
law are respected by all.

The fundamental challenge ahead is to ensure that
Hizbollah does not rearm and does not present an even
greater threat to Israel in the future. This body
unanimously agreed on a resolution that articulates the
necessary elements for a lasting peace. At the centre of
that is the disarmament of all armed groups in
Lebanon, including Hizbollah, so that there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than those of
the Lebanese State.

This is not the first time the Security Council has
dealt with this issue, but it is Canada's hope that, with
the unanimous passage of resolution 1701 (2006), it
will be the last.

Canada welcomes the Lebanese Government's
ordering the deployment of 15,000 soldiers to south
Lebanon and its announcement that it will not tolerate
other armed groups in its territory. When the Lebanese
army, backed by the United Nations, becomes the sole
Visible armed force in south Lebanon, the positive
impact on the region will be great.

Canada is disappointed that Iran and Syria, arms
suppliers and financial backers of Hizbollah, have not
yet accepted the terms of the resolution. They should
not be allowed to spoil the peace.

The Lebanese Government must be strengthened
so that it can fulfil its rightful role as the provider for
and protector of its people. It is equally important for
the Lebanese people to have confidence that their
Government is capable of delivering on the key
responsibilities of a sovereign State. Countries in the
region should support the efforts of this nascent
democracy to flourish without having to compete
against resources being sent to terrorist organizations.
The international community needs to continue
providing humanitarian and reconstruction relief.

(spoke in French)

Lebanon has been at the forefront of international
attention, but Canada would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate that real and lasting peace in
the Middle East is inextricably linked to the search for
a viable solution - that is, two States, Israel and
Palestine.

Canada supports President Abbas and is
following with interest his efforts to establish a
national unity Government. If Hamas is serious about
helping the Palestinian people, it must immediately and
unconditionally release the kidnapped Israeli soldier,
and it must commit to the Quartet principles of
recognition of Israel, acceptance of international
agreements and the renunciation of violence.

In conclusion, Canada is firmly committed to the
provision of humanitarian assistance, stabilization,

reconstruction and capacity-building in Lebanon, as
well as in the West Bank and Gaza. We stand ready to
continue to work constructively with other Member
States and to try to address some of the key problems
with a view to achieving peace and security in the
region.

