Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, Spain was one of the signatories
of the collective letter addressed to you on 11 December
by the representatives of 34 Member States, requesting
this formal public meeting of the Security Council. The
broad support given that initiative, as well as the long list
of delegations inscribed to speak in this debate, are clear
evidence of the interest that exists in the subject which
we are discussing and which, curiously enough, does not
explicitly appear in the agenda for this meeting. I refer,
of course, to consultations between members of the
Security Council and troop contributors to peace-keeping
operations.

Following the adoption of the presidential statement
of 4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/62), significant
progress has been made in the processes for exchange of
information between members of the Security Council, on
the one hand, and Member States as a whole, on the

 

other, in particular the countries contributing troops to
peace-keeping operations. In spite of the progress achieved,
we believe - and this has emerged clearly in today's
debate - that current procedures have proved insufficient
and that thus, in light of past experience, new procedures
are needed.

We have exchanged ideas and opinions with other
delegations from different regional groups. A result of those
contacts is the statement made at the beginning of this
meeting by the Permanent Representative of Argentina,
Ambassador Cardenas - a statement whose content we
support and which, as we understand it, reflects the feelings
of a large and significant number of Member States of the
Organization. I should also like to support in general terms
the comments made during the meeting by a series of
delegations, in particular those just offered by the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand, Ambassador
Keating.

There is undoubtedly a need for intensification and
greater institutionalization of consultations between
members of the Council and the countries contributing
troops to peace-keeping operations. It is not a question of
thereby blurring the respective roles of the Security Council
and troop-contributing States. Nevertheless, the smooth
functioning and effectiveness of peace-keeping operations
require increased cooperation on the part of all involved. I
do not want to dwell on the arguments already put forward,
but I would like to elaborate on one aspect which, in my
opinion, requires special consideration.

Peace-keeping operations are not ends in
themselves - they are instruments to manage and resolve
conflicts. In this respect, we believe that the consultations
of the Council's members should not be limited to troop-
contributing countries, but should include other countries
that are particularly interested in finding a political solution
to a given conflict or situation. This already occurs in the
membership of the groups of friends of the Secretary-
General for a given peace process. Depending on the
specific case, the members of such groups may or may not
participate as contributors to the respective peace-keeping
operation. This idea was partially reflected in the Security
Council's presidential statement of 4 November 1994 and
should be further developed.

In any case, we believe that the entire membership of
the United Nations should be more closely associated with
the work of the Security Council, thereby enhancing the
legitimacy of its actions and, ultimately, of its effectiveness.

We hope that the members of the Security Council
will take into due consideration the expectations and
aspirations broadly shared by the rest of the States
Members of the Organization as regards the
intensification of consultations and the exchange of
information on the development of peace-keeping
operations. This in no way affects the responsibilities of
the Security Council, which, in accordance with Article
24 of the Charter, acts on behalf of all Member States in
carrying out its duties in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

