Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2004/348). I also
thank Mr. Holkeri for his additional briefing, and
welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro to today's meeting and thank him for his
statement.

The Security Council has repeatedly considered
the Kosovo question recently, which has reflected
international community's concern about the Kosovo
question and the importance it attaches to it. Indeed, as
the Secretary-General points out in his report, the
serious violence of March in Kosovo has had a
disturbingly negative impact on local political,
economic and social development.

The Security Council's presidential statement of
30 April (S/PRST/2004/ 13) set out a series of measures
to be taken to emerge from the present difficult
situation. The Secretary-General also expressed some
important recommendations in that regard in his report.
We believe that the present task is to implement those
measures and recommendations as soon as possible.
Only by doing that can the Kosovo peace process be
maintained and advanced. The international
community's efforts throughout the years will not have
been in vain.

The investigations of the March incidents should
be accelerated and those responsible should be brought
to justice. That will help ensure that that type of
violence will not be repeated. Secondly, the facilities
and the property destroyed during the violent clashes
should be rebuilt and compensation paid, and the
security needs of the minorities must be met. At the
same time, specific steps should be taken to gradually
resume mutual trust and enhance reconciliation among
all communities in Kosovo. Thirdly, the relevant
parties, particularly the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, should make greater efforts to enhance
the rule of law, protect minority rights and decentralize
functions from the central level to local bodies.

Here I wish to reiterate that resolution 1244
(1999) and the "standards before status" policy remain
the basis for resolving the Kosovo question. We
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to resume direct
dialogue as soon as possible. We hope UNMIK will
continue to play a constructive role in ensuring
Kosovo's stability, promoting harmonious coexistence
among all communities and facilitating the
implementation of the Kosovo standards document.

