Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): I have the pleasure at the outset to commend the
efforts that have led to the convening of this important
ministerial meeting with a view to discussing the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. The painful events and the unstable
conditions that today beset several parts of the African
continent have made the convening of this meeting
imperative.

I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity
to commend the Secretary-General' s important and valuable
report on the causes of conflict in Africa and to voice the
hope that both the Security Council and the international
community will translate the recommendations contained in
that report into concrete measures which will enable the
parties to get past such conflicts and make the African
continent a secure and stable region. I would like further to
applaud the efforts of the Council's working groups on the
implementation of the Secretary-General' s recommendations
in relation to addressing the challenges that certain African
States face and sparing them the conflict, tensions and
disputes that have affected all aspects of life and exposed
their countries and peoples to numerous risks.

In his report, the Secretary-General has attributed the
causes of conflicts to both internal and international
dimensions. He made it clear that it will be possible to
defuse conflicts if the strong will of the African States
concerned and the international community is brought to
bear. In this regard, joint African and international
concerted efforts and coordinated contributions are thus
necessary to settle these conflicts and eliminate their causes.

The continued deterioration of situations in areas of
tension in Africa will eventually lead to graver and more
serious problems that will affect the economic and social
conditions of not just the parties to the conflict but perhaps
even others. The situation, therefore, requires the
international community to expedite the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions; affirm the
principles of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of States; and refrain from changing
established and traditionally accepted international
boundaries. Furthermore, resort to reason and dialogue,
rather than the use of force, to settle conflicts, is an
essential contribution towards the defusing of situations and
the preservation of the security and stability of areas of
tension.

In this context, the efforts exerted by the Economic
Community of West African States, in cooperation with
the United Nations, which have put an end to the conflicts
in Liberia and Sierra Leone, should be commended. We
should also applaud the steps taken by the Organization
of African Unity to settle disputes in the continent
through the establishment of machinery for that purpose
and through the individual efforts of a number of African
leaders who have used their good offices to not only
contain, but find just, comprehensive and lasting solutions
to, conflicts between States.

While we attach great importance to the role of the
Security Council in the prevention of conflicts and the
elimination of tensions, the State of Bahrain also supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General to enhance the
capabilities of the entire United Nations in this respect
through the development of contacts between the
Organization and regional organizations. It also supports
all steps taken with a View to containing or preventing
conflicts, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the
Organization's Charter. Accordingly, during deliberations
on the situation in Africa by the Security Council, the
State of Bahrain welcomed the Secretary-General's
recommendations for the settlement of conflicts in Africa
and the efforts of Member States, within the framework
of the United Nations, to work together with the African
States to improve the latter's capabilities in the field of
peacekeeping, to enhance the role of the Organization of
African Unity in the management and settlement of
disputes, and to strengthen cooperation between the
African Organization and the United Nations so that the
African contribution in the field of peacekeeping may be
more effective. In this connection, the State of Bahrain,
convinced of the importance of the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes as may be agreed by the
parties to those disputes, has also supported Security
Council resolution 1170 (1998).

The role of the United Nations in Africa is
contingent primarily upon the readiness of the
international community and the parties to disputes to
explore new ways of promoting security and stability,
foremost among which are means to restore confidence to
the peoples of the African continent and to benefit from
the lessons of the past in order to face the future. It is
thus essential to lay emphasis on certain important issues
that can help in that direction.

These include, as a priority, enhancement of the
capability of African States in the peacekeeping missions
in Africa, whether those missions are United Nations

 

missions or are within the framework of a regional
organization or a group of States with a mandate from the
Security Council. It is very important that consultations be
carried out with the Organization of African Unity in the
fields of joint training in peacekeeping functions, provision
of necessary equipment and enhancement of cooperation
between it and the United Nations in this respect. The
purpose is not to relieve the international community of its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter. Rather, it
is to make the African contribution more effective in
relation to those responsibilities.

All efforts should be exerted to ensure the necessary
protection of refugees and displaced persons, and provide
for their sustenance in accordance with international
standards and regulations. That is because of concern for
their tragic conditions and the fact that their displacement
from one country to another poses a threat to the stability
of other States. Furthermore, refugee camps must be
situated away from military zones.

It is also important to enhance the effectiveness of
measures aimed at diminishing the capacity of the parties
to a conflict to continue the fighting, as stated in the
Secretary-General's report. Resort should be made to a
greater degree to sanctions aimed against the decision-
makers in the States concerned.

In this connection, we welcome the positive progress
made with respect to the dispute between Libya, the United
States of America and the United Kingdom concerning the
Lockerbie case. We hope that such developments will lead
to a peaceful resolution through the appearance of the
suspects in the Netherlands, where they will be tried under
Scottish law by Scottish judges in accordance with
resolution 1192 (1998). We are convinced that a speedy
trial and the achievement of the required results would lead
to the lifting of the sanctions on Libya thus easing the
suffering of the brotherly people of Libya, and would
satisfy the demands of all parties concerned with this
matter.

The State of Bahrain, which appreciates the contents
of the Secretary-General's report, is of the View that the
Secretary-General's proposal, endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 1170 (1998), to hold a Security
Council meeting at the ministerial level every two years to
assess progress is worthy of attention and follow-up. The
ultimate aim of that proposal is the maintenance of peace
and political and economic stability in Africa, in the interest
of that continent's States and peoples.

In conclusion, I extend to you, Madam President,
our appreciation for steering the deliberations of this
meeting. We also appreciate the role played by your
friendly country on the international scene for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

