Uruguay thanks Estonia for having convened this timely high-level open video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which allows us to assess the current situation facing peoples in contexts of armed conflict and to express various points of view on the concrete steps that should be taken to implement this agenda. My delegation also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the valuable information contained in his report on the issue (S/2020/366). Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians and will offer some clarifications at the national level. In 2019, tens of thousands of human beings were killed or injured; women and girls were subjected to terrible acts of sexual or gender-based violence; thousands of indiscriminate attacks against essential civilian infrastructure, in particular hospitals and schools, were recorded; famine caused by conflict and often used as a tactic of war devastated entire regions; alarming numbers continued to be added to the millions of refugees and internally displaced persons; an increasing number of people were victims of enforced disappearances; and the obstruction of humanitarian access and attacks perpetrated against human rights activists and defenders continued to increase. In his report, the Secretary-General defines 2019, in terms of the situation of civilians, as a year of suffering. Today entire societies face an invisible, ruthless and deadly new enemy: the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which is exacerbating the extreme vulnerability of the millions of people already suffering the ravages of war. Uruguay strongly supports the Secretary-General's call to implement an immediate and global ceasefire aimed at facilitating efforts to tackle the pandemic and alleviate the situation of civilians. Our delegation wishes to emphasize the following aspects, which are considered priorities in efforts to advance the implementation of the agenda on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. First, it is necessary to respond to the challenge of ensuring strict compliance by States and all parties to conflict with international humanitarian law, especially the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional, and with international human rights law. The alarming failure to abide by those norms is translating into tremendous suffering for the civilian population. Initiatives should also be encouraged that promote respect for these core standards. In that respect, Uruguay has reaffirmed its commitment to international humanitarian law and its implementation, joining the call for action to bolster respect for international humanitarian law and principles-based humanitarian action, launched by France and Germany. Secondly, greater protection must be ensured for hospitals, medical infrastructure, the wounded and sick, and personnel carrying out medical tasks. Four years after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), parties to conflict continue to carry out indiscriminate attacks and bombings against hospitals and medical personnel, blocking humanitarian access and illegally seizing medical material and instruments necessary to serve the civilian population in conflict areas. The World Health Organization registered 1,006 security-related incidents affecting health care in 2019, resulting in 825 victims in 11 countries and territories. The recent attack on a maternity hospital in Kabul, which claimed the lives of mothers, newborn babies and medical staff, shocked the international community by its fiendish cruelty. All this indicates that there is still a long way to go before we see the effective implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). Efforts must be redoubled to safeguard the provision of health care in conflict at a time when hospitals and health workers are also engaged in the fight against COVID-19. Thirdly, particular attention should be paid to the most vulnerable segments of the population, including children, women, the elderly, the sick, people with disabilities and marginalized and displaced persons living in conflict areas where essential services such as water, sanitation, health care and education have broken down or completely collapsed. Those groups are the ones that suffer from the most devastating effects of war and are now also exposed to the worst impacts of COVID-19. Of particular concern is the increase in the number of serious violations against children and incidents of sexual and gender-based violence, perpetrated mainly against women and girls. Home confinement, social distancing, difficulties in accessing justice and social services, and the economic impact of the crisis could increase the incidence of such acts of violence. In order to improve the situation of civilians on the ground, Uruguay endorsed the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Given the increase in the number of attacks against education, the military occupation of schools and educational centres, and the violence and threats against teaching personnel, Uruguay adhered to the Safe Schools Declaration. Fourthly, parties should refrain from using explosive weapons in densely populated areas. My delegation notes with particular concern the Secretary-General's statement in his report that in 2019 the use of explosive weapons in urban areas continued to have serious consequences for innocent civilians, who, for the ninth consecutive year, represented more than 90 per cent of those killed or injured by such weapons. These are not just numbers or cold statistics; they are human beings who will not have the opportunity of a future, and they are men, women and children whose lives, owing to the physical consequences they have suffered, can never be the same. In addition, they suffer from the repercussions of the attacks, such as collateral damage to critical infrastructure, which affects the delivery of services vital to the civilian population. Uruguay reiterates its commitment to the Santiago Declaration, which it signed together with other Latin American and Caribbean countries and which recognizes the need to refrain from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. It also supports the adoption of an international political declaration on the subject, with a humanitarian focus that ensures the maximum possible protection for the civilian population. My country further reaffirms its support for the Secretary-General's disarmament agenda, which is focused on disarmament and arms control, including the priority given to "disarmament that saves lives". That element, which relates to the reduction of conventional weapons such as missiles, shells, landmines, cluster munitions, improvised explosives and small arms and light weapons, relates directly to the protection of civilian populations. Effective control of the arms trade is essential to ensuring the full application of international humanitarian law and mitigating the consequences of the use of conventional weapons. For that reason, today we call once again on States that have not yet done so to ratify the Arms Trade Treaty. Fifthly, in order to enhance the protection of civilians, effective use must be made of one of the most successful instruments for promoting international peace and security available to the United Nations: peacekeeping operations. The Council must prioritize the protection of civilians in the mandates of such operations, particularly during this pandemic. Peacekeeping operations that have such protection-of-civilians mandates must continue to adapt to difficult environments by taking a comprehensive, integrated approach aimed at ensuring adequate protection for civilians. The Organization and its Member States have made, and continue to make, considerable efforts to improve the capacity of those operations. The recent report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, adopted by consensus (A/74/19); the revised policy of the Department of Peace Operations for the protection of civilians; and the new guidance in the form of The Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping Handbook are clear examples of the collective commitment to achieving greater effectiveness in terms of the protection of civilians. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we would stress that peacekeeping operations must have the human, financial and equipment resources necessary to fully discharge the protection-of-civilians tasks entrusted to them. Furthermore, greater participation of women at all levels of peacekeeping missions 1s essential to improving the protection of civilians on the ground. Uruguay has taken substantive steps in that direction, guided by its own experience, which has demonstrated that female staff can establish closer relationships of trust with local communities, particularly women, children and other vulnerable groups. Based on its strong commitment to peacekeeping operations, Uruguay has taken on, with pride and dedication, the task of protecting civilians in various parts of the world and assures the Organization and its Member States of its intention to continue and even to increase the contribution made by the Blue Helmets, especially in these extremely complex operational circumstances in which civilians may be even more unprotected. Sixthly, and lastly, accountability for those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law is essential. My delegation agrees that this is one of the major outstanding challenges. Accountability is important not only because of its deterrent effect but also because it allows an end to the culture of impunity, which denies the right of victims to justice. In order to identify and punish the perpetrators, it is imperative first to collect and analyse comprehensive and reliable information and to conduct independent and impartial investigations. States are primarily responsible for promoting the prosecution of perpetrators in national and international criminal justice systems. Uruguay calls on all States to ratify the Rome Statute and to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court, and it believes that the Council should refer cases to the Court where appropriate. To conclude, as Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has pointed out, the situation generated by COVID-19 is the worst crisis the world has faced since the Second World War. This very serious pandemic at the dawn of a new decade increases the challenges that civilians must face. However, fresh opportunities emerge from even the worst crises. Seventy-five years ago the Second World War gave rise to the creation of the Organization and a new international system of multilateral norms designed to guarantee the peace, security and prosperity of all nations. It also forged a universal conscience that led to the creation of the current human rights system. Today we are facing a new global crisis of unprecedented magnitude in which all of our lives are at risk, one that only solidarity and a collective response will allow us to overcome. It is also within our power to muster the political will to make the changes necessary to advancing the implementation of this agenda.
