Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The world currently finds itself in an extremely
dangerous situation. Our Arab and Islamic region is
faced with a war that has grave repercussions and
negative consequences for the international system and
international relations. War is proof of the failure of
diplomacy and the failure of the United Nations and the
Security Council, in particular, to undertake the tasks
entrusted to them for the preservation of international
peace and security. This war will foment hostility,
hatred, violence and extremism. It will also lead to
many disasters that the world would do well to avoid.

No sooner had it become apparent that war was
on the horizon than the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
began efforts, individually or with our Arab and
Muslim brothers and with the international community,
to reach a peaceful settlement. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia became active on the Arab, Islamic and
international levels. It proposed clear, logical and just
ideas based on the absolute need for Iraq's full
compliance with Security Council resolutions and its
full cooperation with the inspectors and on the need to
give diplomatic efforts a chance to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis.

Regrettably, despite all the efforts to reach a
peaceful and logical settlement of the Iraqi crisis, and
despite international opposition to a destructive war,
the sword has fallen. The two parties realized right
from the earliest moments of the war that they would
suffer great losses. War is a loss for both the victor and
the vanquished. We now know all too well the
horrendous scale of destruction in Iraq and the loss of
life of thousands of innocent civilians. We know that
lethal weapons do not distinguish between belligerents
and non-belligerents. Nor do they avoid hurting
children, women and the elderly. People with vision
realize this tragic reality and understand the obvious
need to favour wisdom and to study in depth the
regional and international dimensions and
repercussions of this crisis.

Reason dictates that military operations against
Iraq be brought to a halt, that good offices and
diplomatic efforts be resumed and that diplomatic work
within the United Nations be resumed to solve the
problem within a legitimate international context. Our
work should be oriented towards preserving Iraq's
national security and its civil institutions, which will
break down under the pressure of war. We are all aware
of the humanitarian and environmental devastation that
this war will unleash against Iraq, not to mention the
staggering political and economic costs.

In line with our firm, principled position, we
categorically oppose the occupation of Iraq. We believe
that the Iraqi people are capable of assuming
responsibility for governing their country and do not
need to be governed by foreign authorities. The sins of
the Iraqi Government and its failure to comply fully
with Security Council resolutions during the past 12
years should not be visited upon the fraternal Iraqi
people, which has suffered excessively and for so long.
The Iraqi people aspires to reaching a peaceful
solution, sparing Iraq and the world a war that no one
really wants. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia insists on
the unity, independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Iraq, and demands an end to the war and
the withdrawal of foreign forces outside Iraqi
international borders.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, acting upon its
responsibilities by contributing to humanitarian efforts
and in keeping with the directives of its leaders,
provided full-scale humanitarian assistance to more
than 24,000 displaced persons, including camps, food
and medical assistance. This is the first of many steps
to take care of any urgent needs, to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of Iraqi citizens resulting from
military operations. Centres have been established in
the region of 'Ar'ar on Iraq's international border. The
Kingdom has already declared the region open for that
purpose. We have also contacted international relief
agencies, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross through the assistance of
the Saudi Red Crescent Society to coordinate and
deliver assistance to those in dire need after taking
necessary legal measures through the United Nations.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia believes that the
Security Council is the party that should decide
whether or not Iraq has any weapons of mass
destruction. We must respect the principles of
international law that have governed our world for
more than half a century. These principles and
international legitimacy protect the international
community from any erosion of the bases of
international relations.

The Middle East region cannot tolerate the
repercussions of another destructive war. We need to
put an end to the hotbeds of tension in the Middle East
and work to make peace and security prevail. We must
encourage cooperation, support development and
enhance progress. Therefore, we demand that there be
serious and effective action in the coming stage to
reach an immediate and just solution to the Middle East
problem and the occupied Arab territories on the basis
of the Arab initiative anchored in the principle of land
for peace, Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories and the establishment of a Palestinian State
alongside Israel, with East Jerusalem its capital.

