Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): One
month ago we met here with the heads of State of the
African countries concerned to explore together ways of
resolving the question of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There was then a unanimous call for the United
Nations to dispatch a peacekeeping operation to that
country as soon as possible in order to promote
effectively the resolution of the conflict there.
Today the draft resolution on the deployment of
military observers to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will be voted upon in a demonstration of the
readiness and determination of the international
community, including the Security Council, to help
resolve the question of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We are gratified that a consensus has finally been
reached on the draft resolution.

The question of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is complex and sensitive. We have long held the
position that respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
effective implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement form the basis for resolving the question. The
current phase II deployment of the United Nations
operation is intended only to assist in carrying out part of
the Lusaka Agreement. More and harder tasks are before
the international community and the parties to the
conflict, and call for their common efforts.

Therefore advance thought should be given to further
United Nations peacekeeping tasks in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It goes without saying that it will
not be possible to carry out these tasks in the absence of
strict adherence to the Lusaka Agreement by the parties
to the conflict and without the successful deployment of
phase II of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

 

We welcome the outcome of the recently concluded
Lusaka summit, particularly the reaffirmation of the
commitment of the parties to the conflict to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and their readiness to provide firm
security guarantees to United Nations personnel.

The success of the peacekeeping operation hinges on
close cooperation between the parties and the United
Nations mission in question. Therefore it is essential that
the parties to the conflict provide assistance to and facilitate
MONUC in its work. At the same time, MONUC, in
carrying out its work, should pay attention to enhancing
communication with the parties - particularly with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo -
and should heed, as well as respect, their views. It is our
hope and expectation that the establishment of the joint
structure of MONUC and the Joint Military Commission
will have the salubrious effect of enhancing coordination
and cooperation between the two.

The Chinese delegation supports the expansion of
MONUC and is in favour of the draft resolution that is to
be voted on. We hope that under the leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Morj ane, MONUC will successfully accomplish its mission
and lay the groundwork for future United Nations
peacekeeping activities in the region.

