Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Jordan's
election as a member of the Security Council and on the
way you have conducted the work of this body this month.
You are aware of the profound esteem and consideration
that the Spanish people have for the Jordanian people
and of the fraternal relations that exist between our royal

families. It will therefore not be a surprise that it is a great
pleasure to participate in this open debate under Jordan's
presidency. I would also like to express our thanks for the
concept note (S/2014/30, annex).
The topic under consideration - the lessons we
can and I dare say that we should derive from war and
the search for a permanent peace - is one of profound
importance. War and Peace, the title of Tolstoy's
universal novel, outlines the history of humankind
without offering a solution to its cyclical continuation.
Seeing the world as a whole, one must admit that peace
has had difficulty enduring unbroken in human history,
despite the enormous intellectual efforts of illustrious
minds such as ofEmmanuel Kant. Ithas instead appeared
in ephemeral intervals between armed conflicts. At
most, peace attains to the imperfect quality of a truce.
This perpetual motion marked by discord, in which
relations between human groups are characterized by
ambition to power, makes sense of the definition of war
by Carl von Clausewitz as a continuation of politics by
other means.

Our duty is to rebel against that tendency. The
contributions that may result from this debate, as
modest as they may be, must clearly demonstrate that
the Members of the United Nations and its Security
Council are aware that our fundamental obligation is to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
and that we are determined to take action to make a
reality of the proclamation of those intentions in the
Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations. We
are called on to make a commitment that we cannot
postpone any further in a world in which weapons of
mass destruction hang dangerously like the Sword of
Damocles over our heads.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of an ancient
nation with a rich history of high points and low. Spain
has been a protagonist in wars of religion, defensive
wars, wars of intervention, wars of national survival,
dynastic wars, civil wars and ideological wars. Spain
has also suffered the pitiless scourge of terrorism. We
have waged international wars, and we have shed blood
in internal conflicts.

By our historical experience we could be considered
an authority on the matter. Distinguished thinkers of our
Golden Age - such as Francisco de Vitoria, Francisco
Suarez or Domingo de Soto - bequeathed important
texts on the moral problem of war, its lawfulness and the
limits of its practice. The development of the concepts

of ins ad bellam and ius in bello, which in the twentieth
century have been incorporated into international law,
is to a large extent indebted to their contributions.

War, contrary to a well-known adage, has never by
definition been beautiful. But in the course of time, and
as a result of technological advances, it can be asserted
that war has become radically perverse. It would not be
possible today for Velazquez, the great Spanish painter
of the sixteenth century, to reflect on canvas an image
like The Surrender of Breda, distinguished by the
chivalrous gesture between the contenders at the end of
the battle. Contemporary wars have assumed the cruel
appearance of Goya's Black Paintings or of Picasso's
Guernica mural, depicted on the tapestry that hangs
outside this Chamber. Humankind must banish war for
all time in this world plagued by challenges.

The year 2014 marks the centennary of the First
World War, otherwise known as the Great War or
Great European War, caused by the rivalry among
the European Powers, of which the main theatre of
operations was the Old World. It was a terrible conflict,
which put a tragic end to that "world of yesterday" that
Stefan Zweig recalled with a serene and painful clarity.
The conflict troubles our conscience, both because of
its destructive effects and because of the feeling that
it could have been prevented or at least mitigated, if a
will to reach a peaceful solution had prevailed over the
ambition to impose a hegemonic vision.

The horrors of that war were, however, not sufficient
to vaccinate us once and for all against the use of
weapons as a way of resolving conflicts. The League
of Nations was a praiseworthy attempt that failed,
given that the period between the wars was marked by
episodes that demonstrated its flaws. Another, even
more devastating war was necessary, the Second World
War, in order for Europe, with the contribution of a
generation of extraordinary politicians, full of courage
and vision, to lay the groundwork for a process leading
to an economic and political union that has replaced
armed conflict with cooperation and brute force with
negotiation and compromise, as the representative of
Germany just said.

Nor has the era of the United Nations been free
of the scourge of war. Quite the opposite a the list of
conflicts and atrocities is a long and in many cases,
dreadful one.

Since "nothing human can be alien to us", the
international community cannot remain insensitive to
brutality. The responsibility to act against it befalls
all of us, but in particular, the Organization and,
within it, the Security Council, in accordance with the
powers entrusted to it by the Charter. Spain supports
all efforts by the Council, the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General aimed at resolving conflicts that
threaten international peace and security and which
have cost the lives ofhundreds ofthousands of innocent
victims in Syria, Darfur, South Sudan, Somalia, Mali,
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of Congo, to mention just a few of the most
horrifying examples.

On that point, I would like to appeal, loud and clear,
for peace in the Middle East. Spain fervently hopes that
the current negotiations will result in an agreement that
will lay the definitive foundation for a just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine, two neighbouring
and democratic States, with secure borders. The world
needs that good news, for which we cannot wait any
longer.

To conclude, Mr. President, I would like to refer
briefly to the problem of the "narrative" that you
mention in your concept paper. I do that so as to affirm
categorically the moral superiority of victims over
victimizers. That assertion has universal validity - in
extermination camps in Lidice, in Oradour, in Rwanda,
in Srebenica - or just to give one national example,
in the streets of Andoain and Guipuzcoa in Spain.
We must keep and honour the memory of the victims,
because it is just and necessary to dignify our condition
as human beings and because reconciliation, which is a
higher state than the mere absence of hostilities, must
truly be rooted in truth and justice.

