Mr. Benitez Verson (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to address the Security Council on
behalf of the 118 States members of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Allow me at the outset, on behalf of the
Movement, to congratulate you, Sir, and your entire
team on your outstanding presidency of the Council.

At your request, I shall try to shorten my
statement and shall circulate the text of the full
version.

The situation in the Middle East remains
complex. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, continues to
deteriorate and to be marked by deadly violence,
instability and high tension. In grave breach of
international law and in contradiction of the peace
process, Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
carry out military attacks against the Palestinian people
in the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, where the isolated and imprisoned
Palestinian civilian population continues to suffer a
dire humanitarian crisis.
The Movement reiterates that the occupying
Power's lack of respect for international law and
ongoing illegal occupation continue to be the major
obstacles to achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. In that connection, the
Movement reiterates its profound regret that, for more
than 41 years, the Palestinian people have suffered
under the brutal Israeli military occupation and
colonization and that they continue to be denied their
fundamental human rights.

The Movement reiterates its call on Israel to
cease all its violations against the Palestinian people
and to abide scrupulously by its obligations under
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law.

This month marks the fourth anniversary of the
rendering by the International Court of Justice of the
Advisory Opinion on the legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. The
Court, the highest judicial organ of the United Nations
system, affirmed that the construction of the wall is
illegal and that Israel is under obligation to terminate
its breaches of international law, to cease its
construction of the wall, to dismantle the wall, and to
make reparations for all damage caused by the
construction of the wall.

Israel, in violation of numerous Security Council
resolutions regarding the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force and the illegality of the
Israeli settlements; in further violation of General
Assembly resolutions; and in contravention of the
Advisory Opinion and of General Assembly resolution
ES-lO/15 of 20 July 2004, continues to build the wall,
to impose an associated permit regime, and to expand
its illegal settlements.

In flagrant defiance of the ruling and of
international law, Israel has completed approximately
60 per cent of the planned 701 kilometres of the wall
and has continued to confiscate even more Palestinian
land, to destroy property and to displace more
Palestinian civilians.

The Movement is concerned by the huge
physical, economic and social devastation caused by
those illegal and destructive colonization practices,
which are dividing the occupied Palestinian territory
into separate, walled-in enclaves and severing East
Jerusalem from the rest of the territory, completely
undermining the unity, integrity and contiguity of the
Palestinian territory, destroying entire communities,
displacing thousands of Palestinian civilians, and
isolating tens of thousands more Palestinians in
isolated cantons.

In flagrant violation of international law, despite
commitments made in the context of the Middle East
peace process and agreements reached therein, and
contrary to the spirit and goals of the renewed peace
process, Israeli has stepped up its illegal settlement
activities. The members of the Non-Aligned Movement
have submitted a letter to the President of the Security
Council, urging the Council to seriously address that
critical issue, including through the adoption of a
resolution.

The Movement reiterates its condemnation of all
Israel's illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, stresses
the dangers of such continuing illegal and unilateral
Israeli measures, and reiterates its demand that Israel
immediately and completely cease all settlement
construction, expansion and planning.

The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation in its territory
following Israel's brutal aggression and serious
violations of its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its satisfaction
at the steps undertaken by the Lebanese Government to
implement resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement also
welcomes the deployment of the Lebanese armed forces
along the northern and eastern borders of Lebanon in
order to ensure security and stability at the borders.

The NAM. remains deeply concerned by Israel's
ongoing air and land violations of the Blue Line in
breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly call on
Israel to end the occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar, on the northern side of the Blue Line, and to
immediately refrain from any violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006), as well as
to refrain from any provocation of the Lebanese armed
forces or the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

The NAM. calls for the prompt settlement of the
question of the Shaba'a farms in full respect for
Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated in resolution
1701 (2006). We call upon all parties to cooperate in
protecting Lebanon's sovereign rights in that area, and
we note the important endeavours of the Secretary-
General in this regard.

08-4326]
The NAM. is acutely aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bombs launched by Israel during its attack on
that country. The Movement once again condemns the
use of such weapons by Israel and deplores the death
toll resulting from them. The NAM. strongly calls upon
Israel to provide the exact location of those deadly
weapons and to provide maps of landmines planted
during its occupation of southern Lebanon.

The Movement congratulates the people and
leaders of Lebanon and strongly supports the agreement
reached in Doha on 21 May under the auspices of His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of
Qatar, pursuant to the efforts of the Ministerial
Committee of the Arab League. The Doha agreement
constituted an essential step towards the resolution of
the current crisis, the return to the normal functioning
of Lebanese democratic institutions, and the complete
restoration of Lebanon's unity and stability.

In this regard, the Movement welcomes the
election of the new President of the Republic and the
establishment of a national unity Cabinet, and supports
the agreement to address Lebanon's electoral law, in
accordance with the Arab League initiative. The
Movement also welcomes the decision to continue the
national dialogue on ways to reinforce the authority of
the State over all its territories, in such a way as to
guarantee the sovereignty and the security of the State
and the people of Lebanon. The Movement also
welcomes the agreement to ban the use of weapons and
violence as means to settle disputes, irrespective of
their nature and under any circumstances.

The NAM. reaffirms that all measures and action
taken or to be taken by Israel which purport to alter the
legal, physical and demographic condition or
institutional structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect.

We also reaffirm that all these measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the Charter of the United
Nations, resolutions including Security Council
resolution 497 (1981) and the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and are a challenge to the international
community. The Movement demands that Israel abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967.

I wish to conclude by expressing the Movement's
hope that current efforts will bring an end to the
occupation of all the Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 and that remain under its occupation,
namely the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan, and
that they will lead to the establishment of the
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, as well as to a just solution of the question
of the refugees on the basis of General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its support
for the Middle East peace process, on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) and the
principle of land for peace.

