Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): As a very
dense month comes to a close, I wish to commend
the dedication, determination and effectiveness that
you have shown, Mr. President. The work that has
been accomplished over the course of the month is a
testament to the commitment of Kazakhstan to the role
of the Security Council and, more broadly, to the United
Nations system and multilateralism. The track record
is particularly positive in the domains of disarmament
and non-proliferation, the maintenance of peace and
regional cooperation in Central Asia, naturally, but
also in West Africa, as evidenced by the meeting on
11 January (see S/PV.8156) and the adoption of the
presidential statement on 30 January (S/PRST/2018/3).

Instead of delving into a programme too vast to be
described in detail in this statement, I will limit myself
to speaking about four priority elements for France.

First of all, January was an important month for
addressing the African dossier in the Security Council.
We held an important meeting on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 9 January (see S/PV.8153).
As the country enters an electoral year that will be
vital to its future and the stability of the entire region,
it will occupy the attention of the Council until
23 December. It has been important for the Council
to express its expectations since the beginning of the
year. The adoption of the press statement of 18 January
(S/PRST/2018/l), for which I thank the Kazakh
presidency, was an opportunity to show that attention
and to recall the principles championed by the Security
Council - the full implementation of the Saint-
Sylvestre agreement of measures to ease tensions, the
respect for the electoral timetable and the participation
of all in the electoral process in an environment of
peace and of respect for fundamental rights.

On the humanitarian front, the statement was an
opportunity for the Council to appeal to the partners of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to increase their
financial aid to the country and to help it overcome the
current humanitarian crisis, which is dire.

On a separate African topic, the meeting on
the situation in Mali of 23 January (see S/PV.8163),
allowed us to send a strong and unanimous message
to the parties in Mali on the impatience of the Council
with regard to the full implementation of the peace
agreement. In that regard, the press statement that was
issued on 24 January (see SC/13l77), welcomes the
renewed commitment of Malian parties to implement
their respective obligations by the end of March, while
indicating that if they do not, the new stages will be
reviewed in the framework of the sanctions regime.

On the Malian peace process, without which there
can be no peace in the Sahel, we must urgently make
progress. France thanks Kazakhstan for having given
the Council the opportunity to reaffirm that message.

Finally, we welcome the unanimous adoption
yesterday of resolution 2399 (2018), renewing the
sanctions regime on the Central African Republic until
31 January 2019. After the adoption of resolution 2387
(2017) on 5 November, which renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
resolution 2399 (2018) is a new indication of the
Council's attention to the situation in the Central
African Republic.

The sanctions that we have just extended are not
useful in and of themselves, but rather as a means to
contribute to the stabilization of and the return of lasting
peace to the Central African Republic. Armed groups
indeed continue to have a presence on a great majority
of the territory and continue to receive supplies,
thanks to the illicit flow of arms and munitions from
neighbouring countries. Maintaining the sanctions is
therefore vital, but the mechanism will continue to be
accompanied by necessary exemption procedures in
order to allow the defence and security forces in the
Central African Republic to be trained, equipped and
armed. Resolution 2399 (2018) introduces two new
elements that seem particularly important. It will allow
us to sanction individuals who incite violence when
their actions are likely to jeopardize the peace, stability
and security of the Central African Republic, and to
punish individuals who attack humanitarian workers.

The second priority as set out by the Kazakh
presidency was Afghanistan and Central Asia, which
were the focus of the Council during January, as was
stated earlier. The Council's visit to Kabul made it
possible to reaffirm the international community's
support for Afghanistan in a very fragile security
context and take steps with respect to the elections
and the peace process. The ministerial-level debate
of 19 January (see S/PV.8162) on the links between
development and security in Afghanistan and Central
Asia was an opportunity to adopt the first Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2) on
the relationship between Afghanistan and Central
Asia. Finally, the consultations held by the Council
on 22 January on the activities of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia led to the adoption, for the first time since January
2015, of a press statement reiterating the Council's
support for the Centre (SC/13179).

The series of appalling attacks that recently struck
Afghanistan make it clear that, regrettably, the country
and the region as a whole require more than ever the
attention of the Security Council.

Thirdly, another priority of the Kazakh presidency
was reflected in the meeting held on 18 January at the
initiative of and with the presence of the President of
Kazakhstan (see S/PV.8160), which made it possible to
address the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. This is an absolute priority for France
as well. We are aware of the fact that the threats facing
the non-proliferation regime are more significant than
ever and that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the threat of their use by States or
terrorist groups are proven dangers.

In North Korea and Syria, non-proliferation norms,
which lie at the very heart of our collective security, are
being regularly and often blatantly flouted. The rapid
development of North Korea's nuclear and ballistic
programmes remains for us a grave source of concern.
The same is true of the ongoing use of chemical
weapons in Syria.

This leads me to my last point: the crises in
North Africa and the Middle East. We participated in
an important meeting on Libya (see S/PV.8159) and
in the quarterly open debate on the Middle East (see S/PV.8167). We had a number ofopportunities to address
the situation in Syria, especially the humanitarian
aspect thereof. We also met to discuss various aspects
of the humanitarian situation on 9 January, allowing us
to touch on the situation in Raqqa, where mines and
unexploded ordnance have killed more than 200 people
since last October. It was also an opportunity for most
of us to more strongly underscore the gravity of the
humanitarian situation in Syria, in particular in eastern
Ghouta and Idlib.

A second meeting on various items was held
on 22 January to enable Mark Lowcock to brief the
Security Council on his first visit to Syria and to make
priority recommendations. Jeffrey Feltman briefed us
on the most recent developments in northern Syria, and
we took that opportunity to reiterate our grave concerns
about the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Syria. Two of those concerns were pre-eminent in our
discussions: the situation of the population in eastern
Ghouta, besieged by the Syrian regime, which is
deliberately and systematically blocking humanitarian
convoys and continues to refuse to authorize hundreds
of urgent medical evacuations; and the resumption
of attacks on civilians and medical infrastructure.
Bombings have killed dozens of civilians in the
"dc-escalation zones", including in Idlib, where they
also led to mass displacements.

Finally, we met yesterday for the monthly briefing
(see S/PV. 8171) and humanitarian consultations on Syria.
The near-consensual views on the urgent humanitarian
situation expressed on those occasions makes it vital
that the Council issue a strong pronouncement. This
would help to underscore the Council's concern with
regard to the exacerbation of the situation of besieged
civilians in eastern Ghouta and the failure to carry out
urgently needed medical evacuations, the intensified
bombings in the Idlib region, and the repeated attacks
on hospitals and health-care workers.

The issues I have just touched on reflect the
diversity and importance of our exchanges of views
in the past month. Mr. President, I wish to thank you
once again.

