Mr. Valle (Brazil): May I convey to you,
Mr. President, first of all, my delegation's satisfaction at
participating in this debate under your competent
presidency. We are certain that the Security Council will
benefit greatly from your wide-ranging diplomatic
experience and personal talent during this busy month. I

 

also take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Al-Khussaiby of Oman for his excellent performance as
President of the Council during November.

The signing ceremony which took place at the
Elysee Palace in Paris yesterday among the leaders of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia represents
a momentous diplomatic achievement.

For all those who participated in the struggle for
peace in the Balkans, the entry into effect of the
Agreement comes as a belated relief and heralds a new
era of hope. To the innocent victims of the conflict and
to the peace-keepers who lost their lives, we pay our
heartfelt tribute. To the tortured and the maimed, to the
displaced and to all the survivors of the hateful practices
carried out under the evil banner of ethnic and religious
rivalry, we lend our solidarity.

Having celebrated the end of several decades of
East-West tension, the international community was taken
by incredulity when the ominous forces of intolerance and
destruction were revived in the Balkans after having been
defeated in 1945. The United Nations, rising from the
ashes of the deadliest world conflict ever, became
involved in the efforts to thwart this new threat to
international security with the only weapons at its
disposal: its Charter, and its commitment to peace.

This involvement became a major operation, draining
considerable human and material resources, for which a
useful role had to be devised in a shifting and complex
scenario. In cooperation with those more closely affected
by the conflict, the Security Council attempted to contain
the war, to minimize the suffering and to present peaceful
alternatives for settling differences. As a country that
contributed military observers and police officers to the
United Nations peace-keeping effort in the former
Yugoslavia, we are convinced that the Organization has
made a positive contribution to setting the stage for peace
in the region.

An opportunity has now been created for the leaders
of the former Yugoslavia to choose a new path: one that
leads to reconciliation, to democracy, to economic and
social reconstruction and development.

Having participated in the work of the Security
Council during two of the four years in which the
situation in the Balkans has been permanently on its
agenda, Brazil experienced the difficulties in dealing with

 

the war in the Balkans with extreme concern and intense
frustration. Persuaded - by our own historical legacy -
that fruitful coexistence among peoples of different
religious, racial and cultural backgrounds is viable and
natural, we consistently and vigorously rejected the twisted
logic of the ethnic borderline.

This logic has yet to be defeated in the Balkans as it
was during the Second World War in Europe, and as it has
been overcome - with the active assistance of the United
Nations - in South Africa. The Peace Agreement, which
will, we hope, usher in a new chapter in the tragic history
of the Balkans, deserves credit for putting an end to bloody
fighting and to an institutional breakdown. But it is now up
to the leaders and the peoples who have lived through this
nightmare to create a new environment through tolerance
and respect for diversity.

As we contemplate the transfer of authority from the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia
to an implementation force (IFOR) whose command will be
entrusted to a regional organization, we must reflect upon
the role of the Security Council in matters relating to the
former Yugoslavia in the stages that lie ahead.

In the resolution that has been adopted the States
Members of the Organization referred to in Annex l-A of
the Peace Agreement are requested to report to the Security
Council on a monthly basis. As the implementation force
takes up its position in a terrain that is still fraught with
uncertainties, it is essential that the organ responsible for
safeguarding international peace and security be given the
necessary tools to enable it to exercise the role ascribed to
it by the Charter.

The creation of multinational forces at the behest of
the Security Council has ceased to be an unusual feature. If
these forces are to be perceived by the international
community as legitimate and credible, however, the
necessary accountability towards the Security Council must
be strictly observed.

As an organ acting on behalf of the entire United
Nations membership, the Security Council is given wide
powers in responding promptly to evolving situations. That
it should envisage the creation of multinational forces for
dealing with certain situations and not with others is a
matter that deserves to be clarified for all United Nations
Members in the most satisfactory manner if support for
such decisions is to have the desired firmness and
unanimity.

 

Mutual recognition among the three States having
signed the Peace Agreement in Paris seems to be a
prerequisite for its success. We welcome the decision of
two of the parties to recognize each other and urge those
not having done so to complete the necessary procedures
for there to be full official ties among the three capitals.

I am pleased to announce that Brazil established full
diplomatic relations with the Bosnian Government on 6
December. We look forward to developing close and
mutually beneficial ties with all States in the region in the
context of a lasting peace and improved living conditions
for all in the Balkans.

