Mr. Dornig: At the outset, allow me tojoin previous
speakers in commending the President for organizing
this timely debate and for providing us with a concept
note (S/2017/892, annex) that outlines the increasing
threats posed by contemporary warfare on children.

NATO recognizes that protecting children from
the effects of armed conflict is both a moral imperative
and an essential element to break cycles of Violence.
If we are sincere about protecting future generations,
we must recognize the Vital role of Member States and
international, regional and subregional organizations in
implementing Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict. Over the past five years since this
subject was first addressed, at the 2012 NATO Summit
meeting in Chicago, the Alliance has developed
practical, field-oriented measures to address violence
against children.

We have developed our standing operating
procedures so that our troops now have a more robust
tool to monitor and report on the six grave violations
against children whenever they encounter them in
NATO military operations. The information collected
can be shared with the United Nations. We thereby
hope to inform advocacy and activities on the ground
to better protect children.

We also recently revised and expanded our
predeployment training on children and armed
conflict for our Resolute Support Mission personnel in
Afghanistan. In partnership and cooperation with the
United Nations, we are currently revising our online
training course to include recent developments in the
field of child protection.

We are witnessing daily the plight of children
affected by armed conflict in Afghanistan, as every
third civilian casualty there is a child. The United
Nations continues to document cases of recruitment
and the use of children by armed groups, while attacks
on schools and hospitals pose a serious security risk
to children and impede their access to education and
health care. Sexual violence against children continues
to occur, which, in the case of the sexual exploitation of
boys, is particularly through the practice of bacha bazi.
Working in this complex and challenging environment,
NATO has sought to integrate child protection in its
Resolute Support Mission operations by undertaking
the following steps.

First, we established the position of senior child

protection adviser in April 2016, thereby ensuring that

the protection of children is prioritized within Resolute
Support Mission leadership.

Secondly, we have developed a training course on
human rights, including on children and armed conflict.
With the support of United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), training was provided to the
top 120 leaders from the Afghan Ministries of Defence
and Interior Affairs. In partnership with UNAMA's
child protection team, we supported the Afghan
Ministry of Defence in developing a child protection
policy to ensure adherence to national and international
child protection obligations.

Thirdly, we have taken measures to protect children
across Afghanistan. Child protection focal points
have been established in our Train Assist and Advice
Commands (TAACs) across the country. The focal
points are tasked to mainstream children and armed
conflict topics within the TAACs command structures,
to monitor and report when grave violations against
children are observed, including incidents of sexual
violence affecting both girls and boys, and to provide
in-theatre briefings and trainings.

NATO remains firmly committed to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1612 (2005), as
well as subsequent resolutions on children and armed
conflict. Close cooperation and partnership with the
United Nations is imperative in that regard, and we
look forward to continuing our work with the Office
of the Secretary General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict in order to establish a
sustainable child protection architecture within NATO.
We hope that these results may inform similar processes
within other regional and subregional organizations,
and thereby contribute to the wider international
effort to help to better protect children affected by
armed conflict.

