Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, at a time when the Council has
before it an agenda replete with important issues and
developments. I also wish to commend your skilful
stewardship of the Council's deliberations.

We are meeting today in the context of a periodic
public debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. Allow me to say
frankly that this event has become, regrettably, a routine
matter - I am tempted to say merely lip service. That
is not due to insufficient importance accorded to the
Palestine question, which my country considers to
be undoubtedly one of the fundamental issues on the
agenda of the United Nations and those of its bodies.
The issue requires sustained, genuine interest on the
part of all Member States until the Palestinian people
regain their rights and peace is restored in the region.

The problem lies in the absence of tangible,
meaningful results from those periodic meetings,
as well as major, bold decisions that would make
such meetings - which include high-level officials
of the United Nations Secretariat - worthwhile.
The Palestinian people do not need endless hours of
discussion every two or three months on the Palestinian
issue, at least not until the discussions produce some
tangible results on the ground.

My country has therefore called for establishing a
regular schedule for such meetings, as well as for new
measures and mechanisms to be considered with the
goal ofupdating and better aligning the discussions with
the daily suffering and reality of the Palestinian people.
The meetings should include active deliberations aimed
at finalized resolutions and results to follow up the
discussions.

Important, decisive events are now occurring
in our region, accompanied by major challenges that
have political, security and economic impacts. It is
well known that the situation in the Middle East has
produced repercussions on issues of international peace
and security, as well as on the international economic
situation. At the same time, some consider those
challenges to be cause or justification for ignoring the
Palestinian question, even if only temporarily. Such a
pretext can obscure issues related to the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including violations
of every sort carried out by the Israeli occupying
authorities. We consider that a colossal strategic error.

All attempts, whether deliberate or not, to undermine
or put off the question of Palestine owing to tensions
prevailing in the region would only further complicate
the situation; whereas resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict would be key to bringing about lasting stability
to the Middle East.

The Israeli authorities are taking advantage of
current regional events in order to entrench their
oppressive colonial policy. They have continued their
status quo policy of devouring ever greater tracts of
Palestinian land, establishing numerous settlements
and asphyxiating our Palestinian brothers and
sisters everywhere - including in the holy city of
Jerusalem * thereby altering Palestine's demographic,
geographic and religious character. It is noteworthy that
Israel, the occupying Power, is acting in that fashion at
a time when it should be sending a reassuring message
that the country is seriously pursuing, as indicated in its
statements and decisions, its purported strategic choice
of peace over its colonialist policy, which we resolutely
condemn.

The era of colonialism and occupation ended
decades ago. We can no longer act in the same fashion
with respect to freedoms when the people of a region
have cast off the domestic oppression that contributed
to their economic difficulties. At the same time,
the Palestinian people continue to face the same
predicament and continue to fight for each and every
fundamental right that every one of us holds dear. Those
are the basic human rights, including the right to live in
freedom and dignity, which we all defend with every
fiber of our being owing to our profound respect for the
principles of the Organization, which itself symbolizes
the defence of the weak and the oppressed who are
victims of injustice.

In that context, there is only one choice, namely,
to find an immediate solution to the question of
Palestine based on international consensus and aimed
at establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
with two States living side by side in peace and security
within the pre-1967 borders. At present, Israel, the
occupying Power, is pursuing a policy of collective
punishment. That has been recognized for decades now.
It is not something that was simply made up; rather, it is
rooted in a set of facts that have been documented over
many years.

On 13 June, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs stated in a press release that

(spoke in English)

"[t]he blockade of Gaza has had a devastating
impact on the lives and livelihoods ofthe 1.6 million
Palestinians who reside there."

She went on to say that

"[t]his amounts to a collective punishment of all
those living in Gaza and is a denial of basic human
rights in contravention of international law."

(spoke in Arabic)

We owe it to ourselves, to the world and to present
and future generations to not justify those acts and to
not fail to resolve the Arab-Israeli-Palestinian question.
We are witnessing scandalous, real violations of
international law, legal instruments, norms and values
of every sort. We must properly assess international
relations and determine appropriate responsibilities
for perpetrators and victims. How can we ignore all
of those instruments? How can we struggle to decide
who is the aggressor and who is the object of the
aggression? We cannot allow one State to violate all of
those instruments with impunity as if any State were
above the rule of law.

The follow-up committee on the Arab Peace
Initiative met recently in Doha to review developments
on the Palestinian question. It adopted a communique
in which it condemned the Israeli settlement policy
and reasserted that the resumption of direct peace
negotiations required an end to the illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. The communique also referred to Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails and called for a
resolution of that problem. It further called for an end to
the unjust blockade of Gaza and for an investigation into
the circumstances of the death of the late President of
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Yasser Arafat.

These decisions and positions have prompted
us to work together on the Palestinian question.
Notwithstanding its political complexity, history and
the conflict of external interests, it remains an issue
of justice, historic rights and moral humanitarianism.
The solution is not difficult; it is not impossible.
The solution requires genuine will. The solution is
straightforward - the Palestinian people must exercise
their rights, beginning with their natural right to live in
freedom and dignity and the return of their territories,
allowing them to live in a State side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

Then the region will enter a new era, which in turn
will see the advent of a better future, not just for those
two peoples, but for the world as a whole. It would
prevent further tensions and frustrations that may
cause us to lose any hope of achieving peace. There is
thus an extremely urgent need to resolve the Palestinian
question and to end this grave deadlock if the talks do
not resume. We hope that the international community
will be resolute in the face of ongoing Israeli violations
and breaches.
We hope that the fraternal Arab peoples will
recover their occupied territories. We should have a
sound and serious framework without manipulation
or attempts to exploit these talks for purely political
purposes at the expense of the oppressed Palestinian
people. We hope that this will be the first step towards
the official recognition of Palestine as an independent
and full Member of our Organization. That we feel is
the essential element for genuine peace.

