Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate on this important topic. We
are also grateful to the Deputy Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Piracy is a complex phenomenon. The international
response must deal with its various aspects in a
comprehensive and integrated manner, starting with
its root causes on land, where the problem truly lies.
Among such causes, one stands out as requiring serious
and constant attention on the part of the international
community. That is the socioeconomic exclusion that
tends to drive many - especially young people - to a
lifetime of crime offshore. If we are to be effective in
our individual and collective efforts to fight piracy and
armed robbery at sea, we must help affected countries to
address economic hardship and the lack of employment
opportunities. That means that any successful and
long-lasting anti-piracy strategy must not limit itself to
improving security and promoting the rule of law. To do
so would risk treating the symptoms of the problem and
not the its key causes. That would be to the detriment of
all involved, in particular the societies affected.

Such an expanded approach is a practical and
relevant application of the understanding expressed by
the Security Council on several occasions regarding the
relationship between security and development, which,
as stated in S/PRST/2011/4, are closely interlinked,
mutually supportive and key to attaining sustainable
peace.

Although the Council has no competence on
development issues per se, it should not lose sight
of those critical interlinkages between security and
development as it discusses peace and security in
piracy-affected regions. When it does address issues
related to threats to international peace and security
arising from piracy, it must also bear in mind the
fact that international law, as reflected in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, provides for
the legal framework applicable to combating piracy and
armed robbery at sea, as well as other ocean activities.
The Council's actions must be fully consistent with that
framework.

We are encouraged by the fact that the overall
number of pirate attacks, and particularly that of
successful ones, off the coast of Somalia has decreased.
That indicates the importance of the combined naval
actions in the region, of capacity-building initiatives in
neighbouring Member States and the relevance of the
discussions held in the context of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, as well as at the
International Maritime Organization.

We support those discussions in both forums as
part of a necessary exchange of views that can lead to
the enhancement of regulation and guidelines for ships,
including with respect to the sensitive issue of privately
contracted armed security personnel.

The many recent positive political developments
in Somalia, which give us reason for optimism, will
strengthen Government control over areas still under
the influence of piracy. Moreover, it is important that,
as Government institutions begin to operate more
effectively, the international community rally behind
efforts to improve socioeconomic conditions for the
Somali people. Alternative livelihoods are the best way
to steer Somali youth away from the dangerous dead
end of pirate recruitment.

In the same vein, we welcome the preparatory steps
taken by the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission towards
the convening of a summit of Gulf of Guinea States to
adopt a regional anti-piracy strategy.

We recall the emphasis given in Security Council
resolution 2039 (2012) to the importance of building on
existing national, regional and extraregional initiatives
to enhance maritime safety and security in the Gulf of
Guinea. We therefore invite Member States to ensure
that the fight against piracy and armed robbery at sea
in the Gulf of Guinea are in line with and support
the objectives and the spirit of the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation of the South Atlantic. In that context, we
underline the leadership role that States of the region
should play and the benefits of regional coordination
of efforts to counter the threat of piracy and armed
robbery at sea.

Brazil has been paying increasing attention to the
international security implications of piracy in the
Gulf and started to discuss possible modalities for
cooperation, especially in naval capacity-building.
We should not overlook the plight ofpirate hostages.
Brazil deems it important that, in addition to seafarers
taking the necessary precautions to avoid capture,
measures be taken to try to reduce the harm inflicted
upon the victims. In particular, we view the efforts by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia to develop
assistance programmes for released hostages as a
positive initiative.

To be fully successful, international, regional and
national strategies to combat piracy and armed robbery
at sea must integrate deterrence, security, the rule
of law and socioeconomic development. Brazil will
continue to support initiatives to combat piracy that are
comprehensive in scope and fully attentive not only to
the needs of the international community but also to
the populations of the countries and regions affected by
the problem.

