Mr. Ryan (Ireland): May I thank you, Mr.
Minister, for presiding over our deliberations today at
this public meeting of the Council on Afghanistan. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Louise Frechette
for her comprehensive briefing.

The Government and the people of Ireland are
deeply saddened at reports this morning of another
devastating earthquake in northern Afghanistan. We
extend our condolences to the Afghan authorities and
people. We greatly appreciate the tremendous efforts
being made by relief agencies to provide rapid
assistance in the affected area.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

Afghanistan, as the Secretary-General says in his
report before the Council, is a shattered society. At the
same time, the overwhelming majority of its people
desperately want peace, security and a new beginning.

It is a notable feature of the Secretary-General's
assessment of the challenges now facing Afghanistan
that no effort is made to portray the situation as other
than it is: real promise matched by real opportunities,
but also accompanied by formidable and daunting
challenges for all of us - the people of Afghanistan,
the United Nations, the entire international community.

For this honesty and clarity of focus, Ireland is
deeply grateful to the Secretary-General and to Special
Representative Brahimi.

It may occasionally be possible to lose sight of
the magnitude of the United Nations achievement in
Afghanistan over recent months and of the scale of the
challenge which the United Nations and others
involved are now addressing. In this respect, one
statistic cited today by the Deputy Secretary-General
should confirm the reality to all of us. Over the coming
months, food assistance will be provided to a
staggering total of 8.8 million people. We can all be
genuinely gratified by the work of our Secretary-
General and his colleagues. The case of Afghanistan
surely proves that an effective, well-supported United
Nations is unquestionably indispensable to the world
today.

It is Ireland's clear and unambiguous conviction
that the international community, the Council and the
United Nations as a whole must now assume our full
obligations in supporting the Secretary-General's
proposals, which he has placed before us, on how the
United Nations can help the people of Afghanistan to
reweave the shredded fabric of their country. This is
not only because of implications for international peace
and security - although these, of course, exist - but
because we can truly do no less: it is now time, as
Abraham Lincoln said of the tasks facing America after
a terrible Civil War, to bind up a nation's wounds. That
is what the proposals in this report of the Secretary-
General really amount to.

The Secretary-General rightly describes the
remarkable progress made in Afghanistan since the
Bonn Agreement and the subsequent establishment of
the Interim Authority, under the leadership of
Chairman Karzai. The Cabinet has been formed and
meets; work has substantially started on an interim
budget; and a back-to-school campaign is very happily
under way. Across the range of issues, in summary, a
good beginning has been made.

At the same time, the Secretary-General rightly
asks difficult questions regarding those elements that
may continue to seek to disrupt the building of peace in
Afghanistan. It is essential, as he says, that the
Government be able to extend its authority throughout
the territory of Afghanistan: that it enhance its
legitimacy; and that it reinforce the importance of
central authority, particularly in the lead-up to the
emergency Loya Jirga due to be convened by 22 June.
Just three months remain until the convening of
that forum. All in Afghanistan must cooperate with the
Loya Jirga Commission, which has performed
exceptionally well over the first two months of its
existence. We are, of course, concerned at reports of
attempts to exercise influence on the Commission, and
we hope that all will assist in ensuring that the
Commission can continue to operate unhindered. The
extension of real stability throughout the country will
be critical in this regard.

As the Secretary-General asserts, stability and
security are essential to the success of the activities of
the United Nations in Afghanistan. We appreciate the
ongoing efforts of those contributing to the
International Security Assistance Force in
consolidating the stability of Kabul and its surrounds,
permitting the return of substantial numbers of United
Nations and other relief and reconstruction personnel.
We hope the United Nations will gradually be able to
begin deployment of civilian personnel throughout the
country to address the still-acute humanitarian needs of
the Afghan population. We remain extremely
concerned at continued reports of insecurity hampering
the delivery of assistance in several parts of the
country.

The Secretary-General outlines in clear and
specific detail the proposed structure for the United
Nations presence in Afghanistan: the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It is
imperative that the integrated mission approach, which
rightly builds on the lessons learned from past United
Nations operations, be given real shape on the ground.
It is also vitally important that all elements of the
United Nations system cooperate in every respect with
the Secretary-General and with Mr. Brahimi in making
this carefully calculated approach work with maximum
positive effect.

My delegation feels that the appointment, at the
regional level, of designated representatives of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is
essential to the coherence and coordination of the
United Nations Mission. Special Representative
Brahimi has stressed throughout the past months that
UNAMA should have the lightest possible international
footprint. This is a strong phrase, and Mr. Brahimi is
surely right. For this reason, we hope that all efforts
will be made to ensure that the numbers of
international staff are kept to the effective minimum.
Afghan ownership of the relief and reconstruction
process is essential to the long-term stability of the
country.
I very much support the strong emphasis placed
earlier by Deputy Secretary-General Frechette in the
area of human rights. Ireland is very concerned that
human rights should continue to be placed at the
forefront of United Nations efforts in Afghanistan. We
were extremely gratified by the human rights workshop
held earlier this month and attended by High
Commissioner for Human Rights Robinson, marking
International Women's Day, and by the Afghan
working groups that have flowed from it.

We are enormously gratified by the profoundly
positive transformation of the circumstances of women
and girls in Afghanistan due to the successful
developments of the past six months.

Given the very substantive successes to date of
the Loya Jirga Commission, we look forward now to
early progress on the creation of a human rights
commission, which, as the Secretary-General notes,
will greatly enhance the United Nations capacity to
fulfil its role in developing a comprehensive human
rights programme.

The reports of continuing human rights abuses,
particularly directed at ethnic Pashtuns, remain
extremely worrying. Such abuses are unacceptable, and
the Interim Authority and all the elements that
compose its membership, as well as the United Nations
mission, must work together to ensure full adherence to
human rights norms. Human rights violations of this
kind can only contribute to a further refugee crisis and
serve to exacerbate instability in parts of Afghanistan.
By contrast, we are heartened by the very positive
reports regarding the return of refugees from Pakistan
and look forward to the extension of the facilitated
return programme to Iran next month.

The beginning of the new school year in
Afghanistan over the past few days is a powerful
symbol of how much has changed in Afghanistan in
just six months. We especially welcome the return of
women and girls to the education system, while
recognizing that almost all young Afghans have lost
several vital years of education. Though conditions
may remain less than ideal for some time, we
appreciate the tremendous work that has been done by
Afghan and international authorities and donors to
make possible the opening of so many schools in time.

Ireland, along with others, has made substantial
commitments to both relief and reconstruction efforts
in Afghanistan. Ireland contributed over €5 million in
2001 in humanitarian assistance. At Tokyo, we pledged
€12 million over 3 years in reconstruction assistance.
This is in addition to humanitarian aid. In 2002, we
expect to exceed the level of humanitarian aid given in
2001. We welcome the most recent statements by
Foreign Minister Abdullah confirming the commitment
of the Afghan Interim Authority to giving the highest
priority to drug control. The setting up of a drug-
control unit in the Interior Ministry, as well as a State
high commission on drug control, are positive steps in
this regard.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan are both wise and also carefully
considered in their detail. Ireland wholeheartedly
endorses them. We will play our full part in helping
bring them to reality. None of us can do any less.

