Mr. Romulo (Philippines): My delegation
welcomes the presence today of the President of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria and Chairperson of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo. We
thank him for taking time out from his busy schedule
to brief the Council about the African Union's effort in
Darfur. Mr. Obasanjo's briefing is a valuable
contribution to the Council's consideration of the
situation in Darfur. The Philippines greatly appreciates
the tireless efforts of the President as the mediator of
the Abuja peace talks on Darfur. We congratulate
President Obasanjo on his address yesterday before the
General Assembly, where he outlined the work that has
already been done and that needs to be done by the
African Union.

My delegation has always advocated the regional
approach in resolving the crisis in Africa. Therefore,
we fully recognize and support the AU's leading role
aimed at achieving a peaceful conclusion of the crisis
and the protection of the welfare of the people of
Darfur.

As long as the international community continues
to lend its support to address the humanitarian
requirements of the crisis and to send correct, adequate
and effective messages to the parties concerned, we are
confident that the search for elusive peace in Sudan
will be found in the very near future. The Security
Council's acknowledgement of the leadership role of
the AU and its support for the AU in the resolution of
the crisis is one of those messages. Insistence that all
the parties - both the Government and the rebels -
comply with earlier commitments and remain
committed to the negotiation process is another.

My delegation appreciates the valuable
contribution of the AU through its deployment of the
African Union mission in Sudan, which should be
appropriately supported and assisted by the
international community, including the Security
Council. We urge the enlargement and early
deployment of the mission in that regard. We also
welcome the announcement by the Government of the
Sudan that it is agreeing to an increase in the size of
the current AU presence in Darfur.

My questions have already been answered by
President Obasanjo, so I wish to take this opportunity
to acknowledge the work of the African Union in
resolving the myriad problems in other regions of
Africa. We positively note in particular the
reaffirmation of the AU's commitment and
determination to effectively support the outcome of the
Somalia National Reconciliation Conference, and we
look forward to future assistance as the incoming
Somali national institutions are reconstructed and
consolidated.

In closing, we would like to express our best
wishes for success to President Obasanjo for all his
present and future endeavours.

