Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the States that have requested the holding
of this open meeting, which makes it possible for us to
open to all Member States the debate on the danger of
the acquisition and use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) by non-State actors. This danger relates above
all to the emergence of non-State actors that vie with
States for dominance in the area of violent force, a new
phenomenon, a phenomenon that also highlights the
existence of a legal void in the arsenal of contemporary
international law and that calls for the community of
nations to cooperate without delay to provide the
means to prevent the danger.

The Security Council, aware of its responsibility,
through the sponsors of the draft resolution, has moved
to the forefront and has begun negotiations for the
establishment of a plan that can mobilize the
community of States with a view to concerted action in
this field. My delegation will contribute to the search
for a consensus on the ways and means of achieving
that goal.

We are convinced that the Council must do
everything in its power to eliminate this danger, a
danger that no one can disregard today, following the
sarin gas attack in the Tokyo subway in 1995 and the
threats that international community has faced since
the attacks of 11 September 2001. These sad events
have demonstrated that the worst is possible and that it
can take forms that were unimaginable until now.

We must reach agreement on the proper equation
for rational means to be found to face this situation
within the framework of collective security established
under the Charter. In the common effort to find good
solutions to effectively address this phenomenon, we
believe it is important that action to prevent access to
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors must
be part of the broader effort to promote disarmament. It
seems to us that the problem of access to weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors resides in the
incomprehensible and unacceptable accumulation of
weapons of mass destruction.

The draft resolution before us is submitted under
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. We
believe that Chapter VII is a collection of Articles that
provide ways of countering imminent threats to one or
more States in which the various rules on dispute
settlement under Chapter VI have been exhausted. We
have noted and heard proposals, as well as the idea of
the sponsors, on the need to place the draft resolution
under Chapter VII. Efforts have been made to dispel
concerns of parties on the question, but we believe that
certain aspects of those concerns remain, particularly
those related to the question of legitimate self-defence.
It seems important to us that in the draft resolution the
scope of Chapter VII be reduced to certain obligations
of States, particularly those contained in the three
Articles to which some delegations referred in the
course of our debate today.

The draft resolution would also benefit from
underscoring the need for treaty organizations whose
objective is non-proliferation to negotiate additional
protocols as soon as possible, in order to fill the legal
void that we deplore today regarding non-State actors.
We also attach great importance to the establishment of
a follow-up committee, especially with consideration
of its mandate and duration. We are prepared to discuss
these matters with other delegations.

The negotiations for the adoption of the draft
resolution thus far have been conducted in an open
spirit to make the process as inclusive as possible. We
want that spirit to continue so that the draft resolution
will have the broadest possible support. That is why we
will follow very attentively the contribution of
delegations of non-members of the Council to this
debate.
