Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, I should
like to extend my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I should like also to express my
delegation's deep appreciation to Ambassador Kovanda for
the excellent manner in which he guided the Council last
month.

Further, allow me to express my delegation's gratitude
to those who formulated the draft resolution before us
concerning the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).

I wish to take this opportunity also to welcome in our
midst Mr. Chikvaidze, the Foreign Minister of Georgia.
My delegation has closely followed the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia. In this regard, we have come to learn
that apparent breakthroughs in the political negotiations
have, not infrequently, been followed by developments that
have the effect of negating the apparent initial gains.
Consequently, progress in the political negotiations has at
best been mixed.

However, this is certainly not due to a lack of effort
on the part of the international community. The United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Russian Federation have all been
untiring in their combined efforts to find a comprehensive
settlement, despite the often less than exemplary
cooperation of the parties concerned. Indeed, these
combined international and regional efforts are a true
reflection of the call contained in the Charter for
cooperation between our Organization and regional
arrangements.

In this regard, it would be remiss of me if I were to
fail to commend the achievements of UNOMIG and the
peace-keeping force of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) in preventing a further escalation of violence.
Furthermore, we recognize the valuable contribution of the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, as well as of the Russian Federation
in its capacity as facilitator, to the search for a peaceful
political settlement through negotiations between the
conflicting parties in Georgia.

My delegation is none the less fully cognizant of the
fact that challenges still abound. We share the concern
felt by the international community regarding the
frustratingly slow progress in resolving the issue of
refugees and displaced persons. We note the continued
lack of a secure environment, particularly in the Gali
region, and the observation contained in the Secretary-
General's report about the failure of the Government of
Georgia, as well as of the Abkhaz authorities, to
guarantee the safety of the displaced persons and
repatriants as agreed upon in the Quadripartite Agreement
on the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons
of 4 April 1994. It is of the utmost importance to come
to an acceptable arrangement on this matter, and we urge
the parties to abide by the principles of international
humanitarian law.

In addition, we deem it imperative that the Abkhaz
side significantly accelerate the process of the return of
refugees and displaced persons, in accordance with the
proposals of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). It would indeed be difficult to
overemphasize the valuable role of the UNHCR in
alleviating the plight of refugees and internally displaced
persons. It is therefore with a deep sense of concern that
my delegation notes the financial difficulties that are
currently being faced by the UNHCR, thereby threatening
the continuation of its valuable presence in Georgia.

However, without in any way minimizing the plight
of the refugees and displaced persons, it is worth noting
that the humanitarian situation is merely a symptom of a
more fundamental problem - that of the impasse in the
political negotiations. We are concerned, for example, that
the Secretary-General has reported that there was a
renewed escalation of violence, in mid-March and early
in April, in the Gali region, thereby impeding the
convening of further rounds of negotiations.

We welcome the recent initiative of the Russian
Federation in drafting a text which seeks to develop in
greater detail the elements of a federal solution that could
provide the basis for a comprehensive political settlement.
The cooperation of all the parties in this effort is indeed
essential. Genuine negotiations always require a spirit of
conciliation, mutual concessions and a commensurate
political will to achieve a peaceful and just solution.

In this regard, the Indonesian delegation would like
to reiterate its strong support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. It further reiterates its

 

deep concern about the renewed hostilities and, therefore,
encourages the efforts of the United Nations, the OSCE and
the Russian Federation.

Indonesia's contribution to UNOMIG, albeit modest,
is a reflection of our commitment to assist in the
international community's effort to find a political
settlement to the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia. We too
share the Secretary-General's observation that an untimely
withdrawal of UN OMIG would lead to open confrontation
and the resumption of conflict.

In the light of these considerations, we are in full
support of the extension of UNOMIG's mandate, and we
shall therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.

