Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. President, I thank you for having convened
another public meeting on the grave situation in the
Palestinian territories.

Israel continues with its ruthless military
campaign throughout the West Bank. By so doing it
reveals once again its unlawful and aggressive nature,
exposing it to the entire world. As has always been its
practice, it is in flagrant breach of two more resolutions
of the Security Council, which represents the will of
the international community. Moreover, it defies
international public opinion, which has widely
expressed outrage at the atrocities committed recently
by heavily armed Israeli troops against defenceless
civilians.

Those Israelis who have orchestrated the ongoing
carnage against the Palestinians must understand that
they are engaged in a disgraceful war. They are
engaging a people who have no tanks, no helicopters,
no F-16s, not even anti-tank rockets. Those who arm to
the teeth and unleash an army against civilians are war
criminals, and those who have armed and equipped
such a reckless army cannot shun responsibility. We
believe that the international community should begin
to take necessary steps with a View to bringing war
criminals to justice. The International Criminal Court,
which is to take effect soon, is an appropriate
mechanism to consider taking up this issue.

The policy of the Israeli regime has always
consisted of driving the Palestinian people into
desperation and hopelessness. Along this line, the
Israelis never meant to abide by the terms of the
agreements they signed with the Palestinians. While
they have ostensibly committed themselves to the so-
called land for peace agreement, they have not stopped
building Jewish settlements in the West Bank and in
Gaza since 1993. The significant increase in the
population and in lands under unlawful Jewish
settlement in those areas over the past nine years,
including 34 new Jewish settlements last year, attests to
the fact that the Israelis have never been serious about
the agreements they signed with the Palestinians. In
other words, the Israeli regime has continued to
colonize the territory from which they had ostensibly
negotiated to withdraw.

Similarly, the Israeli regime, after years of foot-
dragging, has now come to drop the empty pretence of
seeking peace. The Israeli army is out to wipe out all
Palestinian institutions and destroy the nine-year-old
process. This especially serves the ideological goal of
the faction currently in power in Israel. Moreover, by
invading the Palestinian areas and restoring ruthless
tactics the Israelis create more hate, thereby setting the
stage for more Palestinian resistance and more
violence.

The aggressive Israeli policy applies to Lebanon
as well. The Lebanese Government has brought to the
attention of the Secretary-General the almost daily
violations of its border by Israeli armed forces over the
past two years. Israeli aircraft breaking the sound
barrier over Lebanese towns and villages is just one
routine example of such cross-border violations, which
amount to bullying tactics, threatening adjacent
countries. Both regional Governments concerned stress
that resolution 425 (1978) has not been implemented in
full. It is not necessary to recall that the partial Israeli
pullout from southern Lebanon took place only after
years of heroic resistance by the Lebanese people. I
hereby reject the allegations by the Israeli
representative in this Council and assert that my
Government has nothing to do with the situation along
the Blue Line.

Not only does the Israeli army continue with the
massacre of the Palestinians, but in the process it also
flouts all provisions of international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention, and particularly those that
ban indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force, as
well as humiliating treatment of civilians and attacks
on holy places. Under such circumstances not only do
the Israelis show contempt for resolution 1402 (2002)
ten days after its adoption, and resolution 1403 (2002),
but there are also indications that they plan to continue
their invasion for many weeks, if not months, to come.

We believe the Security Council should not stand
idly by and let its authority erode. It is time for the
Council to act more resolutely and demand, under
Chapter VII of the Charter, compliance with its
resolutions, and the establishment of an international
force to provide basic protection for the defenceless
Palestinian citizens.

