Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): Since my delegation is
addressing the Security Council for the first time this
month, may I start by congratulating you,
Mr. President, for the intensive programme of work of
the Council for the month of June and by expressing
my gratitude for organizing this important open debate
on the situation in the Balkans. My thanks go also to
Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Balkans, for his comprehensive briefing on this
issue.

We would like to express our deep appreciation
for the valuable contribution to today's debate by Mr.
Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the Council of the
European Union and High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy.

Bulgaria has already aligned itself with the
statement ofthe European Union on the situation in the
western Balkans Therefore, I would like to make only
some additional comments and express our position on
issues of specific concern to Bulgaria as a country
bordering that turbulent region.

Bulgaria is deeply committed to normalization of
the situation in the western Balkans and in the
improvement of good neighbourliness and cooperation.
The four wars waged in the western Balkans during the
last decade had a very negative impact on the whole
region.

Therefore, the Bulgarian Government launched
several regional initiatives in order to find durable
solutions to the persisting problems. The most
important and ongoing one is perhaps the regular
convening of informal meetings of the Prime Ministers
of the countries bordering the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to deal with the problems in South-eastern
Europe. The first meeting of this kind, initiated by my
Government, was organized in the Bulgarian town of
Hissar on 21-22 January 2000. It contributed to the
more active involvement of the countries neighbouring
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the decision-
making process on the future of the region and in
tackling the core issues of security and stability.

The second meeting was held in March this year
in Budapest and the third is scheduled for this weekend
in Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia. Another initiative
demonstrating the active Bulgarian foreign policy in
the region is the Joint Declaration of the Presidents of
Macedonia and Bulgaria on the situation in the
Balkans, which was adopted in May this year. We
consider these efforts to be part of the international
community's quest for stability in south-eastern
Europe.

Recent events in Kosovo have proven once again
that the establishment of peace in a society torn by
prolonged ethnic conflict is an enormously complex
and time consuming process. To date, some progress
has been achieved in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), but very little has yet
to be accomplished regarding peaceful inter-ethnic
coexistence in Kosovo. Some of the obstacles which
hinder the establishment of peace are the ongoing
violence, the unresolved issues of the missing and
detained, the return of refugees and economic and
social insecurity.

We are particularly concerned by the incidence of
attacks on the peacekeeping forces. Public opinion in
my country is sensitive to the issue, since Bulgaria has
representatives in the Kosovo Force, the United
Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We appeal to the leaders of all communities in
Kosovo to take decisive action towards putting an
immediate end to all violence. Bulgaria also urges the
leaders of Kosovo to encourage cooperation and
tolerance in the spirit of the declarations they have
adopted. In order to facilitate the reconciliation
process, the Bulgarian Government has established
active contacts with the leaders of the two main ethnic
communities in Kosovo.

It is of particular importance that the international
community adhere strictly to the objectives of a
unified, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. Since
there are no civil structures in Kosovo, the delay of
reforms could lead to the establishment of
undemocratic institutions. It is crucial that the
population become politically mature, which will make
possible the establishment of a civil society free of
criminal structures.

The acceleration of the political process in
Kosovo has key importance for the success of the
international community's efforts to create conditions
for lasting peace in the region. In this context, we
express our regret regarding the decision ofthe Kosovo
Serbs to end their participation in the joint
administrative structures. Bulgaria commends
UNMIK's determination to pursue its preparations for
local elections in Kosovo, to be held in the fall. These
elections would give legitimacy to the political actors
and create conditions for the participation of the
population in the political process and Government of
Kosovo. However, the participation of all refugees and
displaced persons, irrespective of their ethnic origins,
is of critical significance to the success of the
elections. Otherwise, the elections will be instrumental
in legalizing ethnic cleansing in the region.

The success of the peace process depends also on
the economic reconstruction and development of
Kosovo and on establishing effective mechanisms,
including those for restricting the black market
economy. Bulgaria has repeatedly declared its
readiness to participate actively in the process of
economic reconstruction and has proposed different
ways to ensure the greater involvement of the private
sector. We consider that such an approach to the
problem by the international community would
definitely confirm that the countries of the region are
part of the solution for Kosovo.

Regarding another key issue in the western
Balkans, Bulgaria is fully committed to the completion
of the peace process and the strengthening of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as an independent, sovereign and
democratic State. Peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are closely related to the security of
south-eastern Europe and the prospects for its
integration into the Euro-Atlantic community. Holding
pluralistic elections is a key element of the successful
functioning of democratic institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Local elections held on 8 April this year
proved that the democratic parties have the potential to
win the trust of society.

There is a danger, however, that the economic
challenges Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing could
undermine the achievements that have been made so
far. The international community should not give up its
commitment to a region where peace is so fragile.
Lasting solutions to the problems can be achieved on
the basis of democratization in the whole region. We
support the policy of reforms in Montenegro carried
out by President Djukanovic. His Government is
making a sustained effort to establish civil society
institutions and a market economy. In foreign policy
terms, Montenegro is aiming at opening and
incorporating the Republic into the ongoing processes
of cooperation and integration in the region and in
Europe, which must be appreciated. The recent
municipal elections held in the capital Podgorica and in
Herceg-Novi are of crucial importance for enhancing
the positive processes in Montenegro and thus will
contribute to the enlargement of the democratic space
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Bulgaria is alarmed by the deterioration of the
political situation in Serbia, caused by the escalation of
the repressive measures of the regime against the
opposition, independent mass media, civil
organizations and academic institutions. We call on the
authorities in Serbia to stop these negative trends and
developments. Democratization requires the effective
integration of the different ethnic groups into the
political process in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
We believe that this is closely related to preserving the
unity and territorial integrity of that country.

Our position of principle is that a lasting
settlement of the unsolved problems on the territory of
the former Yugoslavia, and especially in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Kosovo, cannot be achieved on the
basis of the impunity of the organizers and
implementers of the policy of ethnic cleansing and of
other serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Therefore, the support of Bulgaria for the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is unconditional. My country renders active
assistance to the Tribunal and shares the view that its
work should become more effective and speedy.

Last but not least, the Stability Pact for South-
Eastern Europe proves that the joint efforts of the
international community in tackling the challenges in
the region can succeed only if they are based on a
comprehensive approach. In this regard, the Stability
Pact plays an important and constructive role. We, as a
country that has suffered huge economic losses,
amounting to $6.2 billion, from the recent conflicts in
the Balkans, are extremely interested in its prompt
implementation. The Stability Pact, in our view, should
not turn into another bureaucratic structure; it must be
a political driving force in the reconstruction of the
whole region. We are expecting a pragmatic approach,
practical results and the implementation of concrete
Stability Pact projects.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council that the
lasting commitment of the international community to
the Balkans gives us a reason to be optimistic about the
future sustainable development of our region.

