Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of all, I wish to take this opportunity to express our deep sorrow over the passing of the Amir of the State of Kuwait and extend express our sympathy and condolences to the Government and the people of Kuwait. The Amir was a distinguished leader in the Arab world who contributed to the development of friendly and cooperative relations between China and Kuwait. I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. Today is the last day of the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly. In their addresses in the general debate over the past week, many leaders referred to the situation in the Middle East and the question of Palestine. Ceasefire, cessation of violence, peace process, political settlement and two- State are frequently used expressions by many speakers. That fully demonstrates that the Palestinian question has always caused concern among the international community and has never been forgotten. It remains the international community's common expectation to push for a comprehensive, just and enduring solution to the Palestine question as soon as possible. The Security Council bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and is duty bound to promote the settlement of the Palestinian issue. There have been recent developments in the situation in the Middle East, and the Palestinian issue also now faces new dynamics. The Security Council should listen to the voice of the Palestinian people and countries of the region, strengthen communication and coordination with all parties in the international community and play its part through ongoing efforts to promote the Middle East peace process and the settlement of the Palestinian issue. First, with regard to strengthening political support, the question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle East issue and should remain high on the international agenda. Inhis address to the General Assembly last week, President Abbas called on Secretary-General Guterres to join the Quartet and the members of the Security Council in convening an international conference early next year to discuss a genuine peace process. China believes that such an initiative demonstrates Palestine's readiness to participate in the peace talks and promote the peace process. All parties should attach importance to it and make the necessary efforts to create favourable conditions for the political settlement of the Palestinianissue. The international community, especially countries with influence on Palestine and Israel, should uphold an impartial and just position, actively promote peace talks and make genuine efforts to advance the Middle East peace process. President Abbas also said that the Palestinian side was preparing to hold presidential and parliamentary elections involving all political factions. China wishes to place on record its appreciation and looks forward to prompt and positive progress in intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the relevant political processes. Secondly, with regard to abiding by the international consensus, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution are important foundational agreements for resolving the Palestinian issue that must be upheld in order to achieve peace in the Middle East. The plan to annex parts of the occupied Palestinian territory, if implemented, would be a serious violation of international law and United Nations resolutions and would undermine the two-State solution. China is therefore seriously concerned. We note that the implementation of the plan has been suspended, and hope that the party concerned will respond to the Secretary-General's appeal by abandoning the annexation plan and returning to the track of dialogue and negotiations on an equal footing. In addition, recently the situation in the Gaza Strip has remained tense. It is hoped that all the parties concerned will respond to the Secretary-General's global ceasefire appeal by sincerely observing the ceasefire agreement reached at the end of August and refrain from taking actions that exacerbate the situation. Thirdly, on a people-centred approach, according to the United Nations, the number of Palestinian homes demolished between March and August this year reached a four-year record, with hundreds of people displaced. We urge the relevant parties to earnestly implement resolution 2334 (2016), cease all settlement activities in the occupied territories, stop the demolition of Palestinian homes and the destruction of Palestinian property and refrain from acts of violence against civilians. At the same time, the relevant parties should fulfil their obligations under international law, ensure the coverage of basic services and humanitarian assistance to those in need in the occupied territories and fully lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip. The coronavirus disease pandemic has had a severe impact on the economic and social development of Palestine. Israel and Palestine should resolve their differences, strengthen cooperation and spare no efforts in fighting the pandemic and saving lives. The international community should enhance its support to help Palestine to overcome its economic and humanitarian challenges. China appreciates the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to ease the humanitarian situation of Palestinian refugees and help them to fight against the pandemic. As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people, China firmly supports the just demands of the Palestinian people and all efforts to resolve the Palestinian issue. We also support the Palestinian people in establishing an independent State of Palestine that enjoys full sovereignty on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. China recently handed over the fourth batch of anti-pandemic supplies to Palestine and signed a donation agreement with UNRWA. In addition, further progress has also been made in the Ramallah school project, supported by the Chinese Government. We will continue to provide assistance, within our capacity, to the Palestinian people to combat the pandemic, develop the economy, improve people's livelihoods and make a positive contribution towards achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue as soon as possible.
