Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Madam President, for
having organized this debate. We thank the Secretary-
General's Special Representative in Afghanistan,
Ambassador Yamamoto, for his briefing and wish
him well in his endeavours for peace in Afghanistan.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, for his
important statement.

We offer our sincere condolences at the loss oflives
and destruction of property in several recent terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan, which killed and maimed
hundreds of innocent people. While the Taliban's
increased attacks and military gains in the country
have been resisted by the Afghan security forces, these
attacks have only gone up in the last few months, a
trend which cannot be explained as simply a peak in
the fighting season. The current efforts made by the
international community to assist Afghanistan have
clearly not been adequate.

We have noted the flash appeal issued by the
United Nations to assist Afghanistan in managing
and minimizing the huge humanitarian costs that
an expected mass migration of more than 1 million
people in a short period will entail in the midst of the
increasing violence. The Security Council needs to find
the means to reverse the deteriorating security situation
so that the gains made by the people of Afghanistan in
the last 15 years do not wither away.

Groups and individuals that perpetrate violence
against the people and the Government of Afghanistan
must not be allowed safe havens in Afghanistan's
neighbourhood. We note that Afghanistan, along with
the Resolute Support Force, has taken steps to eliminate
the terrorist leaders who were operating from those parts
of Afghan territory controlled by the Taliban and other
terrorist groups. While the Afghanistan Government has
made efforts to combat terrorism, others have callously
looked the other way when Afghanistan is targeted by
the Taliban, the Haqqani network, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and
Jaish-e-Mohammed.

The effective implementation of the Security
Council sanctions regime, including that established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, as well
as that established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011),
on the Taliban, is absolutely essential for it to serve as
a strong deterrent to the listed entities and individuals.

The fact that the leader of the Taliban, a proscribed
entity, is not yet designated a terrorist individual
remains a mystery to us. Can we know the rationale for
such an approach? Is it now the thinking that leaders of
proscribed entities will not be held accountable for the
deeds of the listed groups that they head? Is this how
we intend to address one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security?

Or will the response to our queries be a deafening
silence, as was the case when the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), which deals with issues relating to Afghanistan,
met last month, on 8 August? We are unaware of what
was discussed and what was the outcome of these
discussions. Are Member States entitled to know what
this Committee, which acts on their behalf, considers
and decides upon on for all of us? This appears to
be one more instance of the secrecy practiced in the
subterranean universe of the Security Council, which
has now enshrined the principles of anonymity and
unanimity to ensure a lack of accountability to Member
States.

Afghanistan has India's full support in
strengthening its defence capabilities and in preserving
its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, which is
essential for the stability of the region.

India remains strongly committed to Afghanistan.
The Prime Minister of India has conveyed to the
President of Afghanistan, during his ongoing visit
to India, our offer of an allocation of a further sum
of $1 billion for the requirements of Afghanistan for
capacity-building in spheres including education, health
care, agriculture, skill development, the empowerment
of women, energy, infrastructure and the strengthening
of democratic institutions. India is proud, privileged
and honoured that its engagement in Afghanistan,
through our development partnership, has been a
harbinger of hope and predictability, as conveyed by
President Ghani to Prime Minister Modi earlier today.

We believe that the path to reconciliation in
Afghanistan should be through a process that is owned
and led by Afghanistan, reflecting the aspirations
of the people of Afghanistan. India will continue to
engage with the international community to assist the
Government of Afghanistan in all possible ways in this
regard.

We applaud the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in providing
assistance for Afghanistan in various sectors in this
crucial transformation decade.

I would like to conclude by reiterating what Prime
Minister Modi told President Ghani: "The 1.25 billion
people of India stand with their Afghan brothers and
sisters". India reposes its full faith in the brave and
resilient people of Afghanistan and the National Unity
Government for a peaceful, prosperous, stable, unified,
sovereign and democratic Afghanistan as a land bridge
between West, Central and South Asia.

