Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/318) and Special Representative Staffan
de Mistura for his thoughtful briefing this morning. I
would also like to welcome Ambassador Tanin back to
the Security Council. As others have said, the Security
Council's visit to Afghanistan was timely, and I would
like to thank Ambassador Apakan for his leadership of
that mission, and also the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Council
secretariat for their organization of the trip.
10-42978

The scale of the challenge was clear to us all, as
was the importance of a united international
community supporting the Government of Afghanistan.
The Council underlined this support to President
Karzai and welcomed the strong working relationship
between his Government and the United Nations. I am
sure my colleagues around this table would agree that
UNAMA's focus on delivering its mandate, and Staffan
de Mistura's leadership, were impressive. We saw
United Nations staff working under the most difficult
circumstances. The United Nations continues to play a
central role in the overall international effort, and we
fully support the Special Representative's focus on the
"three plus one priorities": elections, reintegration and
reconciliation, and regional cooperation, as well as aid
coherence.

As the Secretary-General has reported, the
security situation is serious. We were saddened to learn
yesterday of the death of a United Nations colleague,
killed by a gunman in Kabul. We extend our
condolences to his family and to the United Nations.

The increase in attacks on civilians by insurgent
groups is of real concern. The near doubling of
incidents involving improvised explosive devices and
the high number of targeted political assassinations
threaten ordinary Afghans. International commitment
to increasing support for police training is therefore
paramount. The International Security Assistance Force
will continue to work both to protect the civilian
population from insurgents and to build up the Afghan
National Security Forces as rapidly as is feasible. As
Ambassador Rice has said, we saw an impressive
example of that training work last week in Kabul - in
that particular case, British troops empowering Afghan
trainers to train new Afghan recruits. Last weekend,
Group of Eight leaders sent a collective signal that they
want the Afghan Security Forces to assume increasing
responsibility for security within five years. In the six
months leading up to March, the Afghan National
Army grew by almost 20 per cent, with more than
17,000 joining the ranks. We will continue to work
with the Afghans to lay the foundations for the transfer
to Afghan control of security responsibility for districts
and provinces as soon as they are ready.

As the Special Representative has spelled out, we
cannot succeed in Afghanistan by pursuing only a
military strategy. That is why we support the
emergence of an Afghan-led political process that
responds to the concerns of Afghans of all
backgrounds, as well as of Afghanistan's key partners.
Next month's Kabul Conference is important. We look
to the Government of Afghanistan to present its
detailed plans and show tangible progress in
implementing the commitments made at the London
Conference. We are pleased to see the United Nations
co-chairing this event, and thereafter expect to see
further substantive progress against London and Kabul
commitments by November, one year on from
President Karzai's inauguration. In particular, we hope
to see a clear action plan for improving governance and
tackling corruption. These are key areas of concern to
Afghans, highlighted by the participants in the
Consultative Peace Jirga earlier this month.

On reintegration and reconciliation, we hope that
the Afghan Government will launch the Afghan peace
and reintegration programme in advance of the Kabul
Conference, enabling donors to translate their pledges
into firm commitments. Following on from the
successful Consultative Peace Jirga, this will play a
key role in the development of a political track and
wider reconciliation.

Finally, we do not underestimate the challenges
that remain for the Government of Afghanistan, for the
United Nations and for the wider international
community. But the United Kingdom remains firmly
committed to the goal of a secure, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan, and we will continue to play
our full role in helping to achieve that.

