We thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham and Deputy Special Envoy Matar for their briefings. We recognize the tremendous efforts they have made to fulfil their respective mandates and to achieve a genuine peace in Syria - a peace that will once and for all enable the country's rebirth as the resilient and vibrant nation that it is. Today we are filled with hope as the Chairs of the Constitutional Committee have agreed on the agenda for their fourth and fifth working sessions to begin next week and continue in January 2021. We congratulate the Special Envoy and all those involved in this important step and call on the parties to come to these discussions with the greatest possible commitment and constructive spirit. This reminds us once again that the help of everyone is required if a sustainable peace in Syria is to be achieved and if the suffering of the country's stricken population is to be alleviated. At the outset, we would like to express our concern about the growing violence and insecurity in the north-west of the country. This increase in attacks, which have taken the lives of hundreds of civilians, including children, is unacceptable. Furthermore, the violence and insecurity also present serious challenges to the protection of the civilian population, many of whom are displaced and living in very poor conditions, on the eve of winter. To make matters worse, the country's minimum level of preparedness to deal with the current pandemic is obvious. We take this opportunity to express our deepest condolences to the families of the thousands of Syrian health workers who have died from the coronavirus; in so many of these cases, the deaths have been the result of a lack of necessary protection. With equal regret, we take this opportunity to address the issue of rampant food insecurity in the country. Owing to the critical economic situation, Syrian families are increasingly unable to have access to the basic food basket. Added to this is the fuel-supply crisis, which we find to be a truly unbearable scenario to which no human being should be subjected. Once again, we join the calls of many participants at this meeting today - and of humanitarian organizations on the ground - for humanitarian access in Syria to be facilitated in a sustained manner, reaching all Syrians in need, no matter where they are. We call for a review of the current modalities of providing assistance on the basis of neutrality, impartiality and independence and ask whether they are in fact sufficient. The Dominican Republic calls for an urgent solution to the existing gaps in assistance, particularly medical assistance, in the north-east of the country, which Mr. Lowcock previously described. We reiterate that there is no military solution to the conflict in Syria, that only political consultation and dialogue will make it possible to respond to the aspirations of its population, both inside and outside the country. We must continue to make progress towards the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) as a road map for political transformation and as a precondition for the voluntary and dignified return of the millions of displaced Syrians and refugees spread throughout the world. Finally, as today is the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, the Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to express its total repudiation of acts of violence against the civilian population, including women. We urgently call on the parties in conflict to observe the current ceasefire agreements. There will be no progress amid violence, nor is there a future without peace.
