The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America.

We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his informative and timely briefing on the
current humanitarian situation in Somalia and Uganda.
His first-hand perspective provides the Council with
valuable insight into these pressing crises.

The United States expresses grave concern over
the recent violence in Mogadishu and the resulting loss
of life in Somalia. But even before the recent outbreak
of violence, hundreds of thousands of Somalis faced a
chronic humanitarian crisis. Displacement and
suffering caused by drought and floods in 2006 have
now been dangerously exacerbated by additional
conflict.

Despite ongoing challenges to aid operations in
Somalia, we understand that international relief efforts
are reaching more than 250,000 of those recently
displaced from Mogadishu. We applaud the work of
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) delivering that life-saving
assistance. We also salute the work of the United
Nations country team for Somalia and the leadership of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
for their courageous and dauntless work. The United
States has provided significant resources to the current
relief effort, and we remain committed to supporting
humanitarian assistance in Somalia. We also continue
to provide assistance for Somali refugees in Kenya and
Ethiopia.

We are very concerned that the work of the
United Nations and humanitarian NGOs in Somalia
remains hampered by insecurity, roadblocks and inter-
clan conflict, as we heard in Mr. Holmes's briefing. We
reiterate our call on all parties to facilitate
humanitarian access for the delivery of life-saving aid
to those in need.

We commend recent commitments by the Somali
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to lift
administrative impediments for international aid
agencies, and we stress that recently announced visa
and flight clearance requirements should not inhibit aid

efforts. We expect the TFG to facilitate the critical
work of the United Nations and humanitarian NGOs
for the welfare of the people of Somalia.

Let me join others in condemning the recent
attack in Mogadishu on the forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We express our
sympathies to the families of the Uganda victims. We
are gravely concerned about the recent pattern of
attacks by extremist elements in Somalia, including the
increased use of explosive devices. We call on all
Somalis and regional stakeholders to prevent extremist
elements that are intent on undermining the political
process from conducting further attacks.

We have seen reports that the TFG will allow the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to investigate allegations of human rights abuses
during the recent conflict. We welcome this news.
Allegations of human rights abuses are very troubling,
and we will follow the investigation closely.

Ultimately, the humanitarian situation in Somalia
can only be addressed with the stability of a permanent
ceasefire agreement and a viable, comprehensive
reconciliation process. We therefore continue to urge
all parties to re-engage in a sincere process of political
dialogue as the best means of reaching a sustainable
solution to the crisis in Somalia.

We also reiterate our support for the robust
contingency planning proposed by the Secretary-
General to prepare for the possible transition to a
United Nations peacekeeping mission in Somalia.

On Uganda, we appreciate Under-Secretary-
General Holmes's first-hand impressions of the
humanitarian situation in northern Uganda, and we
share his cautious optimism about the current
negotiations. Improved security and progress towards a
settlement have encouraged an estimated 350,000
people to return to their home areas. However, there
remain more than a million displaced people in
northern Uganda, and we stress the need for all returns
to be safe and voluntary.

We commend recent efforts by United Nations
Special Envoy Chissano to bring the parties back to the
negotiating table in Juba. We support the efforts of the
Government of Southern Sudan to facilitate the
negotiations, and we are watching closely how the
resumed process unfolds. We stand prepared to offer
assistance with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration should a final agreement be reached. In
the interim, we continue to provide significant
assistance to meet humanitarian needs in northern
Uganda, including nearly $85 million in 2006.

Finally, we note that meeting the continuing
emergency needs of displaced populations and
supporting longer-term recovery for returnees require
strong leadership and coordination. We urge the United
Nations, with OCHA's leadership, to ensure that
humanitarian coordination needs in Uganda are
addressed effectively.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. John Holmes to
respond to comments and any questions that have been
raised.

