Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My delegation wishes at the outset to welcome Their
Excellencies the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and of Pakistan and to thank them for their
statements. We wish also to thank Mr. Kai Eide,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their most
informative briefings on the situation in Afghanistan.

We note that the situation is far from hopeless,
especially given the renewed hope that has arisen
following the Paris Conference of 12 June, which laid
the foundation for a political and financial partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community
towards the reconstruction of the country, based also
on the new Afghanistan National Development
Strategy. Approximately $20 billion were pledged at
the Conference, including for support for the
preparation of the 2009 and 2010 elections, which
testifies to the full commitment of the international
community to assisting the Afghan Government in
pursuing the reconstruction and development efforts
that have been under way since 2001.

In spite of that tangible fact, challenges
unfortunately remain as the country faces such
enormous difficulties as the security situation, as we
were reminded yet again by the recent attack on the
Indian embassy in Kabul. We firmly condemn that
attack.

At the political level, the Paris Declaration
underscores the importance of holding elections in
2009 and 2010 in order to consolidate democracy in
Afghanistan. It also calls on the international
community to give particular support to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which, with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme, must guarantee the holding
of free, fair and secure elections. We are encouraged by
the firm resolve of the Afghan Government to pursue
constructive dialogue with civil society, local
communities and marginalized groups, not simply to
promote peace, but also to seek the participation of all
in forging a pluralistic and democratic society.

There is hardly any need to recall the essential
role that the neighbouring countries of Afghanistan
must play in the context of regional cooperation and
good-neighbourliness in helping the Afghan
Government to successfully implement its policy of
national peacebuilding and stabilization.

On the institutional level, the Government has
taken a series of steps to build on the progress achieved
in recent years, in particular by improving the
performance of public administration, local
governance, the judiciary, the police and law
enforcement institutions.

With regard to the economic situation in the
country, we welcome the resolve of the Afghan

Government to focus on the agriculture and energy
sectors in order to stimulate national economic
development by involving the private sector and
promoting its growth and by establishing a conducive
environment for attracting investment and creating
jobs. Such efforts could well be successful, especially
if they enjoy the support of the international
community, which is committed to providing
increased, more predictable and better coordinated
financial aid in order to sustainably enhance the
management capacity of the national budget and State
institutions.

We must also continue to provide humanitarian
assistance in Afghanistan, in particular during these
times of food crisis. We welcome the preventive
measures that have already been taken and call on the
international community to respond to the urgent needs
expressed by the Afghan people.

I will conclude by paying tribute to the Afghan
people, whose determination to fight for its existence
within a strong, secure State, governed by the rule of
law, deserves our full support.

