Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): My delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/1998/1109) on the situation in Afghanistan. All the
relevant information, including that provided in the report,
confirms that the situation in Afghanistan continues to
constitute a threat to peace and security in the region. There
are two dimensions of that threat.

First, the situation was seriously aggravated by
tensions on the border between Afghanistan and Iran
following the escalation of fighting in Afghanistan last
summer, and especially after the killing of the Iranian
diplomats in Mazar-e-Sharif. Tensions with Iran have
since receded. However, the danger of renewed escalation
has not yet been completely removed, and the situation
remains serious.

The second and fundamental dimension is the
situation in Afghanistan itself. The overall development
in 1998 has been negative. This assessment applies to the
political, military and humanitarian aspects. We would
also like to express our deep concern at the continuing
harbouring of terrorists in Afghan territory, as well as
illegal drug production and trafficking.

The failure of the Ulema process last spring, and
subsequent resumed fighting by the factions, was a
serious setback for the efforts to bring a peace process to
Afghanistan. No real solution is in sight, and the logic of
military action is still prevailing over that of a political
settlement which would reflect the interests of all ethnic,
religious and social groups in the country.

Moreover, while the Taliban have made large
military advances, the ethnic factors in the conflict are
being heightened. As the Secretary-General pointed out in
paragraph 55 of his report:

"The atrocities committed by all parties
involved in the conflict over the past two years
have widened the ethnic and religious divide
between different Afghan communities and
have further undermined the social fabric of
Afghanistan, which has been rendered fragile
by almost two decades of war."

Many of the killings have been of a retaliatory
nature. This is disturbing, and may lead to a protracted
military conflict, with no real end in sight. The political
solutions are likely to be even more difficult.

Recent reports of mass killings of civilians belonging
principally to the Shi'a Hazara minority in Mazar-e-Sharif
and other allegations of serious violations of human rights
and of international humanitarian law are a cause for
serious concern. Afghanistan remains one of the world's
most intractable human rights disasters. In the light of
this, and given the new characteristics of the conflict,
there is a need for additional efforts for protection of the
bare minimum of human rights. We support the proposal
of the Secretary-General to add a new civil affairs unit to
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan

 

(UNSMA), security conditions permitting, with the primary
objective of promoting respect for minimum humanitarian
standards and deterring massive and systematic violations
of human rights in the future.

We also call upon the Taliban to cooperate with the
United Nations in investigating the killings of Iranian
diplomats in Mazar-e-Sharif, with a View to prosecuting
those responsible.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan remains
grave, and the efforts of the international community have
been seriously plagued by deteriorating security conditions,
attacks on personnel, impediments and restrictions on their
work. We reiterate our call to the Taliban to provide a full
report on the killing of Afghan staff members of the World
Food Programme and of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
member of UNSMA in Afghanistan, and to meet the
conditions to facilitate the return of the United Nations
personnel, programmes and funds to the country to resume
their work.

We salute UNSMA and the humanitarian and aid
workers for their dedicated work. They have done their
utmost in the most difficult circumstances. We would also
like to commend the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, for the results of his recent
mission to the region and his success in defusing tensions
between Afghanistan and Iran.

A durable settlement can be achieved only through a
ceasefire and the start of political dialogue among Afghans,
leading to national reconciliation and the establishment of
a genuinely broad-based, multi-ethnic and representative
Government.

Two types of efforts must be strengthened in the
immediate future. First, political efforts within the "six plus
two" group should continue to assist in creating conditions
conducive to a successful peace process. The proposed
meeting of the group to be held in Tashkent with Afghan
factions could be an important step in that direction, and
careful preparations should provide ground for concrete and
substantive results. A coherent approach to the problem also
implies renunciation of military assistance to all sides in
conflict in Afghanistan.

Secondly, efforts to investigate the alleged massacres
and Violations of international law must be strengthened.
The importance of this task is increasing. The delays
accumulated in the efforts to investigate atrocities which
have been committed in earlier periods must not become
standard. Careful investigation and publication of results
will be of great value per se and could also contribute to
the political efforts to initiate a meaningful peace process.

Slovenia believes that the draft resolution submitted
to the Security Council today responds to the main
requirements of the situation and will vote in favour of it.

