Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium associates itself fully with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Pillay, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Amos, as well as Mr. Spoerri of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
statements.
Just recently, the indiscriminate bombing of
Syria's most densely populated city was confirmed,
without a shadow of a doubt. The destruction of Aleppo
has, unfortunately, been one of the many tragedies
of the Syrian conflict. In that particular context, the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is at the heart
of my country's concerns. I would like to thank the
Argentine President of the Council for making it the
topic of today's debate.

In his report of 2009 (S/2009/277), the Secretary-
General specifically pinpointed five challenges that
have to do with the topic of today's meeting, three of
which are linked more specifically to today's debate. In
my national capacity, I would like to say a few things
about them, specifically with regard to the situation in
Syria,

First of all, with regard to respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law, the then President of
the Security Council, in his statement at the end of the
debate in February (see S/PV.6917), reminded each one
of the parties of their duty to comply with the provisions
of international humanitarian law, human rights and
the rights of refugees. During hostilities, parties to
a conflict cannot, under any circumstances, attack
non-combatants. They must display proportionality,
taking all the measures necessary to protect the civilian
population. Indiscriminate bombings of densely
populated urban areas and many other actions have
shown that up until now, mainly in Syria, the Council's
measures have remained a dead letter and that they
must be strongly reaffirmed.

Secondly, on the subject ofhumanitarian access, any
victim of a conflict has an inalienable right to receive
help. When an attack is carried out againt humanitarian
workers, when the delivery of humanitarian assistance
is being prevented for any reason, when medical
infrastructure is destroyed, or when people i I am
thinking in particular of women and children, the most
vulnerable group - are being deprived of the care and
assistance necessary for their survival, the principal
of access is being denied and flouted. In Syria, almost
40 per cent of the public hospitals have been destroyed
and another 20 per cent have been damaged. As the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross said this morning, patients, medical staff,
other infrastructure and ambulances are being targeted
and attacked. Hospitals are being used by combatants
for military purposes, even as torture and detention
centres. In addition, humanitarian organizations
are faced with many bureaucratic or even security
challenges, which impede their access to millions of
people who have been affected by armed conflict.

In its resolution 1894 (2009), the Security Council
stated that it was ready to intervene by taking
appropriate measures, as authorized by the Charter
of the United Nations, in the event of armed conflicts
where civilians were being targeted or when the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians was
being prevented deliberately. On that basis, Belgium
calls on the Council to consider measures proposed by
the Emergency Response Coordinator, Ms. Amos, in
her Syria briefing on 16 July, namely, the designation
of special navigators whom agencies and organizations
could consult for assistance in overcoming problems
with access.

Removing red tape would allow medical care to
pass through freely, as would the demilitarization of
medical facilities. Notifying civilians and aid convoys of
military offenses in advance, introducing humanitarian
breaks to allow access to people and implementing
cross-border humanitarian operations would also assist
such efforts.

Thirdly, criminal responsibility must be reaffirmed.
In order to ensure a return to sustainable peace in Syria,
the perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law must be brought to justice. Today, the
International Criminal Court is in the best position to
carry out that role. Belgium reaffirms its support for
the appeal made to the Council last January, in a letter
that we co-signed along with 57 States Members, to
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court.

