Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Since the
beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1948 and the
wait for the Palestinian people to exercise their right to
an independent sovereign State and their inherent right
to a life of dignity and freedom, despite the resounding
silence of the international community and dozens of
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions that
continue to be unimplemented, Egypt has shouldered
and is shouldering great responsibilities and confronted
major challenges. Egypt has gone through many wars
and diplomatic batteles at all levels to defend Palestinian
rights and to push towards creating an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
the framework of achieving a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East.
Resolution 2334 (2016) on Israeli settlements,
which was adopted today, undoubtedly expresses the
painful reality resulting from the illegal settlement
policy. It is also born from the policy of the
confiscation of Palestinian land that runs contrary to
an established principle endorsed by the international
community - the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by armed force.

However, the peace process, with its complexities
and details, requires all of us to be wise and politically
realistic in taking up this issue without manoeuvring
on the part of any party, as we witnessed during
our deliberations in the Council on this resolution,
particularly on the issue of settlements, which is directly
linked to one of the most important components of the
final peace settlement - borders.

The circumstances related to consultations on the
resolution and the timing of the vote over the past several
hours have demonstrated that it might limit the ability
of some international parties that want to intervene
directly in order to resolve the question of Palestine
comprehensively and definitively, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 446 (1979).
To work towards providing an opportunity to future
international movements in no way means abandonment
of or retraction from constants and basics of the policy
related to the question of Palestine, including the issue of
settlements, as those constants and basics are provided
for in previous international resolutions of the security
council, as well as the positions of international parties
directly involved in the question of Palestine.

Today, Egypt felt compelled to withdraw its own
draft resolution procedurally, in light of the manoeuvres,
encountered since the text was presented in blue; that
amounted to a warning from some members of the
Security Council. That is utterly unacceptable in form
and substance in view of Egypt's firm positions, which
cannot be questioned, pertaining to the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians. It should also be noted that
those manoeuvres were carried out while Egypt was
conducting political consultaions at all political levels
with the concerned parties, around the clock; since the
draft was presented.

In spite of all this, Egypt, in order to preserve the
legitimate Palestinian rights through a just and lasting
settlement in accordance with relevant international
resolutions, voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016),
adopted minutes ago, based on our firm, principled and
unequivocal positions, which we do not allow to be put
into question or subject to manoeuvres or bargaining
by any party. Egypt was the first to bear arms to defend
the legitimate Arab and Palestinian rights. Egypt was
the first to make peace with Israel, believing in the
feasibility peace rather than armed conflict. Egypt has
been and continues to be one of the strongest believers
in the possibility of achieving a comprehensive and
just peace in the Middle East based on the principles
of a two-State solution and land for peace, as has been
internationally acknowledged.

