Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

I want to begin by warmly thanking in particular
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui, whom we strongly support. We also want to
thank the Malaysian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this important debate.
The year 2014 has frequently been cited as the worst
year for children affected by armed conflict. In his new
annual report to the Council (S/2015/409), the Secretary-
General speaks of "unprecedented challenges in 2014
with regard to the protection of tens of millions of
children growing up in situations affected by conflict"
(S/2015/409, para. 5). Protracted armed conflicts and
current crises affect far too many children around the
world, keeping them away from school and exposing
them to the risk of recruitment and use as soldiers.
Atrocities against children that have made headlines,
including Boko Haram's abduction of hundreds of
women and girls in Chibok and the abductions in Syria
and Iraq committed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, serve to remind us ofthe special vulnerabilities
and needs of girls in this context.

The "increase in the frequency and scale of
abductions", as noted in paragraph 8 of the Secretary-
General's report, is alarming. In View of that increase,
but also in view of the fact that abductions are one of
the six grave violations that are being reported on under
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, it is only
logical to add abduction as a fifth trigger that leads
to listing in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
report. In many cases abductions are a precursor of
other violations, such as recruitment and use of sexual
violence. We therefore very much welcome today's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which
that adds abduction as a trigger, and we are grateful for
Malaysia's leadership in that regard. We hope that in
consequence this will lead to the conclusion of action
plans with listed parties that commit abductions. We
strongly condemn abductions of children and call on
all parties to release all abducted children immediately.

In several cases, extremist groups have abducted
school children to punish them for attending school.
That serves to remind us of the importance of
education not only for children's development, but also
as a powerful tool to contribute to the prevention of
violent extremism and of conflict. Consequently, more
has to be done to better protect schools from attack
and to deter the military use thereof in accordance
with international law. We welcome the Council's
commitment, stated inter alia in resolution 2143 (2014),
for enhanced monitoring of, and reporting on, the
military use of schools.

Many of the abductions are committed by
non-State armed actors, which also make up the vast
majority of listed parties. During the last open debate
in March (see S/PV.7414), under the French presidency,
we discussed possible measures to effectively address
this phenomenon. We are grateful for the non-paper
circulated by France that compiles a summary of the
proposals presented during that debate. We believe
that many of those proposals merit concrete follow-up.
Unconditional access for the United Nations to non-State
armed actors is essential for the adoption of action plans
to end and prevent violations and, more important, for
steps towards their effective implementation.

In order to prevent future violations, it is Vital to
hold those responsible accountable. A high number
of the parties have been listed for at least five years,
and are therefore considered persistent perpetrators.
Fighting impunity needs to be part and parcel of our
actions and, whereas the primary responsibility lies
with States, the International Criminal Court has an
essential role to play in this regard.

Furthermore, the inclusion of child protection
provisions in the mandates of peace operations and
mandatory predeployment training on child protection
for all United Nations troops and police contingents are
crucial measures to ensure the effective protection of
children on the ground. In that context, the European
Union is strengthening its capacity on child protection
both at its headquarters and at operational level. We are
mainstreaming the issue of children affected by armed
conflict in our Common Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations. This year, the Union is again
organizing specific training on children and armed
conflict for its staff and that of its member States.
Predeployment child protection training modules
for civilian and military personnel have also been
finalized and are taught in the context of preparations
for deployment of European Union and third-country
personnel as part of the various civilian stabilization
missions.

The successful reintegration of children back into
society is a matter of primary concern for achieving
sustainable peace and development. That is the reason
that we are funding reintegration measures for released
child soldiers, for example in South Sudan. This
year, we plan to launch a specific call for proposals
from civil society organizations on future projects on
children associated with armed forces and groups as
well as children impacted by Violence. The European
Union and its member States also continue to support
the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and
UNICEF. We welcome the progress achieved so far and
hope for a successful conclusion in 2016.

The tenth anniversary of the adoption of ground-
breaking resolution 1612 (2005) in July this year should
provide a new impetus to the United Nations and its
States Members to give the protection of children
affected by armed conflict the highest priority and to
ensure that everything is being done to provide children
with better prospects for their future.

