Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, for her briefing.

At present, the situation in the Darfur region of
the Sudan remains stable on the whole. The Sudanese
Government is actively pushing ahead towards the
reconstruction of Darfur and is strengthening its
capacity-building in the areas of governance and
security in the region. It has also set up engagement
with the parties that have not signed the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. Those efforts of the Government
will further consolidate and advance the peace process
in Darfur.

China believes that the Sudanese Government
should assume the primary responsibility for
maintaining the security of Darfur. As the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) gradually withdraws from Darfur in line
with the road map, the international community should
actively help the Sudanese Government to enhance its
own security and governance capacity-building and
ensure that Sudanese security forces take over security
responsibilities from UNAMID as soon as possible.

The Council should review the sanctions on the
Sudan in a timely manner and make adjustments in
the light of the latest developments, with a View to
the eventual lifting of the sanctions. That will send a
positive signal to the countries concerned and better
help the Sudanese Government to maintain peace and
stability in the region.

China has noted that some opposition parties and
armed groups in Darfur are still resisting the peace
process. China urges those opposition parties and
armed groups to actively take part in the peace process
and find a solution through peaceful dialogue and other
political means. China supports the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan and South
Sudan in continuing its good offices to promote the
smooth resolution of the relevant issues.

Development is an important guarantee of peace.
China hopes international partners will, in accordance
with the needs ofthe Sudan, continue to actively provide
humanitarian assistance and economic support. The
United Nations should make full use of the platforms
available, such as the Peacebuilding Commission, to
provide necessary support for the reconstruction and
development of the Sudan.

China has been a long-standing supporter of the
peace process in Darfur, the Sudan, and it is one of the
major troop-contributing countries to UNAMID. Over
the years we have been contributing positively to the
maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur. China is
ready to work with the international community and
will continue to play our constructive role in the quest
for peace, stability and development in Darfur.

