Mr. Fiallo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to congratulate France
for the excellent work and efforts made in drafting and
seeking points of convergence among Member States
in order to reach the consensus that led us to adopt
resolution 2480 (2019) today.

The Dominican Republic voted in favour of this
resolution because we are aware of the worrisome
security situation prevailing in Mali. It is essential
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continue
supporting the people of Mali in the consolidation of
political gains made through the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
understand that this resolution establishes a satisfactory
balance between the challenges existing in the country,
especially in the centre and north. In order to address
those challenges, the Malian parties, MINUSMA
and other international actors must advance the
implementation of clearly defined concrete measures.

We have witnessed a reduction in the representation
of women in institutions that support the implementation
of the agreement in Mali. Despite the balance struck
in this resolution and certain paragraphs devoted to
the issue of women, we would have preferred to retain
some references to ensuring the equal and meaningful
participation of women, as established in resolution
2423 (2018).

Likewise, we regret that it was not possible to
incorporate the undeniable negative impact of climate
change on the economic and social stability of Mali
in the operative part of the resolution. We consider
this a missed opportunity to pay particular attention
to one of the main challenges that Mali faces in the
scope of its development and sustainable peace. We are
convinced that this one-year renewal of the MINUSMA
mandate creates a window of opportunity for the full
implementation of the agreement and is a step in the
right direction to achieve the long-sought stability and
peace in Mali.

Finally, we cannot miss this opportunity to formally
bid farewell to the Permanent Representative of France.
We recognize the valuable work he has done and
appreciate his undeniable commitment and dedication.
We thank him for his inspiring service.

