Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): As mandated by
sub-paragraph (g) of paragraph 11 of resolution 1844
(2008), I have the honour ofbriefing the Security Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, covering the
period from 14 March to the end of July this year.

During the reporting period, with regard to the
arms embargo on Somalia, the Committee received 10
notifications pursuant to sub-paragraph (g) of paragraph
10 of resolution 2111 (2013), three notifications from
Member States pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2142 (2014) and two notifications from the Federal
Government of Somalia pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 9
of resolution 2385 (2017). The Committee also received
two post-delivery confirmations from the Federal
Government of Somalia pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 7
of resolution 2142 (2014), for which the Committee did
not receive advance delivery notification.

At the outset, I wish to welcome the signing of the
Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship on 9 July this
year by the President of the State of Eritrea, Mr. Isaias
Afwerki, and the Prime Minister of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Mr. Abiy Ahmed,
and salute the commitment by both parties to opening
a new chapter of cooperation and partnership. We also
positively note the 28 July visit of Somalia President

Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo to Asmara
on the invitation of the President of Eritrea.

Today, my briefing will focus mainly on my May
visit to Djibouti, Ethiopia and Somalia and ensuing
Committee activities and decisions. The visit in May
marked the first occasion since 2010 on which the
Chair of the Committee has travelled to the Horn of
Africa region. We received great cooperation from
all countries we visited. All countries extended their
welcome and cooperation at the highest possible level.
All our interlocutors where frank in sharing with us their
perspectives. The region is committed to continuing
resolving issues and working towards further stability
and enduring peace.

When meeting with the delegation in Addis
Ababa, the Ethiopian Prime Minister noted Ethiopia's
principled position in resolving conflicts by peaceful
means and expressed readiness to start a dialogue with
Eritrea. These views may have been the forerunner of
the developments witnessed in recent days. I regret that
Eritrea did not invite the delegation and did not take
the opportunity to provide its views on the situation
the Horn of Africa, including on the implementation
of sanctions.

I wish to reiterate the Committee's continued
commitment to engaging with Eritrea. In this regard,
I addressed a letter on behalf of the Committee to the
Eritrean charge d'affaires of the Permanent Mission, in
which 1 expressed the Committee's regret at the lack of
response to the proposed visit to Asmara. I also called on
the Eritrean authorities to cooperate with the Committee
and the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group.

The visit to the region was a diplomatic and trust-
building exercise. The goal was to engage directly with
the authorities to obtain first-hand information on the
situation in the region, including on the implementation
of sanctions measures on Somalia and Eritrea, and
assess and the effectiveness of the measures and their
implementation so as to promote peace and security
in the Horn of Africa. While acknowledging and
encouraging their efforts, particularly concerning
notifications to the Committee, I reminded Somali
officials of their obligations under the partial lifting
of the arms embargo and the requirement to comply
with them.

With regard to the charcoal ban, the Somali
authorities expressed serious concern about the
continuing charcoal trade, which contributes to
financing of the terrorist activities of Al-Shabaab. The
President of Somalia noted the importance of adequate
implementation of the charcoal ban, while the Prime,
Minister requested that the Committee sanction those
individuals and entities responsible for receiving
illicit Somali charcoal. The Committee will consider
that request very seriously. With regard to regional
dynamics, all interlocutors cited the destabilizing
effects of the Yemen war on the stability of the region.
The war has had an impact not only on arms flows,
but also on commercial relations, investment, trade
and tourism between Yemen and countries in the Horn
of Africa.

In terms of sanctions on Somalia, we observed the
firm resolve of the Federal Government of Somalia to
portray the new Administration in a new light of reforms
and willingness to take responsibility for their security
and future. Although that is commendable, it is the
view of the Committee that the arms embargo should
not be completely lifted until Somalia undergo political
and security reforms, and creates strong institutions
capable of securing an adequate level of weapons and
ammunition management. All interlocutors cautioned
against the premature withdrawal of the African Union
Mission in Somalia from the country, as they believe
that Somali forces are not yet ready to fully take over
responsibility for their own security. The Committee
fully endorsed other recommendations aimed at the
strengthening and the implementation of the sanctions
measures. As such, two notes verbales reminding
Member States of their respective obligations under the
terms of the arms embargoes and the charcoal ban were
distributed respectively on 25 and 28 of June.

I also proposed that the Committee discuss the
recommendations made by the joint verification team
in its first report of 1 May. The Committee met on
25 June. In that regard, the Committee has revised its
implementation assistance notice on the arms embargo
to include some of the recommendations made by joint
verification team. As the delegation was unable to meet
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia Michael Keating during our trip to Mogadishu,
the Committee held informal consultations on 20 July,
during which Mr. Keating shared his insights on peace
and security matters in Somalia as they relate to the
sanctions regime.

In conclusion, this was an important visit during
which the Committee gained invaluable insights into
the current political and security situation pertaining to
the Horn of Africa. The information that we gathered
enabled the Committee to act so as to enhance the
implementation of the sanctions measures on Somalia
and Eritrea. I would like to assure Council members
that the Committee will continue its contribution to the
Council's efforts to achieve durable peace and stability
in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.

