Mr. Shearer: I thank the Council for the
opportunity to brief it today and would like to touch
on updates from the ground as well as the progress and
challenges we can expect going forward.

I have been Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for South Sudan for three months and during
that time have travelled to all 10 of the Mission's main
field offices. I have quickly learned that Juba is not
South Sudan. Each of the field offices of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) faces its
own unique array of different ethnic, political and
humanitarian challenges. And in each, UNMISS
field personnel experience some of the most difficult
circumstances and living conditions that I have seen in
my many years of work in conflict zones around the
world. For example, a convoy delivering humanitarian
supplies from Juba to Bentiu, in the North, a distance
of about 1,000 kilometres, or 600 miles, takes more
than two weeks. That is owing not only to the appalling
roads, but also to the fact that as many as 90 official and,
mostly, unofficial checkpoints have to be negotiated
along the way.

UNMISS is currently providing direct protection
to more than 220,000 civilians in six different locations
around the country. The largest site, which is in Bentiu
and hosting 125,000 people, is the second-largest urban
area in South Sudan, and I have no doubt that thousands
of civilians would not be alive today if it were not for
UNMISS. Now more than ever, the 12,000 United
Nations Blue Helmets and 2,000 United Nations police
officers are vital to the protection of civilians.

Since last year, the security, economic and
humanitarian situations have worsened markedly.
Just in the past few days, the currency dramatically
devalued, leaving the Government struggling to meet
its financial obligations. As the frustrations mount,
so does the risk of instability. Virtually no part of
the country is immune to conflict, and yet there
has been no concerted effort by any party to adhere
to a ceasefire. Instead, over the past month we have
actually been seeing the conflict intensify. In some of
the violence, the Government forces have responded
to attacks by the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) in Opposition and other armed groups, notably
in Wau and the Equatorias, in the South. In other
areas, in contrast, SPLA operations such as those in
Upper Nile and Jonglei appear far more strategic, and
are focused on taking opposition-held areas. In early
April, the killing of SPLA soldiers by opposition forces
triggered retaliatory attacks by Government forces in
and around the town of Wau. Multiple witnesses have
reported to UNMISS that the SPLA shot many victims
after asking them what ethnic group they belonged
to. More than 15,000 civilians have sought refuge in
the protection sites alongside the UNMISS base, and
another 5,000 have fled to the Catholic Church areas in
Wau. At UNMISS, we have reinforced our protection
capabilities with additional troops and stepped up the
amount of patrolling that we are doing.

In the Equatorias, in the South, opposition attacks
have focused on vehicles along major supply routes.
Following an ambush by suspected opposition forces
on the Government near Pajok in Eastern Equatoria,
the Government forces, very regrettably, responded by
torching houses, looting shops, hospitals and schools
and, almost invariably, committing acts of sexual
violence. Once again, boys and men were targeted
along ethnic lines. Since the beginning of the year,
60,000 civilians have fled in fear each month from the
Equatorias to Uganda. Most of them, unfortunately,
are farmers, so that what was once the country's
breadbasket is being depopulated, and when these
people leave the area, they are no longer involved in
the production of food. The United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization estimates that South Sudan
is losing about 1,000 metric tonnes of locally produced
food as a result. A group of religious leaders I met
with recently in Torit, a town in the South, told me that
around three-quarters of its population had already fled
to Uganda.

As I said, in addition to those more retaliatory
operations, there are also significant military operations
being conducted that are aimed at gaining a tactical
advantage over opposition positions before the onset of
the rainy season. Government offensives are currently
going on in Upper Nile, towards the town of Tonga, and
as we speak, an SPLA military force is moving into the
area of Kodok, north of Malakal, on the west bank of
the Nile, signalling an offensive into an area that we
believe could displace as many as 70,000 civilians. And
in a third offensive, we are seeing SPLA moves into
Nuer areas of Waat that are under opposition control.
In the face of this escalation of the past few months,
UNMISS has increased the robustness of its protection
activities. Our integrated patrols to most of the conflict
areas have increased. They are aimed at deterring
violence, monitoring and reporting on the human rights
situation and engaging with political parties at the
local level.

Unfortunately, roadblocks and the denial of flight-
safety assurances have restricted the Mission's ability
to reach key locations as quickly as we would like.
However, I am proud to say that the troop-contributing
countries are standing their ground. In recent days, a
Rwandan patrol to Pajok in Eastern Equatoria slept
at the checkpoint, refusing to back down when SPLA
soldiers demanded that it return to base, and was
able to get through the following day. In Upper Nile,
Mongolian peacekeepers cocked their weapons at SPLA
in Opposition soldiers who were abducting young boys
for recruitment and secured their release. Chinese
peacekeepers braved fire to help humanitarian workers
to safety in Kajo Keji, in the Equatorias, and Ethiopian
soldiers reacted swiftly in order to apprehend armed
men who were trying to penetrate our protection-of-
civilian sites in Juba.

Our formed police units are patrolling both inside
and outside the protection sites, thereby freeing up our
military forces to conduct further long-range patrols. I
was heartened by Major General Cammaert's comments
in his recent report on the progress that has been made
with regard to our troop movements, and we will be
pushing further on his follow-up recommendations.
The deployment of a regional protection force will
again also free up resources to project our presence
beyond Juba. However, we should remain realistic
in our expectations. An additional 4,000 troops will
certainly boost our capacity but will largely have to
function under similar rules of engagement.

The humanitarian consequences of the violence
have been disastrous. One third of South Sudan's
population are currently either displaced or refugees.
This is a man-made disaster, unlike that of the other
countries in the region experiencing famine brought
on by drought. People have been forced to flee their
homes and, as the people I have met in places such as
Leer have told me, they have exhausted their coping
mechanisms. For many, three years of conflict have
eroded their basic livelihoods, prevented them from
planting and harvesting and caused cattle to be looted
on a grand scale.

I want to single out the courage and efforts of
humanitarian workers, who, despite massive logistical
hurdles, have operated to provide lifesaving support to
the most isolated communities. In the past month, there
have been three attacks on aid workers alone, killing 10
people. Non-governmental organizations in Mayendit
county were forced to evacuate, and humanitarian
compounds and supplies have been repeatedly looted,
most recently by opposition forces, in Waat and Yuai.
Agencies still struggle to gain clearances to access the
most vulnerable.

Despite what appears to be attempts by the parties
to achieve victory by military means, a political solution
is the only way forward for South Sudan. Military
offensives are fracturing groups and intensifying ethnic
divisions to a degree that will hinder reconciliation.
Regrettably, no party has shown interest in reviving the
peace agreement. President Kiir's announcement of a
national dialogue has been welcomed, but skepticism
remains. An independent convener is essential, as is
the need to bring in all constituencies, including those
outside the country. Unlike this time last year, when
the conflict was construed on a bipolar basis, today the
opposition has splintered. Our peacebuilding efforts,
by necessity, will need to be more widely cast than in
the past.

To create political will, the parties need to be
speaking with one voice. The African Union, the
Security Council and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) must be united in dealing
with the parties. I work hand in hand with the United
Nations Special Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan, as
well as with the African Union and its Envoy, President
Konare, and IGAD Chair President Mogae to identify
ways to revitalize the peace process.

Let me underscore that the political process in
South Sudan is not dead; however, it requires significant
resuscitation. UNMISS will work together with our
partners on opportunities to forge viable solutions to
bring an end to the hostilities and the suffering of the
people of South Sudan. To do so will require the support
of the Council, speaking with a united voice against the
current state of affairs.

I end by saying that I am heartened by what I have
encountered within UNMISS. It is truly making a
difference on the ground. I stand proud to be associated
with the Mission and all that it has achieved.

