Ms. Coomaraswamy: I welcome you here to
New York and to this Chamber, Mr. President. I also
welcome the opportunity to participate in this open
debate on the theme of children and armed conflict. I
thank the delegation of Viet Nam and Mr. Le Luong
Minh for their foresightedness in choosing this topic
and for working with dedication on this issue of
importance to all of us. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his constant support of this mandate. I would also like
to thank the Chair of the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and all its members for
their tireless efforts in bringing this issue to bear in the
work of the Council. For the many children who have
benefited from its robust action, I would like to further
thank the Council on their behalf.

Earlier this year, we had an opportunity to
undertake such an open debate around the annual
report (S/2007/757) of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict. During that debate, I
stressed the concerns of the report, reiterating the
position that the Security Council is the United Nations
body of action on issues of peace and security and that
it should take steps to begin to consider targeted and
concrete measures against the 16 persistent violators
who have been on the shame list of the Secretary-
General's report for four consecutive years. I also
requested the Council to consider moving the agenda
forward and to expand the scope of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict to cover all situations
of concern and all grave Violations against children,
especially the crime of sexual violence, which, like the
recruitment of child soldiers, is always deliberate,
targeted and a direct consequence of criminal intent,
and which received the special attention of the Council
recently in resolution 1820 (2008). I reiterate those
messages again today and hope that the Council, in its
wisdom, will move towards greater protection for
children in conflict zones.

In that context, I look forward to the discussions
regarding the possibility of adopting a new resolution
that would capture some of the concerns that have
developed in the attempt to implement resolution 1612
08-42706
(2005). The new resolution must move the agenda
forward by expanding the gateway to the annexes to
include all other grave violations or at the very least,
and especially after the adoption of resolution 1820
(2008), lay renewed emphasis on the question of sexual
violence against children. Such a resolution should also
consider the possibility of setting up a process that
would eventually lead to taking targeted measures
against persistent violators.

This debate on children and armed conflict thus
allows us to move beyond the immediate agenda of the
Security Council, to reflect on the bigger picture and
the longer term issues concerning children and armed
conflict. During the course of the year, Member States
have expressed the view that my Office should look
more deeply into the root causes of grave violations
against children, especially the phenomenon of
children associated with armed groups, and also look
more closely at the problems of reintegration and
sustainable development. As a result, my Office is in
the process of convening a research project on the root
causes of children being associated with armed groups,
and we hope to convene a meeting later this month of
child protection experts to identify the crucial
messages and gaps with regard to reintegrating
children affected by conflict into their societies.

The reintegration of children in situations of
armed conflict is a long-term process. A recent seminal
study by the Harvard School of Public Health, which
followed former child combatants over a 10-year
period, showed that the impact of the conflict continues
even after 10 years, with many having psychosocial
problems. That is particularly true of those who were
made to commit very violent crimes and those who
were subject to sexual violence. Girl children had the
worst indicators, with the majority having major
problems with social integration because of a low level
of acceptance by families and communities. The
younger the children recruited and the longer they
stayed associated with the armed groups, the more
difficult the adjustment. Another very interesting
aspect is that even children who were not associated
with armed groups but who lived in situations of armed
conflict displayed the same vulnerabilities. Education
was found to be key for the successful recovery of
children. It is for that reason that my Office and
UNICEF are considering compiling a manual of best
practices in line with the Paris Principles, an important
08-42706
initiative by the Government of France, which sets out
the standards for reintegration programmes.

Although I am in perfect agreement that
understanding the root causes of conflict and
identifying strategies for reintegration are important,
they should not steer the Council away from its task of
ensuring accountability for and fighting the impunity
of persistent and grave violators of children's rights in
situations of armed conflict, a task in which it has
supreme advantage over other organs of the United
Nations, including the possibility of imposing targeted
measures. While the funds and programmes and other
parts of the United Nations are well placed to respond
to root causes and the need for sustainable
development, it is the Security Council that can focus
on grave violations. The Council, as the guardian organ
of peace and security, must concentrate on taking
action against those who persistently violate its
resolutions. Though it must deepen its understanding, it
must not move away from its central focus. It will be
most effective if it focuses on taking firm action
against those who commit grave violations against
children and who, by doing so, threaten peace and
security.

Over the past three months, I have visited Iraq,
Chad, the Central African Republic and Afghanistan to
review first-hand the problems of children affected by
armed conflict in those situations of concern. In Chad
and the Central African Republic in particular, I have
seen how the Council's work under resolution 1612
(2005) is having a direct effect on the ground, how the
imprimatur of the Council results in non-State actors
entering into agreements and releasing children, how
Governments sit up and listen and how child protection
activists, both within and outside the United Nations
system, are strengthened and empowered by the
Council's commitment. All of that is a tribute to the
Council's willingness to embark on the unprecedented
initiative that is resolution 1612 (2005). I wish I could
bring the children who have been released from the
clutches of armed groups because of the Council's
actions so that it might see the fruit of its work. It is
important that we collectively reassert our commitment
on this issue, so that we may move forward
realistically and move the agenda as well.

Finally, my visits to Iraq and Afghanistan have
convinced me that the nature of warfare is changing,
that there are different and more difficult challenges
ahead in protecting children and that the Council must
play its part. Aisha was the 11-year-old girl we met in
Jalalabad, Afghanistan. Throughout the one hour I was
with her and her family, she did not smile, and her eyes
reflected sadness. Her family was a victim of collateral
damage, and her school had been attacked by
insurgents. Yet, despite all the dangers, she was
determined to go to school, and her eyes lit up only
when she said she hoped to be a teacher.

The time has come for us to redouble our efforts
in those regions and to renew our commitment to
ensuring that children will not be recruited or used as
suicide bombers, that they will not be detained in
military detention without due process that protects
their vulnerability as minors, that their schools will not
be attacked, that they or their families will not become
collateral damage and that girl children will not be the
targets of sexual Violence or be denied access to
school. Children in those harsh battlegrounds must also
be able to dream of a democratic world, free of
violence, guided by tolerance and diversity, where
everyone will live in peace and dignity.

I end my statement today with the words of
Emmanuel Jal, the former child soldier from Sudan
who filled Conference Room 4 yesterday with a song
he dedicated to the humanitarian worker who rescued
him along with 175 others. He said, "I stand here
because someone cared. I stand here because someone
dared. The sky is now my limit".

