Brazil would like to thank the presidency of the Security Council for convening this important debate and for finding ways to continue the Council's work despite the current restrictions. We also thank the briefers. Most of the world's attention is currently focused on the pandemic. That reality notwithstanding, and while we stand in solidarity with all those affected, Brazil would like to highlight its continued commitment to the achievement of peace in the Middle East, which is the theme of this quarterly debate. Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Brazil wishes to reiterate its support for a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security. We encourage the parties to seek a constructive political environment conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations and to engage in new and creative diplomatic efforts with an open mind in order to achieve a just and comprehensive settlement. The cessation of hostilities in north-western Syria, while fragile, still seems to be holding, which is to be commended. In Yemen, despite repeated calls for a ceasefire, including the coalition's declaration two weeks ago, hostilities have persisted in many areas. With regard to Libya, Brazil urges all parties to resume dialogue under the auspices of the Acting Special Representative, Stephanie Williams, also with a view to undertaking joint efforts against the pandemic. As the crises in the Middle East and North Africa unfold, we should bear in mind that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are mutually reinforcing. The impact of the coronavirus disease on the global economy, coupled with the sharp decline in oil prices and the currency depreciation experienced in many countries of the region, requires urgent attention. At the same time, regional socioeconomic development can be achieved only through the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Religious freedom for all is also essential. While the current situation poses immense risks and challenges to the Middle East and North Africa, it also presents unique opportunities for dialogue and cooperation towards peace and prosperity. Brazil stands ready to contribute to efforts in that regard.
