Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. J ean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, for their
invaluable briefings.

In the context of our debate today, I would like to
focus on three issues: the work of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the desired
bilateral cooperation and the way forward.

With regard to the work of UNISFA, we
condemn all attacks on UNISFA and peacekeepers by
whomsoever. We emphasize the importance of the full
deployment of UNISFA, in keeping with resolution
2469 (2019), and we appreciate the tireless efforts made
by mission personnel to maintain peace in Abyei. We
also welcome the technical extension two weeks ago,
through resolution 2492 (2019), to define a clearer and
more consistent mandate for UNISFA. At the same
time, the parties concerned - the Sudan, South Sudan
and Ethiopia - must accept that mandate. We also call
for the adoption of a gradual and thoughtful approach
in the mission's development so as to ensure the
security of Abyei, its inhabitants and all peacekeepers
working there.

With regard to bilateral cooperation, we welcome
the agreement reached by the Joint Technical
Committee for Border Demarcation on the remaining
border disputes, as well as on the resumption of river
navigation through the borders and its use for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. We hope that
cooperation will increase until all the provisions of
the relevant Council resolutions are met. We hope,
too, that Abyei will be more than merely a place of
convergence and coexistence for its inhabitants. We
hope that it becomes a symbol of fraternity between the
two neighbouring countries, especially in the light of
the constructive political roles played by Khartoum and
Juba in the respective countries' political processes.

With regard to the way forward, we all know that the
Sudan and South Sudan are going through a transitional
phase. This is an opportunity to achieve positive and
constructive progress. The next phase will require the
Council to be patient, temper its demands and give
adequate latitude to both countries. As we mentioned
several months ago, that could contribute to even more
progress, including in the three joint institutions in
Abyei. The Secretary-General's good offices, through
his Special Envoy, could also be helpful.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait is fully prepared
to cooperate with the two neighbouring countries, the
Security Council and the Secretariat in order to reach
a definitive settlement of the situation in Abyei and to
maintain security in the Sudan, South Sudan and the
entire region.

