I thank the presidency of the Security Council for convening today's meeting, as well as the members of the Council for their constant support for Colombia. I also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and his Special Representative, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for the report presented today (S/2020/943). I wish to reaffirm President Ivan Duque Marquez's willingness to recognize the importance of the presence of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia throughout his entire term in office. In this regard, we highlight resolution 2545 (2020), adopted on 25 September, which extended the Mission's mandate for an additional year. Colombia emphasizes the work of the Mission's team and its collaborative efforts with Colombian national institutions and civil society. On 16 September, the Government of Colombia convened a meeting to evaluate the accomplishments made during the two years in which the "Peace with legality" policy has been implemented. As Council members know, this policy is the instrument through which the 2016 Agreement is being fulfilled. On the occasion of that meeting, President Duque Marquez highlighted for Council members and other stakeholders a detailed report on the achievements made as well as the challenges we continue to face in fulfilling the agreed commitments. President Duque Marquez also pointed out how, during our history, Colombia has been a country affected by different clashes and expressions of violence. In the last four decades, these situations have been aggravated by such factors as drug trafficking, illegal markets and terrorist attacks. In some periods, several attempts were made to overcome violence by negotiating peace agreements. However, even those that were concluded successfully have not prevented the re-emergence of violence. Based on our experience, we have learned that building and consolidating peace requires the solid application of the principles of truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition. In the 2016 Agreement, a transitional justice system focused on victims' rights was designed. The Government has supported and continues to support this independent system and its various mechanisms. However, it is necessary to reiterate the inadequate contribution ofactors who are obligated to appear before the transitional justice system yet have not contributed significantly and comprehensively to the truth. Colombia demands that members of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtn (FARC) political party tell the truth and recognize their responsibility with regard to the recruitment of children, kidnappings, sex crimes, attacks against civilians, the planting of antipersonnel mines and forced disappearances, among other serious crimes. Likewise, they must give details on drug trafficking routes, money laundering and the links between the former guerrilla and other criminal organizations. The Government considers essential for the United Nations Verification Mission to address the lack of contribution to truth, reparation and justice by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo. We trust that the truth about their countless crimes during more than 50 years will be revealed, so that the transitional justice mechanisms can impose proportional penalties, in accordance with the victims' expectations. The 2016 Agreement foresees that the Mission will eventually verify compliance with the sentences to be imposed in future by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We appreciate that in resolution 2545 (2020) the Council expressed its willingness to consider the possible addition of this task to the Mission's mandate, based on the consultation process coordinated by the Government of Colombia. The two components of the Mission's current mandate are the reincorporation process and the security guarantees. The report highlights the progress made in the reincorporation of former combatants who remain committed to the process and the work carried out by the National Reincorporation Council. Regarding economic and social reincorporation, the report acknowledges the efforts made in the context of the pandemic and their positive impact. Despite the difficult situation, ex-combatants have received support and resources for individual and collective productive projects. Even during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) national lockdown, the Reincorporation Council approved, in five virtual sessions, 15 projects benefitting 420 people. The report also mentions the political reintegration of former combatants. In this regard, it is important to remember that, in the 2018 parliamentary elections, the FARC party obtained 0.34 per cent of the Senate's votes and 0.22 per cent in the House of Representatives. Still, the FARC party acceded to the 10 seats granted to them in the 2016 Agreement. For any other political party, this number of congressional seats would require 4.8 per cent of the total votes. Currently, a member of the FARC party is Vice-President of the Senate. And in the local and regional elections of 2019 the FARC party participated with the required guarantees. Regarding the transformation of the former territorial areas for training and reincorporation, the measures for their transition and consolidation go beyond the agreed commitments. This fact reaffirms the importance attributed by the Government to these spaces to guarantee the reincorporation of the ex-combatants who live there. The safety and security of former combatants, human rights defenders and social and political leaders remains our greatest challenge. As stated in the report, on 12 August, President Ivan Duque Marquez convened the National Commission for Security Guarantees. At that meeting, the Commission analysed the violent events of recent months and examined additional measures for the dismantling of criminal organizations that operate in some regions. The Government has duly considered the Mission's recommendations, with a view to strengthening prevention, risk management, security and protection strategies. Current circumstances have not prevented the implementation of protection measures. The Presidential Office for Stabilization coordinates 15 State agencies that adopted specific actions to reinforce security, mainly in prevention. For 2,626 people located in the former territorial areas for training and reincorporation, security is provided by more than 1,200 police members and 2,400 army troops. In addition, 266 individual, collective and headquarters protection schemes are provided by the National Protection Unit. For almost 600 people living outside the former territorial areas for training and reincorporation in 579 municipalities, the State has granted individual and collective protection schemes, based on risk assessments decided jointly with five representatives of the FARC party. The fight against impunity is a State priority. Regarding the attacks against former combatants, the Attorney General's Office has advanced in the investigations in 126 cases out of the 266 events reported since 2017. This means progress in 47 per cent of the cases, which include 100 homicides, 18 attempted homicides and eight forced disappearances. In the cases already judged, 30 people have been convicted. We are advancing in the stabilization of the 170 municipalities most affected by violence and poverty, where almost 6.6 million Colombians reside. More than 220,000 people actively participated in the formulation of the 16 development plans with a territorial focus being implemented in these municipalities. In the last two years, 888 projects were completed in these regions. To date, close to $600 million dollars has been invested in these development plans. Their implementation has continued even during the pandemic. Last August, 25 projects, worth $71 million, were approved for eight regions. Transformation in these territories must be a strong process that reinforces the eradication of illegal economies, development of infrastructure, the provision of public goods and services and more opportunities for economic progress and welfare. The Mission's report indicates that limited women's participation in the implementation is a great challenge, although it does not provide concrete examples. I want to emphasize the priority given by the Government to women's participation in the "Peace with legality" policy, including in decision-making and implementation and as beneficiaries. Fifty-one gender indicators of the implementation plan show that more than 870,000 women have benefited from its actions. Be assured that we will continue to work committed to the empowerment of women and to the eradication of inequalities and discrimination. Colombia condemns the violent acts against officials of the country office of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and one of its vehicles, which took place on 7 October in the Caqueta department. According to information from the Attorney General's Office, these officials, together with delegates from the Ombudsman's Office and the Truth Commission, were intercepted by armed men, presumed members of a FARC-EP dissident structure. From the moment the facts were known, the Government expressed its solidarity to the Office of the High Commissioner and has maintained permanent contact with judicial authorities to prevent impunity. Colombia, like every other country in the world, faces the enormous challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Government has implemented comprehensive measures to safeguard people's health, provide support to the most vulnerable, reactivate the country's economy and promote well-being for all. In this context, we keep working and will continue to advance in the implementation of the peace with legality policy - collectively, with institutions, actors and communities committed to enhancing the concrete results achieved in the last two years. Our plan is to keep making definitive progress in territorial stabilization, justice, security, the protection of human rights, welfare and social and sustainable development. Our goal, as emphasized by President Ivan Duque Marquez, is to free ourselves from the causes, motivations and factors that have created and intensified violence in our country. We thank the members of the Security Council for helping us to advance towards that purpose.
