Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): It is a great honour
for us to take part in this afternoon's meeting of the
Security Council. It is also a great honour to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over the meeting. Australia is
a neighbour and a friendly country that has supported
Timor-Leste for many years in achieving peace and
stability. Australia has also been a great contributor to
the development process in Timor-Leste. I thank the
Australian delegation, the permanent members of the
Security Council and the non-permanent members that
are present today for this opportunity.

It is a great honour for us to address the Council
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe and
Timor-Leste.

I would like to start by also congratulating the
people of Guinea-Bissau on the holding of peaceful,
free and fair elections earlier in the year and on the
inauguration of the newly elected authorities, thus
formally returning the country to constitutional order.
In that regard, I would also like to recognize the very
decisive supporting role played by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau and other partners.

In its first 100 days, the Government, led by Prime
Minister Domingos Simoes Pereira, has made very
significant progress in improving the provision of basic
services to the people of Guinea-Bissau, paying salary
arrears, launching the new school year and seeing its
programme and budget unanimously approved by the
National Assembly.

Politics in Guinea-Bissau is not as it was before.
It is a new day and a new and great journey lies
ahead for the people of Guinea-Bissau. Policies
implemented by Prime Minister Simoes Pereira and
his team evidence the change that has occurred in the
country. I congratulate the Prime Minister and all of
his colleagues for those policies. I profoundly believe
that following that path will lead to success, not only
in peace and stability but also in development for the
people of Guinea-Bissau and, ultimately, for the entire
region of West Africa - including even small countries
such as ours that are very far away and situated in Asia.

The recent actions taken by the authorities
concerning security sector reform - especially the
substitution of General Antonio Indjai as Chief of
General Staff of the Armed Forces, the routing of all
salary payments through the banks, the revision of the
Armed Forces retirement roster and the identification
of 100 personnel to retire by January 2015 - are to
be commended. Those achievements show the strong
commitment and steady leadership of the newly elected
authorities. We welcome the Government's continuing
reforms aimed at greater political and socioeconomic
stability, as well as at consolidating the rule oflaw and
protecting and promoting the civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights of all Bissau-Guineans.
In that regard, we stress the vital importance of the
international community's support in its technical and
financial aspects, but also in ensuring stability to allow
the national authorities to implement those reforms.

For all its achievements, Guinea-Bissau is still
a post-conflict country with fragile institutions and
scarce financial resources. In his address to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, the Prime
Minister called on the international community for
assistance, and specifically requested the reactivation
of the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau
as a privileged forum to discuss and seek support for
the mobilization of international aid (see A/69/PV.17).
This morning, we held the tenth working session of
the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau.
A joint communique' has been published. I urge
Council members to read it because it contains some
recommendations that will certainly be helpful to them
and their own countries.

This morning, the Prime Minister described for
us the current situation in Guinea-Bissau and the
vision that his overnment has for the people of that
country. The CPLP and its member States remain
deeply involved in coordinating efforts with the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
European Union, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the International Contact Group
on Guinea-Bissau to support the priorities identified by
the Government of Guinea-Bissau. On 29 October, the
CPLP held an extraordinary meeting of its Council of
Ministers in Guinea-Bissau, at which we expressed our
deep appreciation for the positive role played by the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB), while
encouraging the national authorities to coordinate
with ECOWAS and all African States to reconfigure
ECOMIB to support the implementation of much-
needed reforms. We also call on the Security Council
to give all its support to ECOMIB, which has played an
extraordinary and very positive role in bringing peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau.

We also recognize the very positive role played by
the President of Rwanda and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, His Excellency President
Trovoada. In that regard, we also welcome the
Secretary-General's recent report on Guinea-Bissau
(S/2014/805) and its recommendations, and we endorse
in particular the technical rollover of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau. We look forward to the next report of
the Secretary-General, which will include the findings
and recommendations of the strategic assessment
mission sent to the country earlier this month, and the
comprehensive review of the mandate announced for
early 2015.

We profoundly believe that it is our obligation -
whether we are a small or big country, a poor or rich
nation - to give our support to a people that today is in
great need ofit. For many years, Timor-Leste was blessed
by Council members' support here in this Chamber, as
well as by all the Members of the United Nations. We
are deeply grateful for that and acknowledge everyone.
Today, Guinea-Bissau, a small and still a poor country,
needs the same support. We feel the need and the duty
to share what we have with our brothers and sisters of
Guinea-Bissau.

Today, each member of the CPLP is deeply
committed to contributing to Guinea-Bissau in the
coming years, as we have done in the past. As President
of the CPLP, I would like to pledge our full support
to the Prime Minister and people of Guinea-Bissau
during the donors conference to take place in early
2015. We will continue to seek the full engagement
of all international partners, and in particular the
International Contact Group.

Iwould also like to draw Council members' attention
to the risk of the Ebola epidemic in West Africa, which
also poses a great threat to Guinea-Bissau. Even if no
cases have yet been identified, if the virus spreads to
the country and no preventive measures are taken we
can be sure that one day all the achievements in peace

or development that we have achieved in that country
will be lost. In that respect, we also commend the
efforts made by the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
prevent the spread of the deadly disease, and we ask
Council members and international partners to support,
financial or otherwise, the people and the Government
of Guinea-Bissau in order to help prevent the spread of
Ebola that we all know is affecting West Africa.

Let me thank Council members for their attention.
All the countries from the Portuguese-speaking
Community are committed to supporting Guinea-
Bissau.

