Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for the information she
provided today.

We once again highlight the destruction of the 27
chemical-weapons production facilities declared by
the Syrian Arab Republic and encourage it to continue
to submit reports regarding such facilities. We also
encourage the Syrian Government to continue to
cooperate in order to clarify outstanding issues for
the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We stress
that dialogue and transparency are the best paths to
overcome any doubt or discrepancy that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat encounters. We reiterate our
support for the work being carried out by the Technical
Secretariat. We encourage Syria and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to continue to work concertedly.

We also consider it essential that the Technical
Secretariat conduct on-site inspections in order to
gather reliable information from those places where
chemical elements or agents are alleged to have been
used. In that regard, we highlight the upcoming
inspections of the Barzah and J amrayah facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre. We will
examine the results closely.

Bolivia categorically rejects the use of chemical
weapons; it is an unjustifiable and criminal actregardless
of where or by whom it is committed, as it is a serious
crime against international law and life itself. Anyone
who uses that type of weapon must be accountable to
justice. To that end, we insist that the Security Council
remain united in order to establish an impartial and
credible mechanism to conduct an investigation that is
conclusive, transparent and depoliticized to bring those
responsible to justice. In that regard, we regret that
other multilateral bodies such as the OPCW - whose
technical work carried out to date we recognize and
support - have been resorted to and given powers.
However, we believe that the identification of those
responsible should be undertaken by a mechanism
that has the backing of the Council. With regard to the
technical work of the OPCW, we will closely examine
the results of any of the analyses and investigations
that the Fact-finding Mission carries out on the alleged
incidents in Douma and those reported in 2017.

Finally, we reiterate that the only way out of the
conflict is through a high-level political dialogue that,
within the framework of international law and, in
particular, respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria, allows for the
formation of a constitutional committee, in accordance
with the Sochi declaration, resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva process under the auspices of the United
Nations. We also highlight the latest agreement between
Russia and Turkey, which has enabled a reduction of
violence, mainly in the province of Idlib, as well as the
meeting among Russia, Turkey, France and Germany.
Those platforms for dialogue are essential if we want to
reach a peaceful solution to the conflict.

