Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Since 12 March, the Council has adopted three
resolutions. The latest, resolution 1403 (2002), was
adopted unanimously. That makes three resolutions in
three weeks, in contrast to the earlier period, when 18
months elapsed with no convergence on how to register
a conclusion reflecting the deterioration of a situation
that has led to the deep political and humanitarian
crisis we now face.

For the Council, the topic on today's agenda is as
old as the United Nations itself. We have become
accustomed to quoting and requoting the best-known
resolutions and, unfortunately, every time we do so it is
because they have not been complied with. The
Council must insist yet again, however, if it is to fulfil
its obligations with respect to international peace and
security. It must do so at a particularly sensitive
moment, when several factors have to come together if
we are to work coherently to address the widespread
violence, its serious impact on the civilian population,
the dire need for access to humanitarian assistance, the
resumption of open conflict in northern Israel across
the Blue Line and the growing risk of destabilization
throughout the region.

The focus of our discussion today is immediate
and unconditional compliance with the resolutions of
the Security Council. Colombia cannot accept or
conceive of any argument in support of non-
compliance with the resolutions of this organ. The
basis for our statements is the clearly defined political
vision in resolution 1397 (2002) and the demands in
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) for the
restoration of conditions of security. Both sides have
obligations to discharge without delay. The Council
must do its utmost to ensure that final outcome. Thus,
Israel must immediately withdraw its armed forces
from the occupied cities, including Ramallah. Equally
and as a consequence of the foregoing, Palestine must
do everything in its power to implement a ceasefire.
These are the sine qua non conditions for the
restoration of security and of the viability of a political
process that can be supported by the parties and the
international community as a whole.

In this context, we must consider the desirability
of formally establishing some type of international
presence that will help the parties to maintain the
validity of these resolutions. This may contribute in
turn to the parallel restoration of a sufficient level of
trust between the parties, which could promote political
convergence.

The work of the Security Council must be part of
a concerted international effort to support the efforts of
other relevant actors. After many attempts, we have
now achieved consensus in the adoption of our recent
resolution. This unity will be meaningful, however,
only if it is articulated in coordination with the
activities of the other relevant international actors, the
"quartet" in particular. That mechanism must therefore
be allowed to operate without limitation in the field.
That, of course, is and has been the wish of all of us
here.

We conclude by referring to the humanitarian
situation, a matter that cannot be ignored or subject to
negotiation or exceptions. Regardless of the conditions
prevailing in the conflict, the parties are obligated to do
everything in their power to respect the physical and
moral integrity of civilians affected by those
conditions. In this respect, just as we unreservedly
condemn attacks on the civilian population by suicidal
extremists, we also demand of the Government of
Israel that it adhere strictly to the standards of the 1949
Fourth Geneva Convention in dealing with defenceless
minors, journalists, humanitarian personnel - including
that of the International Committee of the Red Cross -
and United Nations personnel.

Ultimately, we all understand that Israel's armed
forces are seeking to protect Israeli civilians, but we
must ask ourselves: Who is protecting Palestinian
civilians living in the occupied territories, particularly
now that the Palestinian Authority has been reduced to
its smallest common denominator?

