Mr. Klein (spoke in French): I have the pleasure
today of reporting to the Council on the progress
achieved since the start of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL). In so doing, I would like to
introduce the two reports of the Secretary-General
before the Council: the third progress report on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia and the report
prepared pursuant to Security Council resolution 1521
(2003).

(spoke in English)

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to all the
members of the Council for having graciously agreed
to receive Chairman Gyude Bryant, who is a staunch
supporter of UNMIL and whom I would like to
commend, in your presence, for the resolute manner in
which he has led the Transitional Government in these
difficult early stages of the peace process. His presence
here today will give the Council the opportunity to hear
from the Chairman himself the steps taken by the
National Transitional Government of Liberia in
implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
and the Chairman's vision for taking Liberia through
this period of transition to the October 2005 elections.

Given the state of chaos, insecurity and collapsed
governmental structure at the time we arrived in
Liberia seven months ago, our immediate priority was
to stabilize the country by progressively deploying
troops throughout its entirety, disarming the armed
groups through the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation (DDRR) programme,
and simultaneously commencing the restructuring of
the law and order institutions in order to create the
necessary security environment, space for the
implementation of other aspects of our mandate and to
facilitate the delivery of sorely needed humanitarian
assistance. I am pleased to report that the progress we
have made on these most pressing priorities has far
exceeded our expectations.

The deployment throughout Liberia has greatly
improved security along its long and porous borders.
UNMIL now has a strong presence along the Guinean-
Liberian and Sierra Leonean-Liberian borders and the
northern part of the Liberian border with Cote d'Ivoire.
We will have full presence on the border contiguous
with Cote d'Ivoire when the inbound Ethiopian and
Senegalese battalions deploy to the south-east in mid-
June.

Similarly, UNMIL's civilian police component is
gaining ground. It has expanded considerably to the
areas beyond Monrovia, including Roberts
International Airport and the main UNMIL sector
headquarters in Buchanan, Gbanga, Tubmanburg and
Zwedru. The civilian component of UNMIL, although
authorized at 607 international staff positions, has only
400 in place. This leaves me with a shortfall of 33 per
cent. However, what they lack in quantity, they make
up in quality.

The relaunched DDRR programme is progressing
without major obstacles. As of 31 May, a total of
38,673 combatants had been disarmed; of those, 13 per
cent are children and 18 per cent women. As I
indicated earlier, together with those disarmed in
December, that represents more than 70 per cent of the
estimated 53,000 combatants. A total of 16,065
weapons have also been collected, and 12,858 rounds
of heavy ammunition and 3,900,000 rounds of small
ammunition have been collected and destroyed.

There are worrying signs, however, that some of
the heavy weapons are not as yet being turned in for
disarmament. We are determined to ensure that, in the
end, all such weapons are surrendered. Another
concern is that few non-Liberian combatants are
voluntarily disclosing their foreign identities. So far,
only 82 have declared themselves. We expect more to
gain confidence in the process and identify themselves
once the arrangements for their repatriation and
remuneration become clear. We are devising those
arrangements in consultation with the concerned
United Nations agencies in the surrounding countries,
preparing reintegration programmes should those
individuals choose to return to their countries of origin.

With the aspects of disarmament and
demobilization progressing smoothly, the main focus is
now on preparations for the reintegration of disarmed
combatants. In collaboration with the Transitional
Government, United Nations agencies, non-
governmental agencies and other parties such as the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) and the European Union, short-term bridging
projects have been devised to absorb demobilized
combatants pending the availability of a long-term
reintegration programme. The United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and its partners are
currently developing long-term capacity-building
programmes for 7,000 child ex-combatants, most of
which will focus on education, skills development,
apprenticeship and community-based support.

Since we last briefed the Council, there has been
considerable progress in the area of security sector
reform and the rule of law. UNMIL has assisted in the
restoration of the judicial system. Seventeen courts
have been reconstituted in Monrovia and its environs.
Furthermore, in collaboration with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, we have assisted in
improving the facilities and the conditions of the
Monrovia Central Prison and to date have trained 50
correctional officers.

Additionally, the United Nations civilian police
component has made considerable progress in the
restructuring and the retraining of the Liberian
National Police. A Rule of Law Implementation
Committee has been established to coordinate the
reform of the police, judiciary and correctional
institutions, as indicated in the report. The Committee
is finalizing the strategy for the reform and the
restructuring of Liberian National Police. It has already
finalized the eligibility criteria for recruitment into the
new police service, and the Transitional Government
and UNMIL jointly launched the recruitment process
on 5 May. The training of new cadets is to begin on
1 July.
With regard to the restructuring of the army, we
are pleased that the Government of the United States
has offered to take the lead in assisting and advising
the National Transitional Government of Liberia on the
implementation of that important task. A few weeks
ago, I met with a visiting assessment team from the
United States Department of Defence, and we
discussed proposals for coordinating our efforts in that
regard. UNMIL prepared a draft restructuring scheme
and a draft defence policy that are now being reviewed,
and follow-up meetings will ensue to ensure a proper,
realistic and coordinated approach among all parties
concerned.

Since April, UNMIL civil affairs officers have
been deployed in various parts of the country, and
UNMIL has currently deployed staff to the four sector
headquarters, in Tubmanburg, Buchanan, Zwedru and
Monrovia. It has also deployed in 10 of the 16
counties. In collaboration with the Ministry of Internal
Affairs, a project proposal has been finalized for the
return of government officials to their counties and
districts immediately after the disarmament exercise
has been completed. The United Nations Development
Programme, USAID and the European Union are also
involved in sourcing funds for this process.

Preparations for the October 2005 elections have
commenced. The seven members of National Elections
Commission (NEC) were sworn in on 29 April.
UNMIL maintains that Liberia must take ownership of
the electoral process. However, the Mission expects to
play a key role so that the NEC can avail itself of the
substantial material, human and technical resources
that we have. In providing support for the electoral
process in Liberia, UNMIL will be guided by two key
objectives: to assist in the conduct of credible elections
with all the necessary expertise and to leave behind a
Liberian election management body that has the
requisite capacity to continue independently, with
minimal international assistance.

Currently, the Mission and other partners are
assisting the National Elections Commission to
establish its infrastructure in Monrovia and the
counties. In accordance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, the NEC, assisted by UNMIL, the
Economic Community Of West African States, the
European Union and the International Foundation for
Election Systems, will have to select the electoral
system to be used, finalize the demarcation of
constituencies and prepare a draft electoral law for
consideration by the National Transitional Government
of Liberia and the National Transitional Legislative
Assembly. UNMIL is developing a training seminar for
NEC commissioners and senior staff on electoral
administration and electoral systems.

We also ask the Council to take note of the fact
that there are indications that certain individuals in the
Government are becoming enamoured of and
comfortable in their positions and are becoming
somewhat less enthusiastic about the timing of the
October 2005 elections. The Council needs to reiterate
its strong support for the October 2005 election date
and its insistence that the elections will be held as
scheduled.

The three mechanisms for monitoring the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement - namely the Joint Monitoring Committee,
the Implementation Monitoring Committee and the
International Contact Group on Liberia (ICGL) - have
played a significant role in complementing the role of
UNMIL. On 11 May, the ICGL met in London and
expressed satisfaction at the progress made, especially
the successful relaunching of the DDRR programme.

Developments in the surrounding countries are of
concern to us as they can impact negatively on the
peace process in Liberia. Thus, we are much
encouraged by the efforts of the Chairman, who is
working with the leaders of the neighbouring States -
Guinea, cote d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone - to improve
their multilateral relationships. In that context as well,
we have adopted a regional approach for addressing
several of the cross-border issues between those
countries. Hence, in cooperation with our colleagues in
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire and the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), we are
taking concrete measures to enhance inter-mission
cooperation, in particular the sharing of assets and
military information. My Force Commander,
Lieutenant-General Daniel Opande, has met three times
with his counterparts in UNAMSIL and the United
Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (MINUCI). There
have also been three meetings of regional Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, hosted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa. A working group on inter-mission
cooperation has been established to effect close
cooperation on cross-border issues, and the Mission
and the French army in Cote d'Ivoire have exchanged
military liaison officers. As per the direction of the
Secretary-General, a detailed study on enhancing all
aspects of pursuing a regional approach in
implementing our mandate will be prepared for
submission to the Council later this year.

The improved security situation in recent months
and the resumption of the disarmament process have
enabled humanitarian agencies and human rights
groups to extend their activities to areas that were
formerly inaccessible. Also due to the improved
security situation, displaced people and refugees are
returning to their former homes.

Some refugees have returned from the
surrounding countries, especially Sierra Leone, and
almost 80,000 internally displaced persons have
returned spontaneously, out of a possible caseload of
316,000. Others too have returned on their own and
have been assisted by UNMIL and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees when
they become stranded on their way home. That was the
case with some 300 refugees stranded in Mali, who had
to be airlifted to Liberia, and, more recently, the 350
refugees who were rescued from a foundering vessel
off the coast of Cote d'Ivoire. We are discouraging
these piecemeal, self-initiated approaches and are
working in collaboration with the UNHCR in support
of a broad and organized process of return. The main
challenge now for the humanitarian agencies is a lack
of resources for quickly moving relief assistance to
newly accessible areas. That said, I must commend the
World Food Programme, which feeds 600,000 people
in Liberia every day, including 284,000 individuals
belonging to vulnerable groups - the rest being
internally displaced persons.

UNICEF continues to support the Ministry of
Education in its back-to-school campaign, which aims
to return an estimated 1 million children to their
classrooms by the end of 2004. As of this May, the
campaign has provided basic equipment and supplies,
including more than 8,000 school-in-a-box kits to
3,700 schools for 622,000 children and 20,000
teachers. As well, since June 2003, more than 1.24
million children under the age of 15 have been
immunized against measles.

Significant efforts are still required to restore
public concerns and to revive the economy. However,
the commercial and informal sectors have increased
substantially. We are encouraged by the progress made
since the donors conference of 5 and 6 February.
Chairman Bryant will elaborate on the work of his
Ministers to implement the Results-based Transitional
Framework. However, the level of pledges redeemed
by donors remains disappointingly low. As of 24 May,
up to $60 million had been received of the $520
million pledged in New York last February for the two-
year transitional period.

Before I conclude, let me make a few remarks
related to the report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1521 (2003) regarding
Liberia (S/2004/428).

As part of its mandate, UNMIL has continued to
monitor progress made by the Transitional Government
to put in place mechanisms to ensure the proper
management of two key natural resource industries,
namely diamonds and timber, which are both under
United Nations sanctions. In this context, an important
message I would like to leave with the Security
Council is that the National Transitional Government
of Liberia badly needs reliable sources of revenue in
order to function effectively. Liberia's long-term
security and stability will come only with an economy
that is robust enough to create steady employment for
young adult males, supported by a responsible credible,
democratic and accountable Government. It is therefore
necessary for the international community to provide
all necessary support to enable the National
Transitional Government of Liberia to meet the
requirements of Council resolution 1521 (2003).

Let me conclude by stressing that the Liberia of
today is totally different from the Liberia before the
arrival of the troops of the Economic Community of
West African States Mission in Liberia and,
subsequently, of the United Nations. The peace process
is now firmly on track and irreversible. UNMIL troops
are deployed throughout the country and have
significantly stabilized the country, and the
disarmament of combatants is making steady progress.
However, there are still numerous challenges ahead.
The progress made so far is still fragile. Ensuring
complete weapons handover remains a priority. Until
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme and troop deployment process
are completed, inter- and intra-factional conflicts may
persist in remote parts of the country. The capacity of
the Transitional Government to deliver services and to
extend its authority throughout the country also
remains, at the moment, very limited.

(spoke in French)

Despite these challenges, however, I can say that
I anticipate no major setbacks in our effort to bring
lasting peace and stability to Liberia, especially if
resources to facilitate the reintegration of former
combatants and national recovery are made available in
a timely fashion.
