Mr. Batu (Turkey): It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate you, Sir, even on this last day of February,
on the able manner in which you have conducted the
deliberations of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Cardenas, for his very capable and skilful work as
President of the Council last month.

 

The historic agreements reached in 1993 and 1994
have raised hopes and great expectations for the beginning
of a new era in the Middle East. However, the situation on
the ground continues to be a cause of concern. It is obvious
that, while much has been achieved, far more remains to be
done. After decades of bloodshed and mistrust, the process
of building confidence between Palestinians and Israelis is
not only arduous but painful. There is much more work to
be done to ensure that Palestinian autonomy can really start
functioning.

It is disturbing that the implementation of the second
stage of the Declaration of Principles has been delayed for
almost six months. We urge the parties to strive for further
progress in the negotiations leading to final peace. These
negotiations require patience, perseverance and a spirit of
compromise at every turn. They must be carried out in
good faith. In this framework, the continuation of the Israeli
settlement activity not only undermines the patience of the
Palestinian side, but also threatens the already tense and
fragile situation in the occupied territories. Moreover, these
settlements also violate the letter and spirit of the
agreements reached between the parties.

We believe that a positive step to bring an end to the
settlement activities would guarantee the successful
progression of the process towards the achievement of a
just and lasting peace in the region.

Finally, I should like to reiterate that we still have full
confidence in the Palestinian and Israeli leadership's
wisdom, Vision and common sense. We urge them to
reaffirm their willingness to pursue the peace process
currently under way, especially at this critical stage. It is
my sincere hope that these stages will be followed by the
full implementation of the Declaration of Principles. The
great hopes generated by this historic agreement should not
be allowed to give way to despair.

