Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Foreign Minister
Joschka Fischer would like to apologize for the fact
that he is unable to attend this meeting as he had
planned. This is due to a conflict of engagements, to
which the traffic situation in the city has greatly
contributed. I will therefore speak on his behalf.

We would like first of all to thank you, Mr.
President, for having convened this very important
meeting. The issues dealt with by the Security
Council - peacekeeping, crisis prevention and conflict
management - are inseparably linked to the rule of
law. The creation or restoration of rule-of-law
structures in post-conflict situations may be very
difficult, but they are vital. Multilateral engagement in
a crisis area can generate a better and more peaceful
order in the long term only if this order is based on
rule-of-law principles.

The rule of law can be destroyed by conflict very
quickly. But it takes great effort, time and resources to
rebuild a State based on the rule of law. We Germans
know from our own experience that external assistance
is essential in building a State based on the rule of law
in post-conflict situations. The restoration of peace and
justice in El Salvador, Timor-Leste and Kosovo would
not have been possible without the commitment of the
United Nations. The two ad hoc Tribunals created by
the Security Council have played a valuable role in
dealing with the serious crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. The Special Court
for Sierra Leone is a successful example of cooperation
between national and international justice systems.

In this context I would like to single out the
International Criminal Court. The International
Criminal Court is an important step towards global
civilization. It serves the same principles that are
upheld and the same purposes that are pursued by the
Security Council. It serves international justice, the
rule of law and the fight against impunity. It can take
on those very serious crimes which a State believes
cannot be handled by its own courts at present. It
should thus also be seen as an offer to countries
weakened by crisis.

I should like quickly to outline six proposals on
the rule of law in post-conflict situations. First, the
Council knows that greater efforts to create rule-of-law
structures in conflict areas can help ensure the
sustainability of a peaceful order. It should go without
saying that mission mandates also provide for the
protection and restoration of the rule of law. But we do
not have to reinvent the wheel in every post-conflict
situation. Therefore, the development of standard or
model procedures would be desirable. They should
apply to the secondment of judicial commissions of
inquiry, the integration of rule-of-law components into
peacekeeping missions and the establishment of
provisional judicial authorities. I suggest that the
Secretary-General include proposals on this in his
report. He might also consider establishing a task force
in the Secretariat to tackle these issues.

Secondly, the complementarity between national
and international efforts should be kept under constant
review. The main pillar of justice continues to be the
national judicial system, for which every country bears
its own responsibility. However, in post-conflict
situations in particular, the judicial sector is often
crippled. I propose that, in his report, the Secretary-
General also identify the weaknesses of national
judicial systems in such situations and how they can be
redressed. The personnel, financial and intellectual
resources of States, international organizations,
including non-governmental organizations, should be
made available and included in these deliberations.

Thirdly, we feel that complementarity also means
the institutional division of labour between national
and international justice systems. In Sierra Leone,
Kosovo, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the international
community has had good experience with various
forms of division of labour. With regard to the
prosecution of the most serious crimes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it appears that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
International Criminal Court may work together. This
cooperation between national and international bodies
should be further developed.
Fourthly, some instruments aimed at fostering
justice and the rule of law were created by the Security
Council - for example, the ad hoc tribunals. Others,
such as the International Court of Justice, emerged
outside of that framework. However, its Statute
contains cross-references to the Security Council. In
order to use the various judicial systems efficiently, it
could be worthwhile for the Security Council to
observe their work more closely. I therefore propose
that the Security Council set up a monitoring group for
that purpose. It would be especially welcome if those
Council members who are critical of or sceptical about
some tribunals would participate in this group.

Fifthly, the rule of law, in our view, begins with
the missions themselves. Members of United Nations
missions must observe international rules. Violations of
those rules must be investigated. We should consider
whether monitoring by the Security Council and
existing United Nations control mechanisms is
sufficient, or whether we need an independent of
investigation body within the Secretariat.

Sixthly and lastly, the rule of law and basic
economic conditions are interrelated. The rule of law
fosters trade and investment. However, a war economy,
organized crime and smuggling undermine the rule of
law. The international community must therefore try to
stop these illegal economic flows. Our task in the
Security Council is to use the instruments available to
us to combat economic forces that aggravate conflicts.
I think the Kimberley Process is an innovative example
in this context.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we must
focus our efforts on universally valid rule-of-law
principles. That is a difficult balancing act in our
world, with its different legal areas and systems.
However, the rule of law is a main pillar for ensuring
enduring peace in the world.

