Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her very useful briefing. I would also like to thank
the representatives of the United Nations agencies and
programmes, which are doing outstanding work in Iraq.
I welcome here at the Council table the President of the
International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Jakob Kellenberger.

I would like to support what Ms. Frechette talked
about - that is, the heroic work being done by the
ICRC in Iraq. This is proof of the importance of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) in situations such
as that of Iraq. My delegation welcomes the fact that
the resolution on Iraq just adopted this morning talks
about NGOs. This is an excellent thing. Bulgaria, as
you know, Sir, is dedicated to close cooperation
between the United Nations and NGOs, especially in
the humanitarian sphere, where they are often doing
irreplaceable work.

It is clear from what we have just heard that the
main problem confronting the United Nations and
NGOs is to help the Iraqi people and the problem of
security. The restoration of security is the best way to
help these organizations, and I think that the resolution
adopted this morning enables us to make substantial
progress in this area.

Bulgaria would like to thank the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq, Mr. Ramiro Lopez
da Silva. We think he is doing excellent work to
improve the quality of the international assistance
reaching the Iraqi population.

I would like to make three observations that stem
from the experience of some Governments, including
that of Bulgaria, and NGOs with respect to the
situation in Iraq.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General - who will be appointed soon, let us hope -
will need to ensure that the organizations concerned
assist potential donors to identify existing needs as
quickly as possible and to advise on the means for
providing that assistance and on the places where it is
most necessary. We think that it is very important to
reduce delays in the exchange of information with
potential donors.

The second point is that it is clearly important to
avoid overlaps in existing structures for the distribution
of humanitarian assistance in the areas of
transportation and storage, in order to reduce costs to
donors and to maximize the amount of available
assistance.

The final important point: we fully understand the
importance that most organizations present here attach
to cash assistance. But assistance in kind is often more
readily available. Over time, we have to find a way to
benefit from that type of assistance, which might be
available more readily and in larger quantities.

In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
that in the days to come, a convoy of humanitarian
assistance for a Mosul hospital organized by Bulgarian
non-governmental organizations and encouraged and
aided by the Government of Bulgaria, will set out for
Iraq. It consists mainly of medicine and equipment. It
is being organized primarily by the Atlantic Club of
Bulgaria and the Bulgarian Red Cross, as well as by the
Association of Iraqis in Bulgaria. It is a campaign

whose scope will expand in the weeks and months to
come.

