Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We want to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over our meeting today, as
well as the Russian Federation, Mr. Vassily Nebenzia
and his team for the excellent manner in which they
managed the Council programme for this month. Allow
me to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing to the
Council today.

The recent political developments in Syria, as
announced by the Secretary-General on 23 September
(see S/2019/775), are warmly welcomed by my
delegation. South Africa congratulates Mr. Pedersen,
the Syrian Government, the Syrian opposition
and all other stakeholders on the agreement on the
establishment of a credible, balanced and inclusive
Constitutional Committee. We in the Council all know
that the journey to this point has not been easy but the
perseverance and determined efforts of all parties have
borne the fruit of compromise, unity and a commitment
to the people of Syria for sustained peace. We thank all
Governments and parties that made that possible.

My delegation looks forward to the convening of
the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee on
30 October. We hope that the commitment for a 30 per
cent representation of women in the larger 150-member
body and the smaller 45-member body will be upheld.
As has been said before by South Africa and many
other delegations, the active participation of women
at all levels of the peace negotiations is essential to a
successful and inclusive political process in Syria.

With the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee, it is also necessary to ensure the safety
and security of all its members. The members of the
Committee must be assured that they will be able to do
their duty to the people of Syria without undue pressure
or influence from any sector.

While we commend the agreement regarding
the Constitutional Committee, we cannot forget the
broader political process. The establishment of the
Constitutional Committee and the finalization of its
Core Rules of Procedure (see S/2019/775, annex) is but
one step towards the full implementation of the political
process, as set out in resolution 2254 (2015).

The work of the Constitutional Committee must
be accompanied by the active engagement of all
parties in the continuing political process facilitated
by the Special Envoy. In that regard and in calling
for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015),
my delegation calls for the release of civilians from
detention, particularly women, children, the sick
and the elderly. That will serve as a gesture of good
faith and confidence-building among the parties and
bolster the goodwill created by the establishment of the
Constitutional Committee.

The humanitarian situation in parts of Syria remains
of concern. Progress in improving the humanitarian
situation will come about only ifprogress is made in the
political process, which can be resolved only through
continued negotiations and dialogue among the parties.
At this important juncture in Syria's history, we call on
all parties to recommit to ensuring the peace, stability
and prosperity of all Syria and its people.

In conclusion, let me again congratulate the parties
on this important step towards long-term peace and
security in Syria. However, we all know that this is not
the end of the journey. Yet the journey has begun, and
the Council should accompany the Syrian people as
they negotiate their way to a peaceful, stable, inclusive
and prosperous Syria.

