Mr. Duarte: It is a pleasure to send the
Secretary-General's greetings to the Security Council
on the occasion of this important debate on the
strengthening of collective security.

Achieving a sense of collective security is a vital
step towards preventing conflict. As we know all too
well, organizations tend to be better equipped for
reacting to developments than for anticipating them.
But we cannot be passive in the face of threats to
international peace and security. That is why conflict
prevention is very high on my agenda and why the
international community must strengthen its ability to
minimize the potential for conflict.

The strengthening of collective security can build
trust between States. And it can pave the way for
agreements and cooperation in other fields, steadily
tying countries together in a web of shared interest,
better understanding and mutual support.

The strengthening of collective security through
general regulation and reduction of armaments was a
central preoccupation of the League of Nations. When
the United Nations was established, the issue of
minimizing the diversion of the world's human and
economic resources for armaments was given a place
in the Charter along with disarmament.

No serious discussion on the limitation or
elimination of armaments can avoid the topic of
improving transparency. If States behave in a
predictable and transparent way, that can build
confidence and thereby promote collective security.

Member States have developed two transparency
instruments within the framework of the United
08-60919

Nations. First is the Standardized Instrument for
Reporting Military Expenditures. This will be reviewed
in 2010 for the first time. Secondly is the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms, to which
Member States may report their arms imports and
exports, as well as data on their military holdings and
production in specific categories of major conventional
weapons. Over the years, Member States have agreed
to steadily widen the scope of the Register.
Significantly, in 2003 they decided that States could
include their transfers of small arms. Far more than
half of all United Nations Member States have
participated in both instruments. I would hope to see
even greater involvement, as well as more consistent
reporting.

But let us remember that transparency in
armaments is only one of several criteria that the world
community is seeking to enshrine in multilateral
agreements in the fields of disarmament and arms
regulation. Others include irreversibility, verification
and the degree to which signatories are bound by an
agreement. To the extent that such criteria are accepted
by States and implemented in good faith, prospects for
achieving the full potential of collective security will
grow.

I welcome the recognition by the Security
Council that progress in disarmament and the
regulation of armaments can make important
contributions to strengthening international security, to
the benefit of all. All Member States and their
populations have a stake in security. Security is a
common good and, as such, has value only when it is
shared with others.

