Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to take this opportunity to convey my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and Luxembourg
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month, as well as on convening this open debate. My
delegation also expresses its appreciation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
for their briefings.

Malaysia is particularly concerned that armed
conflicts in various parts of the world still plague
children's lives, depriving them of their right to life and
physical integrity, as reflected in the annual report of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict (A/HRC/25/46).

My delegation is perturbed at the thousands of
children who are recruited, killed, maimed, abducted,
subjected to sexual violence, indoctrinated, forced to
commit atrocities, denied humanitarian access and
deprived of health care. Despite the progress made thus
far, more needs to be done in the area of the protection
of the child in armed conflict.

The recruitment and use of child soldiers by parties
to armed conflict is not only a war crime, it also
affects a community's invaluable asset - its children.
Children should be allowed to develop their potential
as they traverse from childhood to maturity. Children
are persons who must be protected during an important
period of their development. Malaysia reaffirms its
strong commitment to efforts to protect and promote
the rights of children. We condemn the recruitment and
use of children as soldiers by any party in conflict.

My delegation also believes that accountability
for ending the impunity of those responsible is a duty
under both domestic and international law. We cannot
deny the fact that in many conflict situations the most
vulnerable members of the population, particularly
women and children, are targeted with impunity. My
delegation is of the firm conviction that there should
be no leniency or amnesty for crimes perpetrated on
innocent children. In that regard, we call on Member
States to steer their national accountability systems
towards meeting international standards in order to
establish effective accountability measures in the
hope of bringing justice, dignity and rehabilitation for
children victimized by armed conflict.

In 2005, the Secretary-General proposed the
development of a monitoring and reporting mechanism
in document S/2005/72. Malaysia feels that was a
positive step in the right direction. We furthermore
believe that such a mechanism would provide objective,
accurate and reliable information on the recruitment
and use of child soldiers in violation of applicable
international law, and on other violations and abuses
committed against children. We would like to see
further developments on the monitoring mechanism,
as we believe that the mechanism would urge Member
States and United Nations agencies to take action to
protect children affected by armed conflict.

The discussion on children affected by armed
conflict would not be complete without making
reference to the role of United Nations peacekeepers.
My delegation believes that training is an underpinning
element in ensuring the effectiveness of the work of
peacekeepers in protecting children. We underline that
peacekeepers to be deployed in conflict areas must be
exposed to the issues and instruments for the protection
of children in the field. Such a mechanism would greatly
assist peacekeepers in executing their duties and would
further ensure better protection for children in armed
conflict.

We are encouraged by the ongoing work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF, other agencies
of the United Nations system and other relevant
international organizations dealing with children
affected by armed conflict. Malaysia takes note of
the "Children, not soldiers" campaign of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF
to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
by Government armed forces in conflict by 2016.
We believe that the campaign should not only create
awareness but should also encourage adherence by
States to respect the rights of children.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, Malaysia has undertaken efforts to
ensure that the rights of its children are protected.
On 12 April 2012, Malaysia further reaffirmed its
commitment to promoting and protecting the rights
of children by acceding to the two Optional Protocols
to the Convention, namely, on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography and on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. Prior to
that, in July 2009, Malaysia initiated its national policy
on children and its national plan of action on children.
Taken together, both sets of initiatives outline the
Government of Malaysia's priorities to promote and
protect the rights of children in Malaysia.

To conclude, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to continue working together with the international
community in advancing the agenda for the protection
of children in armed conflict. Malaysia upholds the
significance ofresolutions 1261 (1999) and 1612 (2005),
on children in armed conflict. We call on Member States
to demonstrate political will and give attention to this
important issue for us to better accord the necessary
protection to children from the harms of conflict. Rest
assured, Malaysia will continue to do its part in that
regard.

