Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in French): Before beginning my statement, I reiterate
my delegation's solidarity with the French people and
Government during these days of mourning. More than
ever, they can count on Spain as a neighbour, an ally
and a friend.

(Spoke in Spanish)

I would like to express my thanks to the President for
convening today's meeting to consider the humanitarian
situation in Syria from various angles, all of which are
essential. I also thank Mr. O'Brien, Ms. Bangura and
Ms. Zerrougui for their briefings, which are cause for
concern and emotion but which should above all move
us to action. The situation of women and children in the
Syrian conflict constitutes the deepest circle of the hell
which that country has become.

As Ms. Zerrougui noted in her briefing, millions
of children have been affected by the war, and there
is growing reason to expect that they will be marked
for life after such a traumatic experience. While our
present task is the basic one of protecting their lives,
feeding them, caring for their health and educating
them, even in conflict zones, we must keep in mind
that many of them, perhaps the majority, will continue
to need all kinds of help for a long time to come. In
that regard, we emphasize once again the devastation of
the Syrian education system, where there are 2 million
children out of school, with another 700,000 children
living as refugees in neighbouring countries. More than
5,000 schools have been destroyed or are being used
for purposes that have nothing to do with education,
in contravention of international humanitarian law
and the resolutions of this Council. It is crucial that
we do something about that, beginning by answering
the call for a Syria response plan, for which members
will recall that an amount of less than $224 million is
needed to prevent Syria from losing a whole generation
owing to war.

Without a doubt, one of the most pernicious effects
on Syrian children is the recruitment of children and
their use in combat by terrorist groups and other armed
actors. With the indoctrination of children by such
groups, there is the risk that a seed of hatred is being
sown that could easily proliferate in the future. The use
of sexual violence by all parties to the Syrian conflict
is also devastating. The use of such Violence as a
terrorist tactic has been widely demonstrated and must
cease immediately. It is critical for the victims of such
violence to receive specialized medical attention, which
unfortunately is not always readily available. The role
of women in Syria should also be viewed from other
perspectives. Central among them should be women's
full participation in an inclusive political process that
leads to a Syria at peace and, if we look ahead, a Syria
participating in all spheres of life - that new Syria we
all long to see.

I leave for the end, not because it is of less
importance - far from it - our response to the briefing
by Mr. O'Brien. In that regard, I take this opportunity
to reiterate our condemnation of the indiscriminate
attacks against the civilian population by all parties to
the conflict, including in particular the use of barrel
bombs. We urge the Council to rapidly adopt measures
in that regard. As my colleague from New Zealand said
before me, the Council will soon turn its attention to
renewing resolution 2191 (2014), concerning cross-
border humanitarian assistance, whose efficacy has
been amply demonstrated since its entry into force. We
should not squander the opportunity that such renewal
provides of strengthening other aspects ofhumanitarian
aid, such as access to areas under siege and medical
neutrality.

Finally, I agree with most, if not all, of the other
speakers that our humanitarian efforts will be in vain
without the immediate launch of a political solution
that leads to a transitional inclusive Government with
full executive powers that perfectly reflects the Syrian
people and that has sufficient legitimacy to promote
political change in the country in line with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex). We are, of course,
closely following the diplomatic process that began in
Vienna, and we welcome the road map adopted in that
capital on 14 November, which expresses our shared
determination to put an end to the massacre in Syria.

