I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and I welcome Ambassador Ja'afari's participation in this meeting. The security situation in north-west Syria has remained generally stable since Russia and Turkey agreed on ceasefire arrangements on 6 March as a result of diplomatic efforts. Those efforts are conducive to the political process and they should continue. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) spreads globally, Middle East countries, including Syria, are exposed to the risk of an outbreak. In such a context, the Secretary-General, Mr. Pedersen and other United Nations envoys to the Middle East have issued several appeals to implement a ceasefire. China attaches great importance to those appeals and calls on the parties to actively promote inclusive political dialogue, to buy time for the prevention and containment of COVID-19 and to create conditions conducive to political solutions. We note that the Astana process meeting between foreign ministers was held last week. We believe those discussions will help address the multiple challenges in Syria. Meanwhile, the issue of counter-terrorism in Idlib needs to be addressed effectively. I recall that the Special Envoy said that, in the current context, it is possible and necessary to discuss a more effective cooperative targeted counter- terrorism effort. We agree. Information shows that terrorist groups are still carrying out attacks in Idlib and pose an ongoing threat to the peace and stability of north- west Syria, which is unacceptable. We cannot let terrorists take advantage of the ceasefire to grow stronger. We call on all relevant parties to seek a comprehensive and long-term solution to the issue of Idlib through dialogue and negotiations. Supporting a political solution to the conflict in Syria is our consistent position. We appreciate the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy, especially in this difficult time. We encourage the Syrian parties to maintain dialogue and work together in the Constitutional Committee for the interests of the people and the future of Syria. The Constitutional Committee must be independent and without foreign interference. The political process must be Syrian-led and-owned, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria must be upheld. China is watching very closely the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Syria. We appreciate the efforts made by the Syrian Government to take responsible and forceful measures to combat the virus and will continue to offer our support. Meanwhile, we are seriously concerned about the negative impact of unilateral sanctions on countries' capacity to respond to the pandemic. Given that the Council will hold another meeting this afternoon on the humanitarian situation in Syria, we will elaborate on this issue then.
