Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Against the
backdrop of the small progress made in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006), the convening of this meeting
could not be more timely. I begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for your initiatives. We also appreciate
the important contributions made by international
organizations, particularly the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organisation for the Prohibition of

Chemical Weapons and the World Customs
Organization in assisting the process of national
implementation.

Bangladesh is unequivocally committed to
disarmament; this emanates from our constitutional
obligations. We have been a forerunner in this field,
particularly among the South Asian countries, by
becoming a party to almost all major disarmament-
related treaties covering nuclear, chemical, biological
and conventional weapons.

Bangladesh fully supports resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006). Bangladesh neither develops,
manufactures, possesses, transfers nor uses nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons or their means of
delivery. Nor does it provide any form of support to
non-State actors that attempt to do so. We have no
intention to acquire such weapons of mass destruction
in future and have undertaken significant measures to
implement the obligations of those two resolutions at
the national level. Bangladesh has already submitted its
first national report to the 1540 Committee. We are in
the process of drafting national legislation on the
Convention on Anti-Personnel Landmines and have
destroyed all our stockpiles of landmines. Our draft
national legislation on the Chemical Weapons
Convention is now under active consideration by the
Government.

Bangladesh is still striving for a better degree of
implementation by expanding the purview of its non-
proliferation-related efforts and through strict
enforcement of domestic measures already adopted. We
are also in the process of preparing a supplementary
report to update the 1540 Committee about the
incremental progress we have attained on the domestic
implementation front. The report will be submitted
soon.

My delegation attaches the utmost importance to
forging cooperation between the Security Council and
international organizations and to the sharing of
experiences and lessons learned between Member
States and dedicated international bodies. That would
go a long way to overcome the difficulties in
implementing the obligations of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006). We should consolidate this
campaign of cooperation and make the best use of it.
Similar exchanges among Member States would
complement each State's shortcomings and elevate the
status of national implementation to the desired level,
which would be a significant leap forward in the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In that
context, we express our readiness to share our
experiences and would expect reciprocation of the
same.

While acknowledging the genuine difficulties
faced by Member States, we should not be oblivious to
the absence of genuine political will, which is a major
reason behind the dismal level of national
implementation. We urge the Member States that have
not yet submitted their first national report to do so as
soon as possible by taking full advantage of the
assistance put forth and in a demonstration of genuine
political goodwill.

