Mr. Al-Dairi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased
to see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over this important
meeting today, as a brother and colleague representing a
brotherly country that is very dear to us and with which
we enjoy good-neighbourly relations. We thank you for
organizing this meeting and for having invited me to
participate. I am sure that resolution 2195 (2014), just
adopted by the Security Council, will enhance the joint
work being done at the international and regional levels
to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.
I pay tribute to the ministers present at this meeting:
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Chad, Nigeria and
Luxembourg. I would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and Mr. Tete
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union, for
their excellent briefings.

I wished to participate in this meeting because the
subject under consideration is one of the priorities of
the Libyan Government at this time. Indeed, Libya is
experiencing a moment of unprecedented instability.
The new Libyan army is combatting terrorist groups.
In cooperation with neighbouring countries, we are
seeking to control our borders in order to prevent
infiltration by terrorists and foreign terrorist fighters
and to prevent transnational crime.

Throughout its history, Libya has been the doorway
from Africa to the Mediterranean and Europe. Today
that is again the case, as evidenced by the extensive
legitimate and illegitimate activities and the movements
of various elements and individuals within our country
for various reasons, including tribal issues and the
presence of foreign individuals. Furthermore, Libya
attracts those who wish to improve their economic
situation and who are determined to emigrate to
Europe, even if they need to employ illegitimate means

to do so. Therefore, Libya is an important hub in which
to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime
in North Africa and the Sahel.

In recent months, the challenges that face the
legitimate Libyan authorities have become quite clear.
Indeed, terrorist groups loyal to Al-Qaida control
entire Libyan towns and announce to the entire
world that they support Daesh in Syria and Iraq. The
most recent confrontations between the Libyan army
and those terrorist groups have shown that the latter
do, unfortunately, include hundreds of Libyans and
non-Libyans. In particular, they harbour citizens of
neighbouring countries among their ranks.

We assert that the terrorism in Libya is international
in nature. That international terrorism has spread to
Syria and other countries and seeks to spread further
into the Middle East, North Africa and the Sahel. An
attack was carried out by militia on 13 December in the
oil region in the centre of our country; the groups that
carried it out seek to transfer control of those areas into
terrorist hands so that they will control entire swathes
of the territory in central Libya and the Sahel.

There is a close relationship between terrorism
and other transnational crime, such as trafficking in
weapons, drugs and oil, money-laundering and human
trafficking. Therefore, it is important to enhance
international, regional and subregional cooperation
and cooperation with neighbouring countries in border
control and to put in place coordination and information
exchange mechanisms that can allow us to pursue
criminals and prosecute them. Libya understands the
importance of cooperation among countries of the
region in this area and hosted a ministerial meeting on
border control. That produced the Tripoli action plan
on regional cooperation and border control, which was
adopted by the ministerial regional council, held on
11 and 12 March 2012. Despite the limited resources
and capacities of the Libyan army at this stage, we were
able to agree upon a certain number of measures to
control our borders with all our neighbouring countries.

Despite that fact, foreign fighters unfortunately
continue to join the ranks of terrorist groups, and
weapons continue to enter and leave Libya. That is
beyond the control of the Libyan Government, given
the lack of our resources to monitor our lengthy
borders in uninhabited desert areas. We need to work
on international cooperation among all States that
have pledged to join the international campaign to
combat terrorism and with neighbouring countries
who are experiencing this scourge. This international
effort must include the provision of weapons to the
Government and efforts to dry up sources of funding
for terrorism.

The situation is growing increasingly dangerous and
grave. The statement issued on Tuesday, 16 December,
by the House of Representatives, following upon its
statement of 11 November, asserted its support for the
political efforts being made by United Nations Special
Representative Bernardino Leon in the wake of the
13 December attacks, which were even worse than those
undertaken last month by the same terrorist group. The
statement made the following points.

First, the operations undertaken by certain Libyan
groups in the name of the so-called Libyan National
Council reflect the use of violence to achieve the
political aims of groups acting outside the framework
of national legitimacy. Secondly, there is a clear link
between the Libyan National Council for Relief and
Support, Ansar al-Sharia and other Libyan groups.
Ansar al-Sharia was declared a terrorist group by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on 19 November. The
actions of Libyan people and Government, alongside
other entities opposed to the extremists groups that
continue to impose bloodshed and destruction on the
country, should enjoy the support of the international
community. Thirdly, the statement called on the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, to oppose all trafficking in oil, which
constitutes an act of aggression not only against the
Libyan people, but also against the peace and security
of neighbouring countries and the international
community as a whole.

In conclusion, Libya is encountering serious
challenges and threats, which it is meeting together
with other States of the region. Without strong support,
we would be unable to combat and defeat terrorism and
the country would soon become a cancerous tumor. I
therefore call on the Council to take our situation into
account by providing the necessary assistance to the
legitimate Libyan authorities in extending their control
over their borders and territory.

