Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): To begin with, the delegations of the United
States and the United Kingdom have tried to promote
false claims justifying their aggression against
sovereign States, particularly my country, Syria, with
the aim of concealing their direct involvement in
terrorism and their part in the responsibility for the
bloodshed in Syria. I would like to say to them that
the testimony, as cited in the media, of the thousands
of Syrians who have escaped the blockades of armed
terrorist groups in eastern Ghouta, has proved that
those countries have been involved in making those
citizens suffer through their support of those terrorist
groups. Through their positions, their malicious acts
and their illegal occupation of various areas of Syria,
they have shown that, contrary to their claims, they
cannot let go of their history of greed, occupation and
imperialism. When speaking in the Council, they claim
falsely that they are trying to find a political solution to
the situation in Syria, but let me point out, briefly, that
we have been able to defeat their agenda in Aleppo and
eastern Ghouta, and we will be able to ensure that they
cannot win in any part of my country.

For the past seven years, since the beginning of the
terrorist war in Syria, the United States, Britain and
France have been working relentlessly to support and
help conduct that war. They have also used the United
Nations as a political tool to put pressure on the Syrian
Government to implement their hegemonic agenda,
interfere in our internal affairs and destabilize my
country. They have not used the United Nations to fight
terrorism and its sponsors or to help Syria overcome
the suffering inflicted on it by armed terrorist groups,
which should have been the goal.

The Special Envoy devoted part of his statement to
discussing the humanitarian situation. In that regard,
I want to reiterate that the Syrian Government gives
priority to providing every kind of humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians in need, wherever they are in
Syria. That is our duty, and we are doing our duty. The
legal and constitutional obligations established under
international decisions and Security Council resolutions
on combating terrorism obliged my Government to
undertake military operations in eastern Ghouta in
order to rescue civilians from the armed terrorist
groups holding them hostage and using them for
years as human shields. In that regard, I want to state
that contrary to some false narratives, the successful
military operations conducted by the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies against the armed terrorist groups
controlling a number of areas that the United Nations
has classified as besieged or hard to reach - along with
the settlement and reconciliation agreements - have
all mitigated civilians' suffering, reduced the numbers
of those areas and facilitated humanitarian access to
them, including eastern Ghouta.
We deplore the fact that the United States speaks of
its eagerness to reach a political agreement while it has
been committing acts of aggression against my country
based on lies, simply because it is working to give
support to the armed groups because they have suffered
losses in eastern Ghouta. It was the United States that
supported Israel's aggression on 9 May when Israel
was unable to protect its own proxy terrorist groups
and implement its conspiracy against my country's
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Israel has
continued its dangerous acts of aggression, which
would not have been possible without the continuing
unstinting support of the United States Government,
because it enjoys impunity as a result of the support
it has from the United States in the Security Council,
enabling Israel to continue its terrorist acts threatening
international peace and security in the region and the
world. The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that through
its military and armed forces it is able and ready to fend
off all acts of aggression against its sovereignty and
independence. However, we want to reiterate that any
attempts to support this failing terrorism will not work.
Such flagrant violations will not present obstacles to
us in combating terrorism throughout Syrian territory.

Yesterday we concluded round nine of the Astana
process, and we are pleased with the results. We thank
the delegations of Russia, Iran and the host country,
Kazakhstan, for making the Astana process a success
with regard to combating terrorism. The outcome
document of the meeting stresses the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic
against any external entities that attempt to violate
them.

In cooperation with our friends and allies, the
Syrian army has succeeded in liberating eastern Ghouta
and the southern area of Damascus, making the capital
and its surrounding areas safe. With the cooperation
of our friends and brothers, we have also expelled
the terrorists from the northern area of Homs and the
southern area of Hama. Today we reaffirm that we will
continue to fight terrorism and to work to liberate each

and every part of our territory from terrorism and from
countries that seek to undermine our sovereignty.

In conclusion, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic will spare no effort to support all genuine
efforts to arrive at a political solution whereby Syrians,
and only Syrians, will decide their future and make
choices aimed at safeguarding Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
