Mr. Nikolov (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Permit me at the outset to join other
speakers in welcoming the presence of the Secretary-
General, Foreign Minister Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro and Foreign Minister Fischer of Germany.
Allow me also to join those who have associated
themselves with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union.

The Government of the Republic of Macedonia is
following the situation in Kosovo with great concern.
Yesterday's tragic developments run counter to the
efforts of the international community and the people
of Kosovo for further democratization and for the
stabilization of the situation in Kosovo.

I would like to express my Government's deep
regret and strong condemnation at the escalation of the
violence between Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs
in Mitrovica, Lipljane, Pec, anilane and other places,
which has already claimed lives and caused hundreds
of injuries among civilians, KFOR soldiers and civilian
police of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We urge the people of
Kosovo to demonstrate wisdom and to restore calm and
normalcy. It is of great importance and immediate
priority to stop the violence, which jeopardizes
Kosovo's stability and security and undermines the
efforts made and the achievements accomplished in the
process of building a stable, democratic and multi-
ethnic Kosovo. The destabilization of Kosovo could
also jeopardize the situation in the region as a whole.

My Government strongly condemns extremism,
no matter where it comes from. It can only cause
further escalation of the situation, which will not
contribute to the normalization of the situation and
could have further negative implications in the region.
We fully support the efforts of UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Harri Holkeri,
as well as those of KFOR and the rest of the
international community, to calm the situation
immediately.

Let me emphasize once again that the recent
tragic developments in Kosovo are only minimizing the
efforts of the international community to democratize
the situation in Kosovo, to fully implement the policy
of "standards before status" and to continue the
necessary dialogue.

