Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
situation in Libya is clear. A violent, discredited regime
that has lost all legitimacy is using weapons of war
against civilians. Al-Qadhafi's regime has ignored this
Council's demand in resolution 1970 (2011) that it stop
the violence against the Libyan people. It is now
preparing for a violent assault on a city of 1 million
people that has a history dating back 2,500 years. It has
begun air strikes in anticipation of what we expect to be
a brutal attack using air, land and sea forces. Al-Qadhafi
has publicly promised no mercy and no pity. We
have also seen reports today of a grotesque offer of
amnesty ~ this, from a regime that has advertised its
determination to continue persecuting and killing those
Libyans who want only to take control of their own
future.

The international community has come together
in deploring the actions of the Al-Qadhafi regime and
demanding that the regime end this violence against
the Libyan people. International opinion has looked to
the Security Council to act. The League of Arab States
has been particularly clear in its demands, including
for the imposition of a no-fly zone. That is why the
United Kingdom, in close cooperation with Lebanon
and France, has pressed for the early adoption of
today's resolution. My Government welcomes the fact
that the Council has acted swiftly and comprehensively
in response to the appalling situation in Libya and to
the appeal of the Arab League.

Resolution 1973 (2011) demands that Colonel
Al-Qadhafi implement an immediate ceasefire. It
imposes a no-fly zone to prevent the Al-Qadhafi
regime from using air power against the Libyan people.
It authorizes Member States to take all necessary
measures to protect civilians and civilian-populated
areas under threat of attack. It rules out a foreign
occupation force of any form on any part of Libyan
territory. It imposes a range of additional measures,
including significant action to tighten enforcement of
the arms embargo and to deny the regime access to
funds. We, along with partners in the Arab world and in
NATO, are now ready to shoulder our responsibilities
in implementing resolution 1973 (2011).

The central purpose of the resolution is clear: to
end the violence, to protect civilians and to allow the
people of Libya to determine their own future, free
from the tyranny of the Al-Qadhafi regime. The Libyan
population wants the same rights and freedoms that
people across the Middle East and North Africa are
demanding and that are enshrined in the values of the
United Nations Charter. Today's resolution puts the
weight of the Security Council squarely behind the
Libyan people in defence of those values.

