Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union. In my national capacity, I would
like to add the following.

I would like to express our appreciation for your
initiative, Mr. President, to hold this open debate on
the issue of youth, peace and security. I also thank the
Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, for her briefing, as well as the other
briefers for their input.

Just over two years ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2250 (2015),
recognizing that the energy and creativity of young
people should be harnessed and actively engaged in
shaping lasting peace and contributing to justice and
reconciliation. We highly appreciate the work of the
team led by Mr. Graeme Simpson, and we welcome
the progress study on youth and peace and security
(see S/2018/86) prepared by its members in response
to the resolution. I would like to assure my colleagues
that the Ukrainian Government is carefully studying
the recommendations contained in the report and will
consider them in the process of further adjustment to its
national youth policy.

Unfortunately, we have to admit and agree with
the conclusion of the study: many young people around
the world are frustrated by the tendency of their
Governments and international actors to treat youth
as a problem to be solved, instead of as partners of
peace. It shall be one of our priorities to address that
challenge, in order to contribute to international peace
and security. We firmly believe that the 1.8 billion
young people around the world can play a crucial role
in building a world that is more peaceful than what we
have now. That can be achieved through ensuring the
inclusiveness ofyouth policies aimed at seamless social
integration and accommodating young people's positive
and creative potential, to the benefit of societies.

We shall continue to pay special attention to this
issue through United Nations programmes and special
procedures for youth. Young people are the future.
While actively contributing to peace and security
through participation in peacekeeping operations - I
invite those present to just look the average age of Blue
Helmet personnel - they also suffer most from political
and man-made disasters, as do women and children.

I should like to highlight the fact that youth are
among those who suffered most in Ukraine from the
Russian aggression in Crimea and Donbas. Young
people in those areas lost their chance to receive
quality education and to work. More than 60 per cent
of internally displaced persons are young women.
Nevertheless, tens of thousands of young people
actively volunteered by providing support to our armed
forces in the fight to protect the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine. Youth and student
organizations became equally active in delivering aid
and humanitarian assistance to the people affected by
the ensuing hostilities.
My delegation has repeatedly urged the
Russian Federation to accept its international legal
responsibility, and we demand the termination of its
wrongful acts in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea,
the city of Sevastopol and certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. As an example, according to the
latest report on the human rights situation in Ukraine
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, which was released a month ago,
the Russian Federation continued to compel Crimean
residents into its armed forces, conscripting at least
4,800 men within two campaigns in 2017, in violation
of international humanitarian law. Moreover, courts in
Crimea started to hear cases on charges of draft evasion.
We therefore demand that the Russian Federation stop
the illegal practice of the conscription of young men in
the occupied territories and respect its obligations as
an occupying Power in accordance with international
humanitarian law, as defined by the General Assembly.

No matter how proud the actions of Ukraine's
youth make us feel, repelling the foreign aggression
and managing its consequences is not the fate we
envisioned for our younger generation. Therefore,
the Government of Ukraine is now committed to
qualitatively strengthening the potential of our youth, as
well as creating equal opportunities and guaranteeing
equal rights for them. In that regard, we strongly believe
that education has to, and will, play a leading role in
shaping the future of our youth, reinforcing their role
in public life and instilling a spirit of open-mindedness,
tolerance and a can-do attitude.

To achieve that goal, an educational reform
was launched in 2017 with the adoption of a law on
education. That, among other things, is fully in line
with the recommendation of the progress study to
support inclusive labour policies and practices that
ensure equal access for all young people to the labour
market and the enjoyment of fundamental principles
and rights at work.

We reiterate our position that the empowerment
of youth and youth-oriented organizations is essential
in promoting positive role models, finding proper
responses to violence and building a peaceful social
fabric. Therefore, with regard to the youth population,
the Government of Ukraine has moved away from the
patronizing stance of working with youth to an inclusive
approach of youth participation. We note that such an
approach is also advocated by the authors of the study
before us.

Ukraine is convinced that the role of youth in
ensuring peace and security cannot be overestimated.
The energy and creativity of young people can
contribute to the development and progress of their
societies. Unfortunately, there are also numerous
examples showing that energy can be, and is, exploited
for destructive purposes. It is our joint responsibility
to assist the younger generation in pursuing their
aspirations to build a better world of tomorrow, to
equip them through education with the right tools and
to make sure that young people become agents of peace
and positive change.

