Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by once again conveying our deep
solidarity with Colombia following the tragic events
in the Mocoa region. The death toll now stands at
almost 300. President Hollande immediately offered
his condolences to President Santos and the people of
Colombia. We have indicated our readiness to provide
any assistance upon the request of the Colombian
Government. I remind my Colombian colleague, who
has acted commendably, that we stand by the people
of Colombia now, more than ever, in the face of this
terrible ordeal.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his illuminating briefing
and his exemplary commitment, as well as that of his
teams. Naturally, he can count on the full support of
France and the other members of the Security Council,
I would venture.

France fully supports the courageous peace
process led by President Santos. That is the central
message that President Hollande conveyed when he
was in Colombia in January. During that trip, he and
his Colombian counterpart visited one of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) demobilization zone. We once again
welcome the parties' unshakeable desire to bring about
peace and their full compliance with the ceasefire since
the signing of the peace agreement. Their determination
to close that chapter after more than 50 years of conflict
shows that peace is always possible, regardless of what
obstacles must be overcome.

For all of us in the Security Council, which has
dealt with numerous crises all over the world, this is
a source of hope and encouragement. France will do
its part in working for the consolidation of peace in
Colombia. French aid stands at around €820 million
in gifts and loans linked to post-conflict initiatives,
primarily in the areas of rural development, land
governance and demining. We also directly contributed
€3 million to the European Union Trust Fund. We are
encouraged by the measures taken by the parties with
regard to the implementation of the peace agreement.
The FARC-EP'S movement to demobilization zones and
the surrender of the first weapons to the United Nations
are major steps in the establishment of lasting peace
in Colombia. We warmly welcome those developments.

We hope that, with the commitment and will of all,
the 180-day deadline for the full surrender of FARC-
EP weapons to the United Nations will be met. With
the effective launching of the demobilization process,
the implementation of the peace agreement is entering
a critical phase. In that regard, it is essential not to
underestimate the challenges that will be encountered
in the transition to lasting peace and to create as soon
as possible the necessary conditions for peacefully
reintegrating those who are demobilized. Specifically,
that will require the ability to offer prospects of
socioeconomic reintegration to ex-combattants through
development of zones affected by the conflict and
the expeditious implementation of legal and security
guarantees stipulated in the peace agreement.
The noted trend of attacks and intimidation during
the past few months against community leaders and
human rights activists is a cause for concern. We know
that the Colombian authorities are committed to take all
necessary measures to respond to that situation.

Finally, we are pleased to see that the United Nations
is doing its part in supporting the process, at the request
of the parties. The deployment of the Mission on time
is good news. It will enable the Mission to participate
actively in the work of the tripartite Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism as it relates to the ceasefire, and
to coordinate the process of the FARC-EP surrendering
their weapons. It shows that the United Nations can live
up to those expectations. We are only too pleased.

The Security Council's upcoming visit to
Colombia next week will be yet another example of our
mobilization on that issue and of our unanimous will
to doing whatever is necessary to meet the needs of the
parties by providing them effective support along their
path towards lasting peace.

