Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his final report (S/2005/310)
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), as well as Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for his presentation. I take this
opportunity to praise the dedicated efforts of the
civilian, military and police components of UNMISET,
under the leadership of Special Representative
Hasegawa, and to congratulate them for their many
achievements in Timor-Leste.

Portugal subscribes to the statement made by the
representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. I will only add a few comments of
our own.

First, we welcome the important work being
carried out by the independent Commission of Experts
appointed by the Secretary-General to review the
prosecution of serious human rights violations
committed in Timor-Leste in 1999. In that context, we
look forward to considering its final recommendations.

We also note the positive developments in Timor-
Leste's relations with its neighbours, in particular the
highly symbolic visit of President Yudhoyono to Dili
last April. We welcome the progress towards resolving
issues key to the Timorese, such as finalizing the
demarcation of land and maritime borders.

We welcome resolution 1599 (2005), which was
adopted by the Council on 28 April and which
establishes a one-year follow-on special political
mission in Timor-Leste.

Although the security environment remains calm
and stable, we believe it is important for the Security
Council to follow the situation on the ground with
particular attention, taking into account the removal of
the last United Nations troops.

Timor-Leste is in a critical period of its
peacebuilding process. The report of the Secretary-
General clearly outlines a number of areas still in need
of international assistance. In particular, police
capacity-building is of great concern to us. In that
regard, Portugal is currently working closely with the
Secretariat in order to coordinate our offer to provide
bilateral support, in the form of 30 gendarmerie
officers, in the efforts of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to assist the national police.

My final comment pertains to the responsibility
of the international community and of the United
Nations in this important period of Timor-Leste's
recent history. Timor-Leste should continue to benefit
from the organized and coherent support of the United
Nations system. We are all aware that, despite the
significant steps that the country has taken in
institution-building and in becoming a viable State,
much more remains to be done. International support,
both bilateral and multilateral, must be forthcoming.
We have achieved a lot, and we must safeguard that
investment by ensuring that Timor-Leste continues to
benefit from the assistance of the international
community.

In that context, I would like to point out that,
from 1999 to April 2005, Portugal invested about $450
million in bilateral investment, development
programmes and technical-military cooperation in
Timor-Leste. Moreover, a significant part of the
equipment utilized by the former Portuguese military
contingent in UNMISET, amounting to over
$20 million in value, was donated by Portugal to the
Government of Timor-Leste in June 2004.

Our involvement, however, is far from being
exclusively financial. With the same objective of
practical involvement, Portuguese nationals in their
thousands have taken part in UNMISET - and in the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor before that - from peacekeepers to civilian
police observers to civil servants and volunteers.
Portugal is ready to maintain that level of support to
Timor-Leste. We encourage other countries to do the
same as we continue to closely follow developments in
Timor-Leste, in particular as the transition from
UNMISET to UNOTIL is carried out.

