Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Sir, for having organized and for presiding over
this important debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and the Deputy-
Secretary-General for his presence today and his
personal leadership on this issue.

We strongly support the draft presidential statement
proposed by Lithuania and call on all Member States to
do likewise.

As we seek to prevent conflict, halt violence and
build lasting peace around the world, we must not
overlook the importance of justice, accountability
and the protection of human rights. Strengthening the
rule of law should be a core priority for the Council.
Equally, the United Nations should be at the forefront
of international efforts to support countries emerging
from conflict to improve their rule-of-law systems.

History has taught us that one cannot have lasting
peace without justice, accountability and reconciliation.
Popular uprisings around the world demonstrate that
nations cannot maintain lasting peace and prosperity
while denying their citizens basic rights and justice.
Effective, accountable and accessible security and
justice institutions protect individual rights and prevent
violent conflict.

Council-mandated missions working in coordination
with other parts of the United Nations system are critical
to strengthening national rule-of-law systems. For that
reason, the United Kingdom supports the Secretary-
General's efforts to strengthen the United Nations
institutional arrangements, in particular provisions
to empower field leaders and United Nations joint
work through a global focal point for police, justice
and corrections. We hope that those steps will make a
positive contribution to the quality of support delivered
to conflict-affected countries. We urge the Secretary-
General to continue to improve the Organization's
ability to measure and to evaluate the effectiveness of
its support. We know that that is challenging, but the
United Nations must show evidence of the difference
that it makes on the ground in countries recovering
from conflict because, without such evidence, it risks
losing credibility in the eyes of those that it is trying
to help.

The United Kingdom is also playing its own part in
strengthening national rule-of-law systems in conflict-
affected regions. This year, we will be the only Group
of 20 country to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national
income on overseas aid, at least 30 per cent of which
will be spent in conflict-affected countries. We have
committed $84 million per year to helping improve
security and justice in 16 different countries, including
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra
Leone. That will support a range of activities, including
facilitating access to security and justice for 10 million
women around the world.

Twenty years ago, impunity for war crimes was
the norm. We have worked hard to break that norm.
While there is still more work to do, in recent decades
we have entered a new age of accountability. We have
built the architecture of international justice so that
individuals responsible for appalling crimes have been
and are being prosecuted. There have been significant
advances in international law, such as defining gender
crimes and establishing that genocide can be committed
through rape and sexual violence. Efforts by some
Member States to oppose such gains are reprehensible
and must be resisted.

There must be no impunity for the most important
crimes. The perpetrators of crimes such as genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity must be held
accountable. The message of the past two decades is
clear: those who commit heinous crimes will not rest
easily. International justice is patient and its reach is
long. There is no expiry date for such crimes. They will
be prosecuted.

The United Kingdom reiterates its call for States
to fully meet their obligations to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) - both those obligations that
fall to States parties to the Rome Statute and those
that follow from the decisions of the Council. We will
continue to use our voice in the Council to encourage
the effective follow-up of Council decisions with
respect to the ICC. We thank the United Nations for its
important contributions in the fight against impunity.
In particular, we welcome the Secretary-General's
issuance of the latest guidance on contacts with
International Criminal Court indictees.

The United Kingdom is proud of its role in
strengthening the international rule of law. We are
engaged in all six existing international criminal
tribunals. We are the only permanent member to accept
the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. We are one of only two permanent members
of the Security Council to have ratified the Rome Statute.
And we are steadfast supporters of the International
Criminal Court.

We must all use the Council's authority to fight
impunity and help countries recovering from conflict
to rebuild their rule-of-law systems so that people
everywhere are safe and have access to the justice that
they so rightly deserve.

