Mr. Alfano (Italy): Today's vote in the Security
Council is a very important step towards holding
Da'esh accountable for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Inhumanity has been the essence of the
horrific offences perpetrated by Da'esh in its cruel
ideology. Few times in history have we seen such
deliberate and systematic acts of murder, kidnapping,
suicide bombing, sexual violence, enslavement, the
persecution of religious minorities and the destruction
of cultural heritage. I salute the courage of the Iraqi
people, who have made a huge sacrifice in the war
on terror. I also praise the commitment of the Iraqi
authorities to upholding the rule of law.

It was in the land of ancient Mesopotamia that the
world was given its first written laws - the Code of
Hammurabi. In the words of King Hammurabi, it was
intended "to destroy the wicked and the evil-doers so that
the strong should not harm the weak". However, no one
today is seeking an eye for an eye or a tooth for a tooth,
as in the old days of Hammurabi. We voted in favour of
resolution 2379 (2017) to help achieve something more
difficult - to eradicate impunity by law alone. That is
accountability. At the same time, accountability means
rejecting the temptation of revenge and retribution - for
example, the risk of collective punishment outside of
the law for entire families associated with Da'esh. That
would not help our cause of upholding human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

We voted in favour of the resolution to support
our Iraqi partners in investigating the atrocious crimes
committed and in ensuring that the law is enforced
and violations sanctioned swiftly. In fact, the fear of
being caught is often a more powerful deterrent than
the punishment itself. Therefore, we stand with Iraq in
telling anyone who has joined or will join the cause of
terror that they will be identified and that there will be
serious consequences for their actions. We also stand
with the victims and their families, who have suffered
great pain and are still facing a huge humanitarian
crisis because of Da'esh.

For all these reasons, Italy will do everything
it can to ensure the success of the new investigative
team and its special envoy. As Council members know,
Italy is a close partner of Iraq in the Global Coalition
against Da'esh. We have helped train around 30,000
Iraqi military and police personnel. Many of those
police officers have also been trained in anti-terrorism
investigation to guarantee security, public order and the
rule of law.

We are entering a new phase of cooperation with
Iraq. We are winning the war on terror militarily, but
where terrorism has left destruction and hatred we
cannot win the peace without a long-term commitment to
stabilization, inclusive political dialogue, reconciliation
and accountability in the eyes of the law. Therefore, I
believe that today's resolution is an important decision
in the right direction, because the law is the pillar of
our societies. Anyone who subjects other humans to
acts that are less than human offends humankind and
spreads insecurity in our international order, founded
on the principle that respect for the law is the safeguard
of human rights and fundamental liberties.

