Mr. Laurin (Canada): I take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
permitting this debate on small arms and light
weapons.

The pervasive and pernicious impact of small
arms on international peace and security requires the
Security Council's sustained attention to this issue.
Canada is encouraged by the Council's recent progress
on small arms, including with regard to enhanced
implementation of arms embargoes. We urge the
Council to continue to focus its attention on the
problem of small arms and its relationship with respect
for human rights and humanitarian law as well as more
traditional security concerns. Enhanced interaction
with the General Assembly to promote the further
development of long-term strategies within the
framework of conflict prevention and peace-building
could also be beneficial.

This debate affords us an invaluable opportunity
to recognize the substantial progress made to date,
consider lessons learned and, most important, commit
ourselves to addressing outstanding challenges with
renewed vigour. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2003/l2l7) serves as a useful guideline for
immediate international action. Compliance with arms
embargoes and sanctions regimes is key to
international peace and security. Canada calls upon all
Member States to effectively implement arms
embargoes imposed by the Security Council. Where
necessary, the Council should strengthen States'
capacities to uphold such embargoes, including via air
surveillance oversight. We urge the Council to continue
to utilize the tools available to it, including reports and
recommendations from monitoring groups and panels
of experts, to investigate alleged violations. Where
appropriate, the Council should also give consideration
to measures to be taken against those who violate arms
embargoes.

We would note that the Interpol Weapons and
Explosives Tracking System, created in Canada by the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police, is an excellent
example of a mechanism designed to identify and
monitor arms traffickers who have violated arms
embargoes established by the Council.

We would also underline the importance of the
work of experts in exposing the link between the illicit
trade in small arms and the illicit exploitation of
natural resources. We urge the Council to take
appropriate measures to break the link between arms
shipments through illicit channels and the illicit
exploitation of resources. In that regard, Canada
recognizes the need for consistent and verifiable end-
user certificates and welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendation that all States establish the necessary
measures to ensure effective control over the export
and transit of small arms.

The forging of end-user certificates continues to
thwart international efforts to ensure accurate
monitoring of arms exports. Attention must also be
paid to the question of State responsibility for arms
transfers. There is no doubt that an effective global
response to small arms issues must address control on
transfers between States as well as transfers to non-
State actors.

Effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes also merit additional Council
attention, particularly as successful post-conflict
reconstruction and reconciliation are often contingent
on concerted national, regional and multilateral
cooperation, as well as on sustained political will and
the concomitant allocation of requisite resources.

It is important to note that the responsibility to
address this issue falls not only to the Council but also
to States, international and regional organizations and
civil society. Much progress has been made by these
actors, including the recent establishment of an open-
ended working group to negotiate an instrument to
enable States to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons. We look forward to the start of such
critical work, which, once completed, will help to curb
illicit transfers of small arms and prevent their
exportation to areas where they risk exacerbating
conflicts and contributing to serious violations of
human rights and international law.
(spoke in French)

Small arms and light weapons are still one of the
main causes of human suffering throughout the world,
as they account for more than half the loss of lives in
modern conflicts. First and primarily, it is individuals
that suffer: girls, boys, women and men, in various
tragic ways. In order to succeed, strategies to reduce
the proliferation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons must recognize those various requirements.
We must work locally with those who suffer daily from
this scourge and enable civil society, including
women's organizations, to participate in designing
programmes. Our efforts must promote both demand
reduction strategies and community police initiatives.
In order to achieve those great goals, it is important to
set up a competent and responsible security sector
designed to strengthen public security and better
respond to collective needs. The proliferation and
inappropriate use of small arms and light weapons has
profound effects that we need to consider. The problem
goes beyond the military, political, arms control and
disarmament domains: it has human and humanitarian

effects, as well as significant socio-economic
consequences.

In that context, Canada primarily and above all
seeks to protect people and to make their communities
safer. We will continue to actively participate in
various regional and multilateral organizations in the
Human Security Network in order to attain those goals.

Canada supports the efforts currently undertaken
by the United Nations to render the coordinated action
against small arms even more effective. The multi-
faceted nature of the important problems that these
weapons entail requires a coordinated and exhaustive
response that would use the resources and
competencies of various United Nations bodies. In our
view, we need to strengthen and focus this action,
because therein lies the key to an integrated
international response.

The challenge for the Security Council and for
Member States - as well as their partners in
international organizations and civil society - is to
now implement this urgent programme, in the
collective quest for tangible progress. We must involve
ourselves in other policy research and development
activities in order to bridge the gaps in the international
response, to provide the resources that this requires and
to prepare us for the biennial meeting of 2005 and the
review conference of 2006. We must act now in a
creative and constructive manner to achieve our
common objectives.

