Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour for us to see Ms. Bensouda in the Security
Council once again. I am very grateful for the updated
information she has given us.

In my statement, I shall focus first on two specific
aspects of Ms. Bensouda's briefing, namely, the
situation of Mr. Al-Qadhafi and on the situation of
torture in the prison of Al-Hadba, before continuing
with some reflections on the limitations of the Court in
the performance of its work.

First, we note that the warrant for the arrest and
surrender of Mr. SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi has not been
executed. Spain fully understands that the instability
prevailing in the country makes it difficult for Libya to
deliver the accused. But it should not be forgotten that
it still has the obligation to cooperate with the Court
and the Prosecution. It is an obligation imposed by
the Security Council in resolution 1970 (2011) and it
remains fully in force. This obligation therefore requires
the Government of National Accord to proceed, at the
moment where circumstances allow it, to the immediate
arrest of the accused and to turn him over to the Court
without further delay.

Secondly, we would like to thank Ms. Bensouda for

the information she has provided about the investigation
into allegations of torture in Al-Hadba prison. We
would echo what was said by the representative of the
United Kingdom and state our concern at the fact that
one of the alleged perpetrators has been able to take up
his post once again. We are waiting for this information
to be confirmed and in the meantime wish to remind the
Libyan authorities of the responsibility to investigate
and prosecute such actions, which cannot be tolerated.

We deplore the fact that the continuing insecurity
in Libya is still hampering the Court in carrying out
its investigations in the field. We encourage it, despite
the circumstances, to pursue its task. It is necessary to
create conditions conducive to allowing the Prosecutor
to visit Libyan territory in complete safety. We therefore
support Ms. Bensouda's request that the Security
Council call on all parties in Libya to cooperate fully
with the ICC and to guarantee the safety of its staff.

Furthermore, we would like to recall that the work
carried out in Libya by the Office of the Prosecutor,
which was mandated by the Security Council, has a
financial cost that continues to be borne exclusively by
the States parties and which requires that resources be
diverted from other investigations or prosecutions.

In Libya, as in other situations with which it is
concerned, the ICC depends on the cooperation of all,
first and foremost that of the Security Council, but also
on that of all States, whether or not they are parties to
the Rome Statute. We are encouraged by the information
that Ms. Bensouda has provided us about the support
given by many of those countries, particularly Tunisia
and Jordan, as she noted in her report, and by Egypt, as
she mentioned in her briefing. Spain calls on all those
countries that have not yet responded to her request to
do so as quickly as possible.

The requests made touch also on the work of the
Libyan judicial institutions. We reiterate once again our
appreciation to the Office of the Prosecutor-General,
which, despite the serious situation prevailing in the
country, has maintained an active level of cooperation
with the Court, which is proof of its commitment to the
cause ofjustice.

Nonetheless, this is not enough. An unacceptable
climate of impunity continues to prevail in Libya,
with persistent allegations of extrajudicial executions,
kidnappings, torture, attacks on journalists and other
activists, and attacks on immigrants. Of course, the
political circumstances do not help things. The ongoing
fragmentation of the country is an increasing source of
concern. We take this opportunity to reiterate our appeal
to all political actors in Libya to join the dialogue and
support the efforts ofthe Presidency Council as it seeks
to establish the Government of National Accord. We
also call upon the Governments in the region to continue
working together so as to facilitate the reunification of
the country and the advent of peace.

Finally, I should like to make a very brief comment,
taking advantage of Ms. Bensouda's presence with us
today, that is more general in scope with respect to the
ICC and not focusing just on Libya. For several weeks
now, the ICC has found itself treading on delicate
ground following the decision of a handful of African
States to begin the process of withdrawing from the
Rome Statute. This is not good news. I should like to
take the opportunity of Ms. Bensouda's presence here
to reiterate to her my country's resolute support for the
Court. Spain stands ready to contribute in a constructive
manner and in a spirit of dialogue to the quest for
solutions that, with due respect for the independence of
the Court and the integrity of the Rome Statute, would
allow us to overcome the differences cited by those
countries in communicating their decision to withdraw
from the Rome Statute.
In any case, we should not give in to defeatism.
There are grounds for optimism. This year may be the
most fruitful year yet for the ICC, and it is important
that we remember this. The Court keeps alive the hopes
of thousands of victims, demonstrating that with the
requisite Will and resources, justice is possible. On that
note, I convey to Ms. Bensouda the full support and
gratitude of Spain.

