Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): On 31 October, Iraq
announced its complete cessation of the little remaining
cooperation it had offered to the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM). It also decided to continue to
restrict the work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). The Iraqi decision was surprising, and
somewhat incomprehensible, in the light of the important
fact that the Security Council, the day before, had
formulated a unified View on the concept of a
comprehensive review of Iraqi compliance. Such a
comprehensive review would, inter alia, have marked the
road out of sanctions for Iraq. But it cannot take place
until Iraq is back in full cooperation with UNSCOM. and
the IAEA, and steps like those now being taken by Iraq
will not bring it any closer to the lifting of sanctions. We
are always ready to listen to the views of the Government
of Iraq, but attempts to bargain with the Security Council
over its resolutions cannot be accepted.

In the draft resolution before us, the Security
Council condemns Iraq's behaviour and confirms its
demands on Iraq. That message cannot be misunderstood:
Iraq must immediately rescind its unacceptable decisions
of 5 August and 31 October and return to full compliance
and cooperation. There is no room for compromise on
these fundamental principles.

At the same time, this draft resolution not only
repeats the Council's demands; it also reaffirms that
Iraq's compliance with all its obligations will make it
possible for the Security Council to lift the sanctions, as
stipulated in resolution 687 (1991). It restates the
Council's readiness to carry out a comprehensive review
of Iraq's compliance with its obligations once Iraq has
rescinded its decisions and resumed full cooperation with
UNSCOM. and the IAEA. It is our sincere hope that the
message embedded in these paragraphs - an exit sign, as
it were, for the route out of sanctions - shall not be
missed by Baghdad.

 

Finally, a very important principle is reflected in the
last paragraph of the draft resolution. The Security
Council's primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as laid down in the Charter
of the United Nations, must not be circumvented. We see
this paragraph as an expression of the desire of members to
safeguard that responsibility.

Sweden fully supports the draft resolution before us.

