Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Along with the other delegations, I would like to express
my condolences to the family of the Force Commander
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), whom I had the honour to know. I extend
my condolences to the family of General Jaborandy, to
Brazil and to all of the MINUSTAH staff in general.

I would also like to commend you, Madam President,
for the outstanding manner in which you have led the
Security Council during the month of August, which is
not always an easy month.

I would like to refer, first of all, to the relations
between the Secretary Council and the General
Assembly and the efforts that we have made to improve
them. Secondly, I would like to highlight the lessons
learned during these past two months - and I think
there are three lessons.

The presidencies of both Nigeria and New Zealand
made great efforts with regard to relations between the
Security Council and the General Assembly. Under
the New Zealand presidency, I would characterize as
exemplary the debate on the process of electing the
Secretary-General, which affects not only the Security
Council but also the General Assembly. Turning to
the Nigerian presidency, I recall the constant efforts
of the President - at the end of each meeting - to
pull together the common threads of the discussion for
presentation to the press. I think that is a fundamental
task for all presidencies, and I hope that, when Spain
assumes the presidency of the Council, that will also
be our approach. As to working methods, the issue
is fundamental. During our presidency in October,
therefore, Spain will organize a debate on that subject.
We are working intensively with Angola to prepare that
debate, and we are confident that it will have a very
satisfactory outcome.

I said that I was going to come back to the lessons
learned over these past two months. The first pertains
to the unity of the Council, the second to prevention,
or the preventive tasks of the Council, and the third to
the relevance of addressing new threats. With regard
to the first lesson learned, namely, the unity of the
Council - and many have said this before me - it would
not have been possible without that unity to adopt four
absolutely fundamental decisions. The first of those
was the nuclear agreement with Iran - resolution 2231
(2015). The second was the adoption of resolution 2235
(2015), on Syria. And the third was the support given
to Special Envoy De Mistura via presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/ 15. Fourthly, the agreement with South
Sudan would not have been possible without everyone
having been on the same wavelength.

Concerning the second lesson learned - I am
referring to the preventive action of the Secretary-
General - I think that we can be proud of the way
in which the Council reacted in a deft and effective
manner to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the electoral
process in Burkina Faso and the situation in Myanmar.
The preventive function of the Council, which I need
not point out, is absolutely fundamental for maintaining
our credibility.

Finally, there is the importance of being innovative
and of addressing new threats to peace and security.
As a preview to that innovation, I will mention the
activities undertaken by Spain on climate change under
the Arria Formula - those are subjects that are not
frequently discussed in the Security Council - and the
open debate that I had the honour of organizing with
New Zealand in relation to small island developing
States (see S/PV.7499). I think that the Security
Council should be ahead of the curve and decisively
address such new threats. Accordingly, I would like
to focus on the last 60 days - which have marked an
unprecedented success - when, for the first time in
history, the Security Council took up the particular
vulnerability of people belonging to the lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender community. Clearly, it is also
important that the Council discuss sexual violence in
conflict, as that has become a constant tactic of war,
particularly in crises such as those in Syria and Iraq.

Spain will follow closely all of those new threats.
In that context, we will count on the cooperation of
the United Kingdom in paying particular attention
to resolution 1325 (2000) and the numerous aspects
addressed in that very important resolution. Many
of them have not yet been sufficiently implemented
or analyzed by members of the Council, or by the
Organization in general.

In conclusion, I would like express my full support
for the upcoming presidency of the Russian Federation,
as well as to commend the presidency of Nigeria. In all
sincerity, I think that each presidency gives the best of
itself, and I think that, on the topic of working methods,
each of us is laying an additional brick in the wall that
we are trying to build for us all.

