Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for
his briefing.

The United States remains committed to
President Bush's vision of two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security.

The road map imposes a phased series of
obligations on both sides to take concrete steps to
create the necessary conditions to permit final status
talks to go forward. Partnership between the parties is a
critical element. Just as Israel has obligations under the
road map, so, too, do the Palestinians.

The international community has made clear that
a new Palestinian Authority Government must disavow
terror and violence, recognize Israel's right to exist and
accept previous obligations and agreements between
the parties. That was the position taken by the Quartet
in their statement of 30 January.

Those requirements are based upon long-standing
principles and are applicable to any Palestinian
Government. However, as Secretary Rice has said,
Hamas, as the majority party in the new Palestinian
Legislative Council, will now have to bear
responsibility for the decisions it makes and face up to
the consequences of those decisions, which will shape
the international community's approach to issues
involving the Palestinians and regional peacemaking
efforts.

On the Israeli side, we note acting Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert's remarks on 28 March, following his
party's success in the Israeli elections, calling for a
return to negotiations and declaring that Israel is ready
to compromise for the sake of peace.

We will continue to judge Hamas by its actions,
not its words. We have seen nothing that would cause
us to change our position towards Hamas - a
designated foreign terrorist organization, under United
States law, that is responsible for the murder of
hundreds of innocent civilians, has long been an enemy
of peace in the region and has harmed the Palestinian
people's aspirations for statehood.

Our position and that of the Quartet is consistent:
future assistance to the new Palestinian Authority
Government will be reviewed against that
Government's commitment to the principles of non-
violence, recognition of Israel and acceptance of
previous agreements and obligations. We would expect
that measures would be in place to ensure that any such
assistance could not be used by those affiliated with a
foreign terrorist organization.

I noted this morning the remarks of new Foreign
Minister Mahmoud Zahar, who said, "America is
committing big crimes against the Arab and Islamic
countries". Obviously, we unequivocally reject that
proposition. I would also note to Foreign Minister
Zahar that casual slander is an inauspicious way to
begin.

As noted in the 30 January Quartet statement, we
also remain concerned about the humanitarian needs of
the Palestinian people. The United States has long been
a supporter of the Palestinian people through
substantial contributions of our foreign assistance
funds. The United States continues to be devoted to the
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people, and we
shall remain so. We firmly believe that it is important
for the people in the Palestinian territories that they
should have a chance to enjoy lives that include safety,
security, and economic well-being.

Until now, United States Security Coordinator
Dayton's focus has been on frequent and direct
coordination between the Israeli Defense Forces and
the Palestinian Security Forces, including on such
issues as the Gaza border crossings and continuous
liaison with the Palestinian and Israeli security
leadership. With a new Palestinian Authority
Government taking power, General Dayton will have
no contact with Palestinian security forces who report
to any members of a Hamas-led cabinet. General
Dayton's role will be redefined in the light of changing
circumstances.

The road map requires obligations from both
parties. We believe it is important that there be a
Palestinian partner for peace, and in that context we
have welcomed President Abbas' commitment to
pursuing such an agenda. We remain in ongoing
discussions with out colleagues in the Quartet
regarding the way forward, and we will continue to
discuss the best means to support the Palestinian
people.

