Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of the present meeting and express our
thanks to Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Pedersen for their
highly informative briefings.

Peru is following the ongoing conflict and grave
humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
with deep concern. It is clear that, since April, despite
the fact that there has been an evolution on the ground,
the level of violence has escalated, especially in north-
western areas such as Idlib and Hama. Women and
children, as in all such bloody conflicts, are the principal
victims. We condemn in particular the extensive
damage to the area's infrastructure, including schools
and medical centres, as a result of air strikes that do
not discriminate between combatants and civilians. In
that regard, we welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General to mount an investigation into these and other
incidents in the north-west of the country. We hope that
will lead to much-needed accountability in Syria.

Peru reaffirms its condemnation of terrorism in
the strongest terms but once again emphasizes that
combating this scourge cannot, and must not, be
interpreted as a justification for putting the lives of
millions of people at risk.
The responsibility to protect the civilian
population makes the cessation of hostilities in north-
western Syria imperative, which we believe could be
achieved by effectively implementing the September
2018 agreement reached between Turkey and Russia
or through new ways of devising a solution that the
Council should urgently explore and implement in
a united manner, as embodied in the proposed draft
resolution. That is necessary, inter alia, to provide
assistance to the hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons living near the border with Turkey in
extremely precarious conditions.

The focus on events in north-west Syria must
not allow us to lose sight of the humanitarian crises
in other parts of Syria. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors to
provide continued assistance to the 68,000 internally
displaced persons living in the Al-Hol camp and
underscore the importance of continuing to encourage
the international community to support them. Given
that a major percentage of them are of Iraqi origin,
we encourage the Iraqi authorities to conclude the
necessary processes to make their return a reality
within internationally accepted parameters with the
support of the Organization.

While we welcome the recent assessment of
humanitarian needs in Rukban by the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, we underscore the
obligation to allow continued access for that assistance,
as well as to guarantee that those who wish to return to
their homes can do so in a voluntary, dignified and safe
manner. We also hope that the bilateral arrangements
announced in the northern part of the country will
not pose a threat to the civilian population or affect
humanitarian assistance operations.

With regard to the political arena, Peru is eagerly
awaiting that the efforts of the Special Envoy in
conjunction with the parties and the Astana format lead
to the speedy establishment ofa legitimate and balanced
constitutional committee in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). We commend the progress that has been made
to that end. We emphasize the urgent need to agree on
a single measure encompassing aspects relating to its
composition, decision-making functions and mandate
as soon as possible so that it leads to free elections
monitored by the United Nations.

In conclusion, I underscore the urgency of the
parties continuing to work on measures that foster a
better environment of understanding, particularly with
regard to the release of detainees, the identification of
missing persons and the transfer of human remains.
We welcome the work being done within the Astana
framework but note the need to make further significant
progress in that regard.

