Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are grateful to
Ambassador Jessen-Petersen for his briefing and
extend a warm welcome to him. We are also grateful to
Mr. Covic' for his briefing.

Kosovo is one of the more intractable conflict
issues facing the Council, despite the fact that so many
international actors - NATO, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Global Compact are all
active in support of a multi-ethnic and democratic
Kosovo. That is an enigma to us, perhaps because the
Security Council was absent when the conflict began
and it essentially sat out the conflict. True, resolution
1244 (1999) was adopted, but it did not contain a
strategy to resolve the conflict.

Five years into the Security Council's
consideration of the question of Kosovo, we all know
what needs to be done. As a matter of fact, paragraph
19 of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/907)
states that,

"there seems to be a general understanding of and
support for an integrated strategy for the way
forward in Kosovo from now until mid-2005 and
in preparation for the process to determine the
future status of Kosovo. There was broad
agreement on the need to focus on the economy
and on security, the need to engage with Belgrade
and to bring the Kosovo Serbs into the process,
and the importance of the standards process".

We all know that. The challenge now is how all of
those concepts may be realized. We have heard some
interesting and noble ideas from Ambassador Jessen-
Petersen this morning and we have heard similar
proposals from two previous Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General. The question is, what factors
make the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General more optimistic now than were his
predecessors? Similar arrangements were made before
the trouble in Kosovo in March, but that did not
prevent the problems from happening.

The representative of the United Kingdom
enumerated some small, but nevertheless significant
signs of progress towards the resolution of the
problem. But there are other big and even more
significant issues, such as real dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, the existence of parallel Serb
structures, and the participation of all key factors in the
democratic process. We welcome the efforts made after
the March conflict, including the rebuilding of private
property and religious and cultural sites that had been
destroyed or damaged.

We express our satisfaction with the arrest and
prosecution of a number of those who instigated
attacks against the minority communities. We take note
of the progress achieved in local government, as well
as in economic development.

We also welcome the technical assessment
presented in the report of the Secretary-General, but
the challenge now before the Council is to find the best
way forward for Kosovo. There have been some
proposals presented, and the Council should be of one
mind, if possible, to concentrate on the best approach.
Certainly the Council cannot remain seized of the
matter for 10, 15 or 20 years, as Mr. Covie said in his
statement.

In the coming months we should be able to
present the best option possible for Kosovo. Perhaps
the proposal made by the representative of Romania
concerning a mission to Kosovo could be given
consideration. That means the Council would not be
discussing the matter from a distance but would be
obtaining information on the ground.

Before I close, I would like to find out from the
Special Representative whether things are moving in
the right direction concerning the implementation of
standards. Would it be possible to start discussion on
Kosovo's final status by the middle of next year, as
planned? Also, what is his assessment of the impact
that the anticipated appointment of the former Kosovo
Liberation Army Commander Haradinaj as prime
minister would have on the standards implementation
progress and on the discussions concerning the final
status of Kosovo?

