Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in expressing our sympathy and solidarity to
the Turkish people and Government for the tragic loss
of lives caused by the earthquake that struck eastern
Turkey, and to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the
passing of Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.
It is not often that we can, at these regular
briefings, welcome positive developments on the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. So let me begin by welcoming
the exchange of prisoners and the orderly manner in
which the agreement that made it possible was
implemented. We hope this positive development can
be translated into further cooperation, in particular
concerning the situation in Gaza. Fully lifting the
blockade without prejudice to legitimate Israeli
security concerns is vital to allow for life to go back to
normal and reconstruction to take place.

Brazil believes that the time has come for
Palestine to be fully represented at the United Nations.
We hope the Council can take a decision on the
Palestinian application very soon. The ultimate
demonstration that Palestine is a peace-loving State is
precisely the decision to turn to international law and
to the United Nations to realize its legitimate right to
self-determination. The recognition of the Palestinian
people's legitimate right to sovereignty and self-
determination increases the possibilities of peace
between Israel and Palestine.

While supporting the Palestinian aspiration,
Brazil remains convinced that a negotiating process, in
which Israel's legitimate concerns for security are duly
taken into account, is the way to achieve lasting peace
in the Middle East.

Negotiations, however, must be meaningful and
minimally balanced. International recognition of the
Palestinian State and its admission in the United
Nations as a full Member can help reduce the
asymmetry that at present characterizes relations
between the parties. No sustainable agreement can be
reached if one side is too weak and is constantly
undermined by the actions of the other on the ground.

In this regard, the announcements of new
settlements in occupied East Jerusalem are not only
against international law, but are also detrimental to the
prospects for resuming negotiations. Coming just days
after the Quartet called for the resumption of
negotiations on the basis of Security Council
resolutions and the obligations under the Road Map,
they downgrade our hopes and contradict Israel's
proclaimed disposition to negotiate a viable peace.

The continuation of settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian Territories destroys the very
feasibility of a two-State solution. It is not reasonable
to expect the Palestinians to keep negotiating as the
reality on the ground is being deeply and, some fear,
irreversibly altered. This is particularly worrisome in
East Jerusalem and in small and medium settlements
deep into the West Bank. In the current circumstances,
therefore, strong political commitment is needed for
the peace process to advance. This includes putting a
halt to and reversing settlement activity.
The Quartet must impress upon the parties the
need to abide by the steps and timeframe set out in the
statement of 23 September. Given the link many
countries see between the deliberations in the Council
on Palestine's request for membership and the
Quartet's efforts for the resumption of peace
negotiations, it is important that the Council be briefed
by the Quartet on progress made, or the lack thereof.

As Brazil's Foreign Minister Antonio Patriota
stated in our debate on preventive diplomacy in
September, "It behoves the Security Council to find
solutions that can both resolve the challenges posed by
specific situations of crisis and, at the same time,
strengthen the multilateral system itself" (see S/PV.6621, p. 19).

The wave of change that has swept the Middle
East and Northern Africa lends an even greater sense of
urgency to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for a State of their own. In this pressing
issue - perhaps one of the most important issues
regarding international peace and security today - this
Council must also be on the right side of history.

