Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
warmly welcome the Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr.
Ali Khalif Galaydh, whom we again had the pleasure
of hearing in the Security Council. His last visit to New
York, in January, gave us the opportunity to have a
very constructive meeting.

The Transitional National Government (TNG)
resulting from the Arta process deserves support.
Admittedly, the situation is still very precarious. But,
as the report of the Secretary-General emphasizes, the
completion of the Arta process remains today

"the most viable option for lasting peace in
Somalia." (S/2001/963, para. 57)

It is necessary that all factions rejoin the Arta process.

A statement will be made later during this
meeting by the Permanent Representative of Belgium
on behalf of the European Union. France fully endorses
that statement, and I will therefore confine myself to
some brief comments.

The current situation could engender lethargy.
The Security Council first took up the situation in
Somalia at the beginning of 1992. The Council has
devoted a great deal of energy to the Somali crisis and
has adopted almost 20 resolutions on the subject. Those
resolutions made possible the deployment of two
peacekeeping operations, at a cost of some $2 billion
and involving a multinational force of 37,000 men.

This is not the time to give up. The humanitarian
situation, of course, calls for greater involvement by
the United Nations. According to the report of the
Secretary-General, 750,000 people are in need of
international assistance to make up for shortfalls in
foodstuffs due to poor past harvests.

Beyond that, in the context of the new situation
after 11 September, it is essential to assist Somalia in
order to prevent it from becoming another Afghanistan.
It would appear that the Al-Itihad Al-Islamiya
organization has not had a military presence in Somalia
since 1995 or 1996. That is clearly a good thing. But
we must prevent new terrorists from finding refuge on
Somali territory in the future. The fight against
terrorism in Afghanistan and elsewhere will drive the
members of terrorist organizations to seek to settle
anew in countries where State structures are the
weakest. Somalia must not become one of their
sanctuaries. That is exactly the wish of the new Somali
Government. We must help them to succeed.

Helping Somalia today simultaneously entails
peace-building and conflict prevention. Greater
involvement by the United Nations is necessary,
particularly in the crucial area of police training. The
activities of the United Nations Development
Programme in this area should be encouraged. I recall
that France favours sending a peace-building mission
to Somalia as soon as security conditions allow.
Security must be assessed regularly. It is essential that
a mission from Headquarters be dispatched shortly.

