Mr. Covie (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): On
behalf of the Council of Ministers of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Government of the Republic of
Serbia, I would like to avail myself of this opportunity
to extend to you assurances of the highest
consideration and express pleasure for being able to
take part in today's session of the Security Council on
Kosovo and Metohija. Of course, I would like to
extend my appreciation to Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his
interesting statement.

Let me start by describing briefly the
circumstances following the recent parliamentary
elections in the province. I would like to remind you
that only around 0.3 per cent of Kosovo and Metohija
Serbs participated in the elections, after which
Belgrade and the Serbian Orthodox Church were
accused of undermining the multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo and Metohija. Such accusations are a classic
case of misconstrued truth, since Kosovo and Metohija
Serbs' abstinence was not the consequence of
Belgrade's public position that there were no
elementary democratic conditions for the Serbs to take
part in the elections. Their non-participation in the
elections was the consequence of the failed efforts in
establishing and achieving the standards of a truly
multi-ethnic society in the province. Simply, the
position of the Serbian community in Kosovo and
Metohija is such that they have no confidence
whatsoever in the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government nor do they have any hope that they can
realize their interests through these institutions.

The human rights of the members of the Serbian
and other non-Albanian ethnic communities are still
violated in Kosovo and Metohija. There is no security
and freedom of movement for these communities. They
are still subject to intimidation and persecution. Their
property is snatched and set on fire. The only message
they could hear from the Albanian political leaders
before the elections was that Kosovo and Metohija
would inevitably be independent and that it was up to
them to decide whether they would live in an
independent Kosovo and Metohija or not. Is this the
way one should build confidence? Is it not one of the
basic principles of a multi-ethnic democratic society
that a majority ethnic community should provide
protection to minorities or at least refrain from
threatening them? Regrettably, this has not been the
case in Kosovo and Metohija.

Let us go back briefly in time, to the period
before the first elections in the province in November
2001, when Belgrade, in the spirit of good will and a
constructive approach and out of the belief that all
parties to the process should do their best in building a
truly multi-ethnic society with equal rights for all
people, encouraged Kosovo and Metohij a Serbs to take
part in the electoral process. After the necessary
guarantees had been provided by the Common
Document, signed on 5 November 2001 between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the Serbs took part in the elections and joined the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. Intensive
talks followed, as well as signing of a number of
agreements that were to improve everyday living
conditions of all citizens in Kosovo and Metohija.
However, as time went by, it became clear that the Serb
representatives were only window dressing in the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, and every
new Special Representative additionally ignored
UNMIK's commitments made in the agreements that
had been signed. Although it has continued to be
treated declaratively as an active participant in the
process of finding a solution to the Kosovo and
Metohija problem, Belgrade has been, in fact,
gradually shut out of the process, and the position of
the Serbs has further deteriorated.
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo reports have swept this situation under the
carpet for months, even years. And then, the murders
of Serbs in Obilic and Gorazdevac were committed,
and then the violence of 17 March took place.
Throughout this time, the Serbs continued to
participate in the work of the Provisional Institutions
with stoicism and hope that things would change. Alas,
there were no results whatsoever.

Not only did the events of 17 and 18 March
destroy all their hopes, but they also brought to ashes
the credibility of the reports on the progress made in
building the multi-ethnic Kosovo and Metohija. These
events, what preceded them and What followed, forced
us in Belgrade to use all possible arguments to call the
Serbian community once again to participate in the
elections. The 17 March violence, despite all harsh
condemnations and declared determination to have
everything restored to its pre-violence condition,
continues even today.

A couple of days ago, eight full months had
passed since the March events took place. It is late
November now, the winter is here already, and more
than 2,100 people are still out of their homes. Almost
500 Serbs and other non-Albanians internally displaced
on 17 March still live in collective centres! Half of the
houses damaged have not been reconstructed yet, not
to mention the churches and the monasteries.
Throughout this time, all efforts have been directed
almost exclusively towards settling the consequences
of the March violence. The program of the return of
over 200,000 people internally displaced before
17 March has been totally neglected, partially due to
UNMIK's inability to work simultaneously on both
programmes, and partially because of the fact that the
funds earmarked for the regular returns program have
been lent to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to enable them to reconstruct the houses
damaged on 17 March. Was it necessary to use the
funds that were set aside for returns? I do not know the
answer to this question. What I know is that of 1,500
families that were planned to return before 17 March,
only 120 have returned.

In light of everything that has happened in
Kosovo and Metohija for years, for decades, it is an
indisputable fact that it will take years, perhaps
decades, to create a truly multi-ethnic society in the
province. Look at Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the
inter-ethnic strife before the conflict was negligible in
comparison with the situation in Kosovo and Metohij a;
however, it took years for the people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to learn to live with each other again. Is
there willingness in the international community to
remain actively engaged in this problem as long as it is
necessary - for 10 years, 15, or perhaps 20?

This brings us to the following questions. Do we
want to solve the problem for good, in a thorough and
sustainable way, or just have it formally off the
agenda? Does the international community need the
Serbs in the Assembly of Kosovo just as evidence that
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government are
multi-ethnic? The previous three years showed that the
Serbs were not able to improve the elementary living
conditions by working through the institutions. Will
Kosovo and Metohija Serbs, by non-participating in the
elections and in the work of the Provisional
Institutions, manage to draw the attention of the world
to their position and prevent a positive assessment to
be made of the progress achieved in the
democratization process, or will a positive assessment
be made in any case and the Serbs be blamed again for
undermining the multi-ethnic society?

Given the reality in Kosovo and Metohija and the
fact that the basic rights of the Serbs and other non-
Albanians are arrogantly violated, the government of
the Republic of Serbia firmly believes that the
decentralization of the government in Kosovo and
Metohija is the best way to secure the survival and
security of the Serbs and other non-Albanians and their
return to the province. Only additional and enhanced
institutionalization of the position of the Serb
community can guarantee the survival of the multi-
ethnic character of Kosovo and Metohija. If the Serbs
could autonomously decide on a number of their vital
interests, their participation in the work of all other
self-government institutions would be easier and more
certain.

Along with the increased engagement of Belgrade
in the process of harmonizing UNMIK's
decentralization plan and the plan of the government of
the Republic of Serbia, that is the only solution that
will lead to normalization and stabilization of the
overall situation in the province. And since
decentralization is not a local issue, direct participation
of Belgrade representatives in those talks will be the
best guarantee for reaching a successful solution, with
the full reconciliation of the two existing plans.

Recent statements that the countdown has already
started and that the process will go on with or without
Belgrade and with or without the Serbs are most
disconcerting. The recommendations on the process in
Kosovo and Metohija that the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, presented to the Security Council in
his report of 17 November - which reiterate the need
to comply fully with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and the position that it is unacceptable to begin
talks on the status of the province until the prescribed
standards have been fully met - raise hope but are at
odds with what has been going on in the field. In that
context, reducing the role of Belgrade to an advisory or
even an observer's role cannot be seen as a
constructive approach in compliance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Common Document, which would
speed up the processes that are vital for finding a
sustainable solution.

The authorities in Belgrade have showed on many
occasions that they sincerely support the idea of
establishing a modern, multi-ethnic society in the
province and that they are willing and open to engage
in cooperation with the international community and
the Provisional Institutions. I would like to reiterate
today that the international community has a sincere
and reliable partner in Belgrade. However, cooperation
is a two-way process in which both parties respect each
other and in which commitments made and words
given are important. Unilateral attempts to change the
name of the game, failure to fulfil what has been
agreed on and a one-sided approach cannot be
considered cooperation. Of course, any solution can be
forced on all parties, and I will not attempt to deny it.
But a solution made without the active participation of
Belgrade would not be sustainable because it would
only sweep the problem of the security and the stability
of the region under the carpet for a brief period of
time. That brings me back to the question I have asked
already: do we want to solve the problem for good, in a
thorough and sustainable way, or just have it formally
off the agenda?

