Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michele Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, for their informative briefings. I would also
like to express my gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities and the Office of Counter-Terrorism for
the eighth report of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts
in support of Member States in countering the threat
(S/2019/103).

I would first like to concur with what Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov said in his statement
with regard to the fact that the threat of terrorism is a
global challenge that does not recognize borders and
is complex in nature, which means that addressing it
effectively requires a collective effort on the part of
the whole international community. That is why the
Council continues to play a crucial role in this issue.

Although the numbers in the report show that the
areas in Iraq and Syria controlled by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) are shrinking, we must
not lower our guard. We must continue our efforts to
stop the expansion of Da'esh and the creation of its
affiliated cells in Central and South-East Asia, Libya,
Afghanistan, West Africa, as well as other countries
and regions. This year alone, we have witnessed
terrible terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, Kenya and
the Philippines. While there are numerous burning
issues under discussion with regard to preventing and
countering terrorism, I would like touch on three that
are of special importance to Poland.

First, we must step up our efforts to prevent and
counter the financing of terrorism. As the most recent
report of the Monitoring Team shows, ISIL remains the
richest terrorist group in history, with the potential for
continuing to carry out attacks for years. The risk that
the Secretary-General's report identifies of abuses of
unregulated new technologies and payment modalities
for the purposes offinancing terrorism is a serious threat
wherever it might occur. The terrorists' sophisticated
adaptation strategies are forcing us to adjust our
legal and operational frameworks. Enhancing the
transparency of financial flows, information-sharing
and cooperation with the private sector is vital.
Member States should strengthen their efforts to freeze
the assets of all individuals and entities on the Da'esh
and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Ifimplemented effectively,
targeted financial sanctions are an important way of
depriving terrorists of their money.

The second issue that we consider very important
is the need to pay special attention to women and
children associated with foreign terrorist fighters.
Those associated with such fighters who are returning
from conflict zones and relocating may require special
focus and assistance, as they may have served in many
different roles. As the Secretary-General's report
reflects, a significant number of children affiliated
with ISIL have been detained in Iraq and Syria. They
are very often held in poor conditions with a very
small chance of returning to their parents' States of
origin. Poland encourages Member States to use the
guidance provided in the December 2018 addendum to
the Madrid Guiding Principles (S/2018/1l77, annex),
which Ms. Coninsx highlighted in her briefing, and
which advises countries to put special safeguards and
legal protections in place, in full compliance with their
obligations under international law, and to ensure that the
competent authorities consider the impact of terrorism
on children and children's rights. Poland calls on all
parties to bear in mind that children should primarily
be considered victims entitled to full protection of their
rights, and that alternatives to detention should be in
place whenever possible.

We also have to remember that human rights are not
a complementary or secondary issue in the discussion
of measures to prevent and counter terrorism. To echo
Ms. Coninsx, in our view all activities aimed at fighting
terrorists must be conducted in full compliance with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and must never be used as a pretext
to undermine international humanitarian and human
rights law standards.

The third issue is ensuring accountability. Too
few terrorists have been brought to justice. Given the
fact that foreign terrorist fighters and their families
are relocating, Member States must redouble their
international judicial cooperation efforts, as well
as those aimed at prosecuting, rehabilitating and
reintegrating terrorists. That means expanding the
collection, analysis, preservation and sharing of data,
including evidence, which should be conducted in full
compliance with human rights and the rule of law,
because accountability and justice depend very much
on the kind of data and evidence we manage to collect.
In that regard, Poland welcomes the commencement
of the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We are
firmly convinced that its efforts to collect, preserve
and store evidence in Iraq of acts that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide will
produce substantive findings.

