Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish on
behalf of France, I thank you, Mr. President, and the
United Kingdom for having made possible this
discussion on the Sudan and for having invited
President Mbeki, Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Bassole to participate. I thank them for being with
us today.

As all previous speakers have said, the coming
period is crucial for the Sudan and its people. We must
be united, which means that all international
community actors must work together, first and
foremost of course the United Nations and the African
Union. Thanks to the joint United Nations-African
Union forum set up following the Addis Ababa meeting
on 8 May, structured and continuous coordination
between the two organizations on all Sudan issues will
now be possible, in particular on the referendum. We
must take full advantage of this, in line with the
principles of the United Nations Charter and Security
Council resolutions.

Being united also means ensuring coherent action
by the representatives of the international community.
As the African Union High-Level Panel reports, we
cannot isolate the Sudan conflicts: they are all
interlinked.

And we must be vigilant. As the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement implementation period comes to an
end, we must ensure, in accordance with resolution
1919 (2010), that all stages leading to the January 2011
self-determination referendum can be completed. First
of all, the Government of the Sudan must meet its own
commitments. In the immediate future, the Referendum
Commissions, which are key in organizing next
January's poll, must be established. France and the
European Union are prepared to provide technical and
financial support in organizing the referendum. The
deployment of European Union observers could also
help to make the process more transparent.

In the run-up to the referendum, the parties must
also make significant progress in settling outstanding
post-referendum issues, which, as already noted,
include demarcating the borders, clarifying the
modalities for wealth-sharing and resolving citizenship
issues. Postponing those questions will only raise
questions about the credibility of the referendum.

The United Nations must also help in this
process, both with logistical support for meeting
deadlines and by making its expertise available to the
parties. Here, we expect that the Secretariat will play
an active role in supporting the parties. The Security
Council should remain vigilant in the coming months,
given the high stakes involved. France therefore calls
for the Council to be given regular briefings and
presentations on the progress in the preparations for the
referendum.

Of course, the support of the United Nations
should continue after the poll to implement the
decision that the people of Southern Sudan will take.
To that end, we have already called on the Secretariat
to consider modalities for a United Nations presence
following the interim period of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. This issue has already been properly
raised by my colleague from Gabon.

Beyond that political support, the United Nations
should monitor the humanitarian situation in the
Sudan. In particular, given the reported deterioration of
the humanitarian situation, the international
community should consider how it can bolster its
support for the development of Southern Sudan. The
Council could consider that issue in the coming weeks.

Turning now to Darfur, it is essential that all
parties participate in good faith in the negotiations led
by Joint Mediator Bassole and the State of Qatar. We
encourage the African Union to continue its efforts to
pursue this political process.

A first stage has been initiated by the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Liberation and Justice
Movement with the signing of framework agreements
with the Sudanese Government. Those agreements
should be implemented as soon as possible. All
elements of the Movement for the Liberation of the
Sudan should join the process. It is unacceptable for
the Movement to remain outside the peace efforts.

With regard to the situation on the ground, we
must not accept that the free movement of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) should be impaired by Sudanese
authorities and rebel groups. The Missions should be
able to ensure the protection of civilian populations
and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
everywhere and without exception. In that regard, we
are concerned about the issue of access to humanitarian
assistance in camps in Darfur. We would like to have
more detailed information in that regard, as well as in
connection with the efforts of UNAMID to correct the
situation.

Lastly, we should promote justice in the Sudan.
We recently met with Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, whose briefing
was damning (see S/PV.6336). We cannot expect there
to be peace and stability without justice and without
combating impunity. France supports international
criminal justice, and we reiterate Sudan's obligation to
cooperate, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). In that
regard, we are concerned about the Court's new report
to the Security Council underscoring the lack of
cooperation by the Sudan (see S/2010/265). We should
follow up that communication. We cannot remain
silent. Moreover, international criminal justice to judge
the most serious crimes should go hand in hand with
the strengthening of the Sudanese justice system. That
system too must commit itself resolutely to combating
impunity and to developing a mechanism for
reconciliation at the local level.

In conclusion, I would like again to say that
France is prepared to participate in the joint efforts to
be taken so that the coming deadlines in the Sudan
provide an opportunity to bolster the stability of the
region and to put an end to the suffering of
populations, which has continued for far too long.

