Mr. Daccord: I am pleased and honoured to brief
the Security Council today on a topic that is very central
to my organization, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC). On behalf of the ICRC, I would also
like to thank Lithuania for the invitation to participate
in this meeting.

As we meet today and debate the problems and,
I hope, possible solutions as to how better to protect
civilians caught up in armed conflict, no amount of
words alone will adequately convey the scale and depth
of suffering of many of those civilians - nor, in all
honesty, will our words offer a way to end it.

In some of the diverse armed conflicts or other
situations of Violence in which the ICRC is currently
working around the world - and here we are
thinking especially of parts of the Middle East and
Africa - the humanitarian impact of that violence on
entire populations within, but also beyond, national
borders is so overwhelming that it almost defies
description. When almost every man, woman and child
in a particular country has been directly or indirectly
affected by violence, the need for decisive actions
rather than just words really does become a matter of
life or death.

While the search for political solutions to a number
of seemingly intractable conflicts continues, it is the
role of humanitarian organizations such as the ICRC to
help alleviate the consequences of the fighting rather
than to question its causes. Yet that role is becoming
increasingly difficult to fulfil in many of today's most
complex and violent crises.

There are various reasons for that. The overt
politicization of aid and the polarization of States
around humanitarian issues are just two reasons,
reinforcing the need to clearly distinguish and
separate principled humanitarian action from other aid
initiatives. The widening gap between humanitarian
needs and the ability to deliver an effective response is
another reason, as is the decreasing proximity of many
humanitarian actors to the people whom they are trying
to help. Parties to armed conflicts, including complex
webs of armed groups that in many cases do not respect
or accept impartial humanitarian actions, present

another challenge, as do the ever-present security risks.
Administrative hurdles and unjustified or arbitrary
restrictions and delays often add to the problems.

All of those challenges are present in the single
most pressing issue facing the ICRC in many contexts,
which is to gain greater humanitarian access to people
directly affected by violence, to be close to them and to
be able to address their needs. Therefore, the protection
granted to civilians under international humanitarian
law lies at the heart of the ICRC's mandate and mission,
and provides a framework for our assistance activities.

The issue of humanitarian access can be extremely
contentious, as ongoing debates at the highest political
levels have shown. For the ICRC, however, the issue is
quite clear: humanitarian access in situations of armed
conflict is regulated by international humanitarian
law, the rules of which must be respected by all parties
to a conflict, both State and non-State. Those rules
unambiguously specify that States and other parties to
a conflict have the primary responsibility for the safety
and well-being of populations in territories under
their control. Where the basic needs of the population
affected by the armed conflict are not met for whatever
reason, the parties must allow and facilitate the rapid
and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief, which
is impartial in character and conducted without any
adverse distinction, although the parties retain a right
of control. That means that the offer of humanitarian
services by a neutral, impartial and independent
organization such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross cannot be interpreted as a challenge to a
State's sovereignty, nor as recognition or support to any
party to the conflict, and the offer cannot be refused on
that basis.

We therefore take this opportunity to reiterate the
ICRC's appeal to all State and non-State parties to even
the most violent armed conflicts today: respect the
provisions of international humanitarian law, including
those related to humanitarian access. The survival of
countless vulnerable people may depend upon it.

It is of course the general lack of compliance with
international humanitarian law by States and non-State
armed groups that presents the most critical challenge
to the protection of civilians, and that is at the root of
the widespread suffering we are witnessing in various
situations of conflict today. For my organization, the
ICRC, it is a critical aspect of our approach to engage
with all parties to a conflict, including non-State
armed groups, to remind them of their obligations
under international humanitarian law and urge them to
comply.

Of course, the ICRC's approach is only one among
an increasing number of actors - both civilian and
military - aiming for the protection of civilians
with different mandates and ways of working. The
United Nations has gone a long way in recent years
in further integrating the issue of the protection of
civilians into its structural framework. The ICRC is
committed to maintaining and further developing its
highly constructive dialogue with the United Nations
on operational and legal issues related to peacekeeping
and to lending its support and expertise in humanitarian
law for the training of United Nations peacekeepers,
both predeployment and on-site. Professional standards
in protection work are of the utmost importance, and
in 2013 the ICRC published an updated guide on the
issue. Those standards could be used to inform the
development and implementation of civilian protection
strategies by United Nations peacekeeping missions.

In our daily work, the ICRC and United Nations
peacekeepers are confronted with the consequences of
the prevailing lack of compliance with international
humanitarian law. One of the most widespread and
daunting humanitarian problems arising from violations
of that law - at least in terms of numbers - is that of
internal displacement. That problem not only affects
the many millions of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) themselves, but also countless host families and
resident communities.

Better respect for international humanitarian law
is key to preventing that problem in the first place
and to protecting people who have been displaced
and easing their suffering. Humanitarian law, for
example, prohibits the displacement of people unless
it is necessary for imperative military reasons or for
the protection of the civilians themselves. If there were
better respect for the rules prohibiting direct attacks on
civilians and civilian objects and for those prohibiting
indiscriminate means and methods of warfare, to take
another example, fewer people would be compelled to
flee their homes.

During displacement, IDPs are often exposed to
further abuses and have wide-ranging subsistence
needs. Conversely, but equally reprehensible, people
are sometimes forcibly prevented from fleeing when
they wish to do so. In both situations, it is crucial that
parties to the conflict allow and facilitate humanitarian
access so that the needs of affected people may be
addressed in an impartial manner.

In many armed conflicts, the prevalent use of
explosive weapons with wide impact in densely
populated areas - with all its inherent risk of incidental
or indiscriminate death, injury and destruction of
homes and vital civilian infrastructure - further
fuels displacement and inhibits return. The ICRC joins
the Secretary-General in encouraging States to share
information on their respective polices, operational
practices and lessons learned on the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. That would contribute to
informed discussions on this important humanitarian
issue, and hopefully to the development of operational
guidance by States.

Compliance with international humanitarian law
provides protection during armed conflict and after the
fighting has ended. Yet we watch in dismay as parties to
conflict continue to disregard the very rules that could
lay the groundwork for recovery and an eventual return
to stability. Fanning the flames of ethnic, religious
and sectarian hatred and violence further exacerbates
the problem, increasing the perennial instability and
fragility of many conflict-affected States.

All of us here today have a role to play in improving
compliance with international humanitarian law. For
our part, the joint Swiss-ICRC initiative to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law, which
continues to gain momentum and widespread support
from States, is just one example in that regard.

Ultimately, it is up to States and non-State armed
groups, which are also bound by the provisions of
international humanitarian law, to show the political
will to translate legal provisions into actual deeds, to
turn words and promises into concrete actions and to
make the protection of civilians a meaningful reality.

