Mr. Selim (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to extend our thanks to the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan for its initiative to convene this important
meeting. We greatly value the presence of His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II of
Jordan, presiding over this Security Council meeting
on a very important issue that all of our countries must
seriously address, as well as the consequences that
could ensue and threaten the security of our citizens
and even international peace and security.

A number of factors together have led to the fact
that our communities are now afflicted with currents
in the form of groups and factions that have embraced
extremist ideas and Views that have nothing to do with
religion and tolerance. What is worse is that they have
started imposing those views on people, in particular
youth. That reveals the nature of their clash with
society, which is, in essence, nothing but an intellectual
aberration, as they refuse to live or coexist with other
segments of society. They do not wish to integrate
into society, and they focus on and magnify points of
discord. That leads to friction and strife, and impedes
the progress of the State and individual citizens. Those
individuals thereby isolate themselves by believing that
the community in which they live is a pagan one that
does not deserve to be lived in.

Within that context and taking into consideration
the various aspects of terrorism, we must give priority
to addressing extremism wherever it is found, because
it paves the way for terrorism. In all our actions we
must give particular attention to young people and
always keep them in mind. One of our priorities should
always be to keep them from falling into the clutches
of extremism and terrorism in particular, because
the youth in many of our States constitute the largest
proportion of the population. We must also take into
account the ferocious campaigns against youth in
all States, in particular campaigns that have been
orchestrated recently in an attempt to recruit young
people as fighters in terrorist groups by using religion
as a means to ends that have no connection whatsoever
to any religion.

At the outset, it is necessary to recognize that the
phenomenon of extremism is a reality that we cannot
overlook and that we must counter. In that regard, we
have to address its causes. That is something that we
have recognized in Egypt, where the President has
recently called for the renewal of religious dialogue
aimed at countering extremism and ensuring the
necessary and appropriate interpretation of Islam and
its tenets. We have taken serious steps in that direction.

First, we must analyse extremism and terrorism
and counter them with irrefutable arguments and
evidence. The matter cannot be restricted to taking
security measures. In that respect, we must adopt a
consensus-based and tolerant method that leads not
to half solutions, but to tolerant and consensus-based
solutions. We must also avoid all obscurantist views
that lead people who embrace such ideas to believe that
the world is divided into only two groups - those who
believe what they do and those who are infidels - only
good and evil. In that regard, we must make sure that
youth, who do not have the ability to correctly interpret
those views themselves, are always informed by
those who are able to provide them with appropriate
interpretations, and that they are made aware of the
nature of the exigencies of such interpretations with
regard to their circumstances, so that there would
be no discord or contention. In addition, there have
been a number of economic and political reasons
that have led to extremism among youth and to their
resorting to violence, including access to adequate
education, the lack of opportunities to make a decent
living, unemployment, poverty, the marginalization
of foreigners, foreign occupation and the lack of
recognition of a people's right to self-determination.
All of those factors must be addressed very seriously
by strengthening cooperation, by adopting relevant
strategies, by implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and by refraining from extending
support to extremists and terrorists.
I would like to underline that the fact that today we
see more youth from the Muslim and other minorities
in Western States who seek to join terrorist groups as
foreign combatants, especially in Iraq, Syria, Libya
and in Africa, makes it necessary for those States to
review their policies so as to integrate Muslims into
their communities, curb transgressive acts against
religion and prophets and adopt the necessary steps that
would put an end to the recruitment by those terrorist
organizations. On the other hand, it is necessary to
implement the various relevant Security Council
resolutions and hold accountable those States that
instigate and provide support and funding to those who
use foreign terrorist combatants.

We must also recognize that this phenomenon is
capable of refuting the argument that the reason for
terrorism is the system of government and the economic
and social pressures that bear upon society. The fact
that this phenomenon is spreading in countries where
remarkable gains have been made is itself testimony to
the fact that there are organizations that are seeking to
use religion for other objectives.

We in Egypt have for many years understood and
recognized the dangers of extremism and terrorism
and the need for joint international efforts to address
them. We need to adopt a comprehensive strategy
in this regard. In addition to our international and
regional efforts, we have taken a number of effective
steps at the national level, including the numerous
initiatives of Al-Azhar, with its moderate, tolerant and
enlightened Views, to refute mendacious ideas that are
affecting young people. These steps include various
cultural events explaining the fundaments of the
tolerant religion of Islam so that young people do not
fall prey to those who spread Violence and the takfiris.
Moreover, this mission has not been limited to Egypt;
many Al-Azhar scholars have Visited a number of other
countries to explain the moderate and tolerant Islamic
way of thinking. Moreover, the Department of Fatwah
in Egypt has created an observatory that uses scientific
methodologies to monitor takfiri fatwahs and expose
their defective nature.

The Government of Egypt has also made great
efforts to raise the standard of university and vocational
education so as to nurture young people and help them
to find decent work opportunities, which in turn will
reduce unemployment and enable young people to
engage in the attainment of sustainable development
objectives. In political terms, young people are being
invited to join the political arena.

Once again, it is extremely important for us to
continue discussing this issue and to build on efforts
that have already been made, including those of the
United Nations. In this context, it could be useful
consider the possibility of the Secretary-General
preparing a comprehensive report considering this issue
from all points of View, including recommendations on
a programme of work to be implemented.

I would like once again to thank the Jordanian
presidency of the Security Council this month for
having convened this important meeting.

