Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has closely followed the situation in the Horn of
Africa and understands the concerns of the relevant
countries about the security situation in the region. We
oppose all words and acts that may jeopardize regional
peace and stability.

China always supports the settlement of African
issues in African ways by Africa. We stand for
solidarity among African countries and for the
appropriate settlement of their disputes through
dialogue and negotiation. We hope that the African
Union and other regional organizations will play a
positive role in that regard. We will continue to firmly
support the constructive efforts made by the relevant
countries and regional organizations to maintain peace
in the region. We will also continue to do what we can
to offer our assistance.

China has all along adopted a prudent attitude
towards sanctions, as we believe that, rather than
achieving the expected results, sanctions may often
lead to further complication of a situation and affect
the economic development and livelihoods of the
people in the countries in question. For that reason,
China abstained in the voting on resolution 1907
(2009), which the Council adopted in 2009. China
believes that the relevant actions by the Security
Council with regard to the Horn of Africa should be
conducive to improving relations among the countries
of the region, the settling of disputes by the parties
concerned through dialogue and negotiation, and the
maintenance of regional peace and stability.

In the context of that basic principle, China took
an active and constructive role in consultations on the
resolution. Some of the amendments proposed by
China are reflected in the text of the resolution.
However, we believe that there is still room for
improvement. Regrettably, the rush to vote on the
resolution resulted in its ultimate failure to reflect
some of the major legitimate concerns of many
members of the Security Council, including China. For
example, the implementation of due diligence
guidelines has not yet reached maturity, and the impact
of its implementation on other issues has yet to be
seen. The Security Council's Sanctions Committee
should have studied and explored the issue further.
11-62209
It is for those reasons that China abstained in the
voting on resolution 2023 (2011), which the Council
has just adopted.

