Mr. Pham Binh Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of South Africa
on your effective leadership of the work of the Council
this month. We highly appreciate your initiative to hold
a debate on this important topic, and I am confident
that, under your skilful leadership, this meeting will
arrive at a successful conclusion.

We are facing fast and complex changes in the
world, in which peace and cooperation for
development remain the dominant trend, though
challenges arising from both traditional and
non-traditional security issues have increased at the
regional level. More than ever before, the international
community recognizes the pressing need for a stronger
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations in responding to challenges to regional
and international peace and security.

The Charter of the United Nations places on the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Despite the fact that the Security Council has yet to
find a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, notwithstanding tremendous efforts, the initial
positive steps in the transition from conflict to peace in
countries like Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi and
recently the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
testimony to what the Security Council can do to bring
peace and security to the people of Africa.

As the Secretary-General noted in his 2007 report
on the work of the Organization (A/62/1), there has
been a dramatic increase in the range of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Heads of State and Government at the 2005 World
Summit agreed to expand consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
through formalized agreements and, as appropriate, the
involvement of regional organizations in the work of
the Security Council. Various resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and the Security Council on
cooperation between the United Nations and specific
regional organizations help further promote such
cooperation.

On the implementation front, we are convinced
that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations should be based on their
complementary capacities and comparative advantages,
making full use of their experience, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and the relevant statutes of
regional organizations. Regional organizations, owing
to their most immediate connection to regional
particularities, are well positioned to understand the
root causes of armed conflicts and have unique
advantages to detect potential threats early and find
peaceful solutions to those problems. Better
coordination and the development of a more effective
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations will strengthen the capacity of the
Security Council to fulfil its task of maintaining
international peace and security. At the same time, the
United Nations and the Security Council should pay
greater attention to the issue of providing political,
physical and financial assistance to peacekeeping
efforts of regional organizations that lack resources.

Equally important, possible modalities of
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations must be further explored and expanded
for mutual reinforcement, taking into account the
differing characteristics of regional organizations in
terms of membership, resource availability and
institutional capacity, as well as the uniqueness of each
conflict situation.

Africa, the second largest and second most
populous continent, is where most regional conflicts
are taking place. Together with United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the African Union (AU) has
proactively contributed to the mediation, reconciliation
and reconstruction processes in many countries such as
Angola, Burundi, C6te d'Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea-
Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan,
Uganda and Western Sahara. The Governments and the
peoples of Africa and the African Union must be
commended for their determined efforts in this
connection.

We welcome the adoption of the Declaration
signed by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission in November 2006 on enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of capacity-building over the
next 10 years (A/61/630, annex), as well as the
ongoing close coordination between the two
secretariats. Given the many existing challenges ahead,
Viet Nam is of the view that the AU should be
supported in playing a greater role and should therefore
enjoy greater cooperation from the United Nations in
term of financial and logistical assistance for building
the capacity of its peacekeeping forces, so as to
consolidate peace in fragile post-conflict countries and
help prevent a relapse into violence. The difficulties
facing the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur are vivid examples demonstrating how
necessary this is.

In our region of South-East Asia, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has become an
important mechanism for strengthening peace,
friendship and cooperation in the region. ASEAN has
also attached great importance to fostering
consultations and exchanging experiences and best
practices with other regional organizations in Asia,
Africa, Europe and Latin America to promote
multilateral endeavours for peace, stability and
development.

As a brother and friend of Africa and as a
member of ASEAN, Viet Nam has always been at the
forefront of any efforts aimed at strengthening the
partnership for peace and development between the
two organizations. We look forward to further
promoting these efforts in the interest of peace,
security and development in Asia, Africa and
throughout the world.

