Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic) (spoke in French): On behalf of my delegation, I should
first like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We have
no doubt that, under your wise guidance, the work of the
Council will be successful. I should also like to
congratulate your predecessor, our friend Ambassador
Andjaba of Namibia, on the outstanding way in which he
conducted the Council's work last month.

Before entering into the heart of the matter, I should
like to thank you, Sir, and all the members of the Council
for having heeded our request to participate in this
discussion on the situation in East Timor.

Like other member countries of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic has closely followed developments in East Timor.
As we all know, under United Nations supervision, on 30
August the great majority of the people of East Timor
expressed itself in a popular consultation by rejecting the
status of special autonomy offered by the Government of
Indonesia.

My country took note of this event, the historic
importance of which is clear to all. Since then, given the
complexity of the problem, the situation has deteriorated.
Acts of violence have erupted, bringing death and material
damage. In these difficult circumstances, the Indonesian
Government has done its utmost to resolve the problems
so as to normalize the situation as soon as possible.

In considering this question, we believe that
recognition is due to the sincere efforts of the Indonesian
Government to achieve a just and internationally
acceptable solution to the question of East Timor. It is
therefore important to stress that the Indonesian
Government has already undertaken to abide by the result
of the popular consultation and is committed to assuming
its responsibilities for the security of the island, in
accordance with the New York Agreement of 5 May
1999, and in particular with its article 6.

We fully understand the feelings of several friendly
countries that are advocating the dispatch of a
multinational force to East Timor to address the situation.
We are of the View, however, that Indonesia's argument
that it is striving vigorously and in all due earnest to
rectify the situation - an argument which we deem to be
sincere - must be taken into account. Certainly, the
situation is not an easy one, but Indonesia has asserted
that it will do everything necessary to restore order and
security to the island as soon as possible. In our opinion,
it would doubtless be right to allow the Indonesian
Government to shoulder its own responsibilities.

The question of East Timor is not as simple as one
might imagine. In fact, it is one of the most complex
questions of our time. We feel that, given this great
complexity, the matter requires serious in-depth
consideration and that any endeavour or demarche to
resolve it requires the consent of the Government of
Indonesia. It is in this spirit that my delegation intends to
make its modest contribution to the current debate on this
question.
