The Deputy Secretary-General: I deliver this
statement on behalf of the Secretary-General.
"Since the outbreak of the war in Syria, I
have persistently called for accountability for
perpetrators of grave human rights violations,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
recent attacks against humanitarian convoys and
personnel, which may constitute war crimes, add to
the urgent need to see action now on accountability
in Syria.

"The Security Council has an inescapable
responsibility in that regard. States that are members
of both the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council have a particular duty to end the bloodshed
and to ensure justice for the victims of unspeakable
crimes.

"In February 2013, the Commission of Inquiry
concluded that the International Criminal Court was
the appropriate venue to pursue the fight against
impunity in Syria. The High Commissioner for
Human Rights has repeatedly called on the Security
Council to refer the situation in Syria to the Court,
most recently in April. The Syrian people have a
fundamental right to justice. The United Nations
and its Member States have a fundamental duty to
defend that right. I support mechanisms that can
genuinely hold perpetrators to account. It is clear in
this case that no side to the tragedy is innocent. Let
us also recall that accountability will help prevent
further atrocities.

"For more than three years, the Security
Council has been unable to agree on measures that
could bring an end to this extraordinarily brutal
war, which has deeply affected and damaged not
only millions of Syrian civilians but also the entire
region. If members of the Council continue to
be unable to agree even on a measure that could
provide some accountability for the ongoing
crimes, the credibility of this body and of the entire
Organization will continue to suffer.

"When we talk of accountability we should be
thinking not only of the parties to the conflict, we
should also think of those outside who are fuelling
the conflict and exacerbating the suffering by their
continued supply of weapons to those who are
committing the atrocities.

"I call again on the Council and plead with the
members to set aside their differences and to finally
work together on a joint approach that can bring an
end to this long nightmare for the Syrian people.

They desperately need an end to the violence, and
a political solution. We all have a responsibility
to help the Syrian people finally see a future of
peace."

