Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): We would like to express our
appreciation to the delegation of Namibia for preparing this
open debate on the situation of children and armed conflict.
We are particularly pleased that this debate is taking place
under the presidency of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Namibia. We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu,
for his statement. He again presented us, in most
compelling terms, with the tragic consequences of armed
conflicts for children. More than a year has elapsed since
the Security Council held its first open debate and issued its
first presidential statement on the subject. It is therefore
timely for the Council to take stock of developments and
strengthen its efforts to assist and protect children in armed
conflict.

The plight and the number of children affected by
armed conflict are appalling. As a result of the changing
nature of contemporary conflicts and the fact that they often
take place over extremely protracted periods of time, the
consequences are devastating for children. Millions are still
victims of wars and often their principal targets: killed,
brutalized, permanently disabled, sexually abused,
traumatized, separated from their families and forcibly
displaced from their homes. And, more ironically, children
have also become instruments of war, recruited or
kidnapped to become child soldiers and to participate in
hostilities. Entire generations are being victimized and their
prospects for a normal life destroyed.

The work of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, is extremely
pertinent both for awareness-raising and for the
identification and implementation of viable strategies to
effectively address the victimization of children in armed
conflict. We strongly support the concrete initiatives
proposed and the field missions undertaken by the Special
Representative to assess the plight of children in conflict
situations and to mitigate the suffering of children affected
by war, including in Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Kosovo and Afghanistan. We are heartened
by the results achieved in obtaining commitments from the
conflicting parties to stop the recruitment and enlistment as
soldiers of children under the agreed age limit and to allow
humanitarian ceasefires. It is of paramount importance to
follow up on these activities and to ensure that the parties
honour their commitments.

The special needs of children should be recognized
in peace agreements, including through comprehensive
demobilization and rehabilitation programmes specifically
designed for child soldiers. Given the dramatic scale of
the plight of children in Sierra Leone, we are particularly
pleased that the Peace Agreement in that country
recognized children's entitlement to special care and to
protection of their inherent right to life, survival and
development, and recognized also the need for long-term
rehabilitation of child combatants. This should be one of
the important priorities in the process of the
implementation of peace.

The efforts of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict have to be closely
coordinated with the work of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and other United Nations
organs, agencies and organizations which have the
necessary expertise, resources and operational capacities
on the ground. Their cooperation is crucial to achieve
results and truly ameliorate the situation of children
affected by armed conflict. Their efforts deserve the
recognition and full support of the Security Council, both
for their inherent humanitarian value and for their
contribution to international endeavours for peace and
security.

The Council must pay special attention to children
in its decision-making and in mandating peacemaking,
peacekeeping or peace-building operations. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration represent a standard
aspect of many situations dealt with by the Security
Council, and the special needs of child soldiers have to be
duly taken into account on such occasions. In his reports
to the Security Council the Secretary- General should be
encouraged to include recommendations in that regard.
The same is true in the case of demining. Just as
important, although perhaps less obviously pertinent to the
work of the Council, is the question of preventing the
recruitment of children as soldiers. If the Security Council
proves effective in addressing specific situations, it will
also help the larger cause of curtailing the practice of the
exploitation of children as soldiers.

In presidential statement S/PRST/ 1998/ 18 of 29 June
1998, the Security Council expressed its readiness also to
consider "means to assist" and "appropriate responses"
when sites that usually have a significant presence of
children are specifically targeted. This is an important

 

commitment by the Security Council that needs to be
emphasized once again. The Special Representative should
be encouraged to inform the Security Council of situations
in which particular action of the Security Council might be
required. We would like to recall in this context the
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court that designate intentionally directing attacks against
such buildings as a war crime.

The Council must also extend its full support to
deployment of human rights field monitors and to the
efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure that the personnel
involved in United Nations-mandated operations will
receive special training on the protection, rights and welfare
of children. We support the efforts to review and strengthen
arrangements and standards for the conduct of peacekeeping
personnel in that regard. We recognize the importance of
UNICEF's training package on gender and child rights
protection in complex emergencies, which is already being
used by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
several national peacekeeping training institutes. We
welcome the Secretary-General' s bulletin on the observance
by United Nations forces of international humanitarian law,
which also sets out the obligation for special protection for
children, including against any form of indecent assault.

It is worth repeating what the Special Representative,
Mr. Otunnu, has stressed on a number of previous
occasions: children simply have no role in warfare.
Slovenia fully supports the efforts to raise the minimum age
limit for recruitment and the participation of children in
hostilities to 18 years through the adoption of the optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. We
welcome the provisions regarding child soldiers in the
recently adopted International Labour Organization
Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labour.

The international community is facing a perplexing
situation today. We have an impressive body of
international humanitarian and human rights law that sets
standards for conduct in conflict situations. Yet there is an
unacceptably wide and growing gap between the existing
norms and the situation on the ground, where these norms
are flagrantly violated by belligerent parties. It is clearly
primarily the responsibility of States to put an end to
impunity and to ensure that those responsible for violations
of these norms are brought to justice. States must act
individually through their national systems of justice, and
also collectively, to achieve this goal through an effective
international justice system.

The adoption of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court has manifold implications for
children affected by armed conflicts. It designates as a
war crime the practice of conscripting or enlisting
children under the age of 15 or using them to participate
actively in hostilities in both international and
non-international armed conflicts. It furthermore
recognizes as war crimes and crimes against humanity
such crimes as rape, sexual slavery and other forms of
sexual violence, and these provisions are of great
significance particularly in the light of the situation of
girls in armed conflicts. It is our hope that the Statute will
enter into force as soon as possible.

The situation of children affected by armed conflict
has many important aspects and we realize that it would
be too ambitious to address all of them extensively in our
statement today. Let me conclude by saying that we are
pleased to see that the Security Council is going to adopt
a draft resolution on children and armed conflict for the
very first time, and also that it is increasingly paying
attention to the problem of children and armed conflict
when discussing different items on its agenda. The recent
adoption of the resolution on Sierra Leone, which for the
first time specifically addresses the situation of children
affected by armed conflict, is a case in point. We would
encourage a continuous and meaningful dialogue with the
Special Representative in situations before the Council,
and we look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General and his recommendations for concrete measures
on the protection and welfare of war-affected children.

Slovenia fully supports the preparation of today's
draft resolution and hopes that it will be adopted.

