The President (interpretation from Arabic): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Guinea-Bissau and Togo, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral (Guinea- Bissan) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Kpotsra
(Togo) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1998/ 1202, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to documents S/l998/1178, which contains
the text of a letter dated 15 December 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Togo to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of the final communique and the
additional protocol to the Abuja Accord of 1 November
1998 concerning the formation of the Government of
National Unity of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, signed
at the conclusion of the meeting held in Lome on 14 and
15 December 1998 within the framework of the Guinea-
Bissau peace process.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1998/1202) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President (interpretation from Arabic): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been

adopted unanimously as resolution 1216 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.55 pm.

