Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Madam President, for inviting me to the
Security Council and for giving me the floor.

Eighteen months after the signing of the Conakry
Agreement, my country finally has a consensual
Prime Minister. Since 25 April, Guinea-Bissau now
has an inclusive Government. I have the great pleasure
of thanking all of the Council members for their
patience, efforts and solidarity. I would like to express
my gratitude to the Security Council, the Economic
Community of West African States and Ambassador
Mauro Vieira.

Our inclusive Government has the great challenge
of preparing the upcoming legislative elections,
scheduled for 18 November. The Conakry Agreement
also requires that a number of institutional reforms
be carried out. Why? It is not enough to just conduct
successful elections to automatically consolidate the
institutional stability of our democratic rule of law.

To give Council members a more accurate picture
of our lengthy institutional crisis, I wish to recall
here that over the past 24 years of our pluralistic
democracy, Guinea-Bissau has had five legislative
elections, suffered a civil war and was shaken by two
coups d'etat. The current Prime Minister, Aristides
Gomes, is the twentieth person to occupy that post.
All that clearly demonstrates that it is not enough to
hold successful elections to consolidate democratic
institutions. To achieve all the goals enshrined in
the Conakry Agreement, the inclusive Government
and Parliament will need the participation of the
international community - for example, in the area of
technical assistance.

Guinea-Bissau needs the support of the Council
to conduct universal, participatory, transparent, free
and fair elections. In spite of our domestic financial
efforts, which have, and will continue, to come from
the State budget, the Government will need financial
assistance to cover the inherent costs, including sound
technical preparation of the elections. In that regard,
I would point to the urgency of updating the voter
registration rules, especially regarding the registration
of new voters, namely, the thousands of young people
who have reached voting age since the last elections,
in 2014.

In the new political framework, we will continue
to count on the patience and solidarity of the members
of the Council. Most important for us is that fact that
now we can build up our central public institutions and,
finally, move towards a recovered constitutional order
through the re-established political dialogue.

I would like to take this opportunity to wish every
success to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in my country, Mr. Jose Viegas Filho. The
appointment of a Brazilian national to that post is a
renewed source of hope for us. In conclusion, I can
assure those present that they have our gratitude.

The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
