Mr. Khare: Allow me to begin by referring to the
political process for Darfur. Despite the incidents of
violence in Darfur in recent months, there has been
some progress in the ongoing negotiations in Doha.

In November, joint negotiating committees from
the Liberation and Justice Movement and the
Government concluded their work in the broad areas of
power-sharing, justice and reconciliation, compensation,
the return and resettlement of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and security arrangements. This work
has demonstrated that the parties have significant areas
of common ground. However, important points of
disagreement remain, particularly related to the powers
of a regional authority to implement the peace
agreement in Darfur and a Vice-presidency post for
Darfur. The mediation has made a series of proposals to
address these issues and is currently planning work
throughout February with all parties in Doha to achieve
consensus on the terms of peace.
The 16 December decision of the Justice and
Equality Movement to return to Doha and resume
negotiations on a ceasefire with the Government was
also a positive development. The mediation has
stressed that the basis for a comprehensive and
inclusive peace agreement remains a cessation of
hostilities on the ground. In this regard, it has
consistently urged all parties to the conflict to cease
fighting and join the talks in Doha. While Abdul Wahid
has not yet joined the talks, he continues consultations
with his movement on the possibility of coming to
Doha. Recently, he has indicated that he may send a
delegation in the near future.

On 6 November, the African Union-United
Nations Sudan Consultative Forum agreed to begin
planning for a Darfur political process, to take place
within Darfur. The Darfur political process would be
based on the outcomes of the Doha process and work
to build support within Darfurian communities for the
key principles arising from the Doha negotiations. It
has been agreed that the Darfur political process will
be led by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the African Union
(AU) High-level Implementation Panel, with the
support of interested stakeholders.

The credibility of the Darfur political process will
depend on the steps the Government of the Sudan must
take to create a conducive, enabling environment. Key
aspects of an enabling environment include the
protection of the civil and political rights of
participants in an atmosphere where they can present
their Views without fear of retribution; freedom of
speech and assembly to permit open consultations;
freedom of movement for participants and UNAMID;
and proportional and equitable participation among
Darfuri interests.

At a 16 December meeting with Joint Special
Representative Ibrahim Gambari, AU High-Level
Implementation Panel Chairman Thabo Mbeki and the
Presidential Adviser of the Government of the Sudan,
Mr. Ghazi Salaheddin, it was agreed that a joint
UNAMID-Government of the Sudan technical task
force would be established. The task force would
monitor the conditions for an enabling environment,
which must be established as a prerequisite to the
Darfur political process and to develop modalities for
implementing that process when it is initiated. The
importance of an enabling environment was again
discussed on 12 January at a meeting with Joint Special
11-21690
Representative Gambari, Adviser Salaheddin and
United States Special Envoy Scott Gration.

We understand that various stakeholders in the
Darfur peace process have expressed differing views
regarding the timing and content of the Darfur political
process, as well as its possible relationship to the Doha
talks. The Secretary-General is currently reviewing
these issues with a View to establishing a clear vision
for the way forward.

The unprecedented international attention and
cohesion regarding the Sudan's landmark referendum
also represents an opportunity to generate renewed
focus on Darfur. The situation in Darfur, as part of a
broader set of centre-periphery dynamics that affect
populations throughout the country, should be
considered within the national framework of the Sudan
and the many challenges facing the country as a whole.

I will now turn to the Secretary-General's report
on the Sudan (8/2010/681) and the ongoing referendum
for Southern Sudan. Since the last briefing to the
Security Council on 18 January (see S/PV.6468), all
ballots cast in the Southern Sudan referendum have
been counted and are in the process of being verified
and approved. Preliminary results are scheduled to be
announced on 2 February. Barring any legal appeals,
the final results will be declared on 7 February and, in
the case of appeals, a week later on 14 February. Early
indications of results from the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission point to an overwhelming
vote in favour of secession.

As the Council is aware, the referendum in Abyei
did not take place pending the outcome of negotiations
on the disputed area's status between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). I am pleased
to report that, since the Council was last briefed, there
have been no major incidents of violence reported in
Abyei. The agreements reached by community leaders
on 13 January and between the Ministers of Interior of
the Government of the Sudan and the Government of
Southern Sudan on 17 January, relating to migration
and security in the area, have largely held and are
being gradually implemented.

The agreed deployment of two additional
battalions of joint integrated units to provide security
in the area is expected to be completed by tomorrow,
27 January. Nevertheless, with seasonal migrations
scheduled to resume shortly, tensions on the ground
between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities
11-21690

remain high. The United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) continues its efforts to deter a return to
Violence through the increased deployment and patrols
of its troops, but in the absence of a permanent
settlement of the status of Abyei, the resumption of
violence remains an ever-present threat. In this respect,
we are encouraged that President Al-Bashir and First
Vice-President Kiir are scheduled to meet again
tomorrow, 27 January, to resume discussions on Abyei,
with the support of the AU High-Level Implementation
Panel chaired by President Mbeki.

UNMIS and the United Nations country team
have also redoubled their efforts to engage with the
authorities in Abyei and Southern Kordofan to ensure
the safety and well-being of Southern returnees caught
in the Violence of the past weeks. On 22 January, the
movement of convoys in and around the Abyei area
resumed with protection from local authorities, and no
incidents of Violence were reported.

The many challenges to stability in the North and
South require a commitment by the authorities to
inclusive political participation. In this context, the
Government of Southern Sudan continues to make
progress on its road map for political accommodation,
reaching out to other political parties and forces,
including those that rebelled against the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement after the April
elections. On 22 January, Vice-President Salva Kiir
announced the formation of a constitutional review
committee, as called for during the all-party conference
of October 2010.

While President Al-Bashir's meeting on
22 January with the National Unionist Party, the largest
opposition party in the North, to discuss future political
arrangements is a step in the right direction, we are
concerned by reports from Khartoum of the arrest of
opposition leaders and other activists. The Government
of the Sudan will, I hope, continue on the path of
democratic transformation in the spirit of the CPA.

The ongoing popular consultation processes in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states continue to
make steady, albeit slow progress. It is crucial that
these processes, mandated by the CPA, proceed in a
transparent way and address the complex political and
security issues, as well as popular grievances, in these
states. Public hearings commenced in Blue Nile state
on 14 January and continue in a relatively positive
atmosphere. A new timetable for elections in Southern
3
Kordofan state has been announced, with registration
set to begin on 24 January. It is hoped that both
processes can be completed before the end of the CPA
interim period. UNMIS will continue to monitor
progress and provide assistance where appropriate.

While the referendum passed without major
incident, the parties must refocus their efforts on
concluding negotiations over post-CPA arrangements.
They continue to meet at all levels and have committed
themselves to reconvening the negotiation process
early next month. We are confident that the parties,
through the mediation efforts of President Mbeki, will
make swift progress in the period ahead. We also
believe that stability in the North and the South will be
mutually reinforcing and expect the international
community to recognize the courage and sacrifice of
both leaderships as we enter the final days of the CPA's
interim period.

In order to support the efforts of both UNMIS
and UNAMID and take forward the United Nations key
priorities, the Secretary-General will attend the African
Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January,
where, alongside African Union Chairman Jean Ping,
he will participate in a high-level meeting on regional
and international support for the Sudan. We anticipate
that this will be an opportunity to harness the
unprecedented international attention and goodwill
towards Sudan and assist the parties in meeting the
many challenges facing the country today.

