Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank Egypt for its initiative in
convening this open debate. We also wish to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal for their
respective briefings.

The current international security situation is
grave. Factors giving rise to conflicts in various parts
of the world have become increasingly complex, with
the interweaving of traditional and non-traditional
security threats. Countries are closely interdependent,
including with regard to their interactive, indivisible
security interests. The fundamental way to maintain
lasting peace and common security is to abide by the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, work together on building a community
towards a shared future for humankind, promote a
governance system featuring broad consultations,
relying on joint efforts and shared benefits, and practice
a new security concept that is common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable.

The United Nations is the central mechanism for
the maintenance of common security. At different
stages - including conflict-prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace - the Organization
has different priorities and focuses concerning
those four aspects. However, efforts to achieve the
overarching goal are interconnected and must be
managed holistically.

First, conflict prevention must be aimed at
maintainingpeaceandsecurity,whiletargetedmeasures,
based on the type of conflict and its root causes, must
be taken. The most important consideration in resolving
disputes between States is to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic norms governing international relations,
while safeguarding the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of nations. The Council's work must
reflect those principles and include urgiing the parties
concerned not to engage in words or deeds that may
escalate tensions.

Many issues on the Security Council's agenda
concern countries' internal conflicts. In addressing such
internal issues, the Council must observe the principle
that all countries are sovereign and equal, and that there
must be no interference in a country's internal affairs.
The Council must also respect the will and leadership
role of the countries concerned, provide them with
constructive assistance to assist them in advancing the
political process, and facilitate reconciliation based on
the specific national conditions.
In areas plagued by protracted armed conflict, one
finds a proliferation of terrorist activities, often with
spillover effects. Conflict prevention and de-escalation
are closely linked to efforts to counter terrorism. The
international community must guard against potential
terrorist attacks against the weak links in national or
regional security mechanisms. In fighting terrorism,
uniform standards must be used. The relevant Security
Council resolutions must be strictly implemented and
international cooperation in countering terrorism
strengthened. In particular, the terrorists' mobility
networks and financing channels must be blocked.
Efforts must be directed at preventing terrorist
organizations from acquiring weapons and keeping
violent extremist ideologies from propagating. The
United Nations should support synergies forged among
regional countries in their fight against terrorism,
provide capacity-building assistance to developing
countries through bilateral and multilateral channels
and eradicate the root causes of conflict and terrorism.

Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must strictly comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the three
principles governing peacekeeping operations, and
formulate explicit, viable and focused mandates in
keeping with the specific conditions of the countries
concerned, while taking into full account the myriad
factors affecting the needs and security environments
of the host countries.

In order to improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations a periodic review mechanism
should be established in order to ensure the continuing
role that peacekeeping operations are expected to play
with a view to ensuring the progress and ultimate
fulfilment of their mandates. Peacekeeping operations
should adjust dynamically in keeping with evolving
needs, prioritize support in stages and focus on the
central task of peacekeeping in an attempt to lend
targeted assistance to efforts to resolve the most urgent
and prominent problems facing the host countries.

Once peacekeeping operations are decided upon, the
role thatpeacekeeping forces will play is key to executing
the peacekeeping mandates. The United Nations
must seriously consider the role of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), strengthen communications with
them, support their capacity-building, improve the
quality and equipment of peacekeeping personnel and
enhance the ability ofpeacekeeping troops to fulfil their
mandates and effectively deal with security threats.

Thirdly, peacebuilding must set an overall goal
of strengthening political security and development
capacity in order to promote the transition from a
conflict situation to development and reconstruction.
While countries differ in their specific conditions and
development stages, many countries mired in conflict
share a praiseworthy tradition of resolving differences
and achieving consensus through consultations.
Peacebuilding work should respect the ownership of
the countries concerned, advocate seeking common
ground while resolving differences and the concept
of democratic consultation, adapt to the prevailing
conditions in host countries, optimize the tradition
of cooperation among countries of the same region,
promote social integration and consolidate the fruits
of peace. The relevant United Nations agencies should
strictly observe their respective mandates in carrying
out peacekeeping activities and focus on strengthening
the host countries' ability to generate revenues, while
concentrating on assisting them in resolving the most
urgent problems.

Fourthly, sustainable peace and sustainable
development are mutually reinforcing and dependent.
Peace is not a castle in the sky, as it relies on
development for its foundation. Only by giving equal
attention to development and peace and by resolving
conflict in terms of both symptoms and root causes
will successful peace be assured. The United Nations
must intensify its input in the field of development,
comprehensively advance the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, vigorously help developing
countries improve livelihoods and reduce the gap
between the rich and the poor, while paying attention
to the advantages of regional initiatives and regional
organizations in efforts to form the synergies needed
to lay the foundation for attaining sustainable peace by
promoting sustainable development.

In supporting the economic development of
countries, the United Nations should respect the
social systems and development paths chosen by
countries on their own, put itself in the shoes of host
countries, understand their essential needs, solve their
key problems, offer them substantial help in their
concerted efforts to attain the goals of their domestic
programmes, and enable their people to effectively
enjoy the dividends of peace.

In recent years, the African Union (AU) has
vigorously promoted solidarity and unity among African
countries in their quest for peace and development, and
has made substantive progress in that regard. China
hopes that the United Nations and the AU will fully
implement the joint UN-AU Framework on Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security so as to enhance
cooperation in such areas as conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict reconstruction. China
supports the positive consideration of the African
proposal for financing AU-led peace operations,
effectively helping Africans to secure sustained, stable
and predictable funding.
China looks forward to the alignment of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with the AU
Agenda 2063, in support of accelerated economic
development, to address the root causes of conflict
in Africa. China has always pursued an Africa policy
characterized by sincerity, practicality, affinity, good
faith, justice and shared interests. It supports African
countries in seeking African solutions to African
problems, and encourages the AU and other regional
and subregional organizations to play an active role in
finding solutions to regional problems.

China is firmly committed to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As the second-largest
contributor to the United Nations peacekeeping budget,
China has a total of 2,514 peacekeepers on active duty
in nine mission areas. We are working at full capacity
to fulfil the commitments made by Chinese leaders in
support of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and to advance the peace and security track of the
10 major China-Africa cooperation plans to enhance
capacity-building for African-led peace operations.
China will further enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations-China Peace and Development Trust
Fund, giving momentum to the peace and development
of developing countries, in particular those in Africa.

China stands ready to cooperate closely with
African countries within the framework of the Belt and
Road Initiative, supporting their social and economic
development and helping them to achieve peace,
stability and development at an early date. China looks
forward to working with the international community
to forge a new type of international relations featuring
win-win cooperation and to promote a new security
vision of universal security and common prosperity,
thereby making positive contributions to the sustainable
peace and development of the world community.

