Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate, which bears witness to your
country's commitment to and ongoing focus on this
topic.

I wish to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui for her briefing,
dedication and passion in carrying out her mandate,
as well as Mr. Herve Ladsous, Ms. Yoka Brandt and
Mr. Forest Whitaker for their briefings. I would also
like to thank Ms. Uwiringiyimana for her very moving
and courageous testimony.

Children are often doubly victimized in armed
conflict because of their vulnerability. On the one
hand, they are the first victims of violence, in particular
sexual violence, and their most basic rights are violated;
on the other, they are recruited by parties to conflict
as child soldiers, in blatant violation of international
law. That is why this debate is particularly important in
mobilizing the international community to strengthen
the existing legal instruments for the protection of
children. Through its consistent commitment, the
Council has clearly demonstrated that combating
violence and abuse against children in armed conflict
is not only a moral and humanitarian obligation, but an
imperative for international peace and security.

Morocco welcomes the commitments made by
various States parties to the conflict to ensure the
protection of children's rights, the progress achieved in
liberating child soldiers from the ranks of armed forces
or groups, and the growing number of national action
plans on this topic that have been signed or are being
negotiated.

Morocco also welcomes the efforts undertaken
in the framework of the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign launched by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and UNICEF. My delegation
hopes that initiative will achieve its goal of halting
the recruitment of children by 2016 and of supporting
national initiatives in this area.

Morocco condemns all forms of violence against
children, including their use as shields at stockpiles or
barracks, taking them as hostages, or their recruitment
in refugee camps. Morocco also condemns attacks
on schools and hospitals and the use of such sites for
military ends.

Although today's debate has the merit of galvanizing
all stakeholders in the international community, it is
unfortunate to note that efforts made until now to end
children's participation in armed conflict have fallen
short. In fact, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, child trafficking and their
exploitation in prostitution and pornography, various
Security Council resolutions and the Paris Principles
have been unable to achieve their noble goals. That
is why my delegation believes that the efforts of the
international community to deal effectively with this
problem would benefit from the following multifaceted
approach.

First, the approach should be global and
implemented with an exhaustive understanding of
the root and structural causes of the problem, such as
poverty, discrimination, social exclusion and social and
economic inequality.

Secondly, it should be a strategic approach that
deals not only with current conflict situations but
also emphasizes prevention, in particular by allowing
democracy and human rights, the strengthening of
good governance and the promotion of sustainable
development to take root.

Thirdly, the approach should be cross-cutting and
involve all stakeholders, in particular Governments,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and
organizations protecting human rights.

Fourthly, it should be flexible and take into account
the multifaceted and evolving nature of armed conflicts,
as well as the specificities of each conflict.

Lastly, the approach must be practical and combe
both incentives and specific measures, in particular to
deal with acts of reprisals and to plan for redress when
violations are committed, as well as for reintegrating
child soldiers into society in the framework of
appropriate national reconciliation processes.

In parallel, national strategies for the protection of
children continue to depend on the capacity-building of
Governments and on available material, financial and
human resources to allow such strategies to be long-
lasting. That is why it is important to rapidly respond
to the appeal of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2014/339), which calls upon donors to meet the
funding needs for the implementation of action plans
and national programmes.

The Kingdom of Morocco was one of the first
countries to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We have
also complied with our obligations under the Paris
document with regard to this issue. Morocco's legal
arsenal regulating enlistment and military recruitment
is in full conformity with international law. It prohibits
all military integration under the age of 18 and stipulates
measures to support young soldiers in all the training
process and integration.

As was pointed out by Ms. Zerrougui this morning
in her statement, the ongoing nature and increasing
number of children recruited in armed conflict, in
particular by armed jihadist groups, including the
Islamic State in Syria and Iraq, as well as the kidnapping
of dozens of girls by the Boko Haram terrorist group,
challenge us all and calls for coordinated efforts by the
international community.

Resolute action must be urgently taken to ensure
accountability for all of those who continue to flout
international law and child-protection standards.
Coordinating these efforts among various parties in
the United Nations system is a guarantee of efficiency
and success. However, the primary responsibility is
borne first and foremost by the parties to the conflict,
who must comply with their internationals obligations
under Security Council resolutions and the relevant
international conventions.

In conclusion, it is time that crimes against
children in armed conflict be considered crimes
against humanit. For children are the future of their
respective countries - something that the international
community has a responsibility to protect.

