Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): There was nothing
new in the statement made by the representative of
Azerbaijan: Armenia-phobia has become standard
practice in this Chamber. Although I will not engage in
that meaningless exercise, I will make several remarks.

First, the representative of Azerbaijan spoke
at length about selectivity and double standards.
That is exactly what Azerbaijan is practicing. In her
statement, she referred to a number of the principles
of international law. Let me recall that no one is in a
position to hierarchize the principles of international
law. No one principle takes precedence over the other,
in particular the principle of self-determination, which
was missing from the statement of Azerbaijan. Thanks
to that very principle, Azerbaijan is here as a Member of
the United Nations. Indeed, the overwhelming majority
of the members of the United Nations are here thanks
to that principle.

Secondly, she referred to the Security Council
resolutions. I would remind the representative of
Azerbaijan that the key element of those resolutions is
the establishment and observance of a ceasefire. That
is something that is violated by Azerbaijan on a daily
basis, with casualties on both sides. Armenia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group - the main format for negotiations on the
conflict - call for the establishment and observance of
a ceasefire, the establishment of an inquiry mechanism
and the withdrawal of snipers. The observance of the
ceasefire has been refused unilaterally by Azerbaijan.

Thirdly, the representative of Azerbaijan referred
to the incumbent Armenian President, Serzh Sargsyan.
It is ironic that Azerbaijan should refer to the Armenian
leadership. In the 24 years of independence, not one
President in Armenia out of the three, including the
incumbent, has served more than two terms of office.
Meanwhile, if one were to, out of curiosity, have a look
at the leadership of Azerbaijan, they would come to a
very simple conclusion: for almost half a century just
one family has led that country - and Azerbaijan is
not a monarchy.

