Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2042
(2012). We hope that it will mark a turning point in the
crisis in Syria. The point is to quickly deploy a strong
and reliable United Nations mission with the task of
verifying the implementation of Mr. Annan's plan.
With this resolution the Security Council makes that
goal its own. We hope that in the short term the
resolution will open the way to an end to brutal
violence and that we will be able to say to the Syrian
people that the time of indiscriminate violence is
finally over.

Since six o'clock Thursday morning the Violence
has subsided; however, the attacks against civilians in
Homs today have confirmed the doubts that may exist
as to the reality of the Syrian regime's commitment.
We will very soon know if Syria will fulfil its
commitment. If that does not happen, it will be the
responsibility of all members of the Council to
consider the measures that should be taken. We will
judge the Syrian regime by its acts and nothing else.

Let us be clear: this partial de-escalation of
repression comes very late, after more than 10,000
Syrians have fallen to the brutal violence of the
Damascus regime. The perpetrators of this barbaric
repression of a peaceful civilian population will not go
unpunished, and I am happy that today, finally, the
Security Council has been unanimous in recognizing
their criminal responsibility.

Above all, we cannot consider this de-escalation
of repression to be enough; it is up to the Syrian
Government to fully and immediately fulfil the
commitments it has made to the Joint Special Envoy of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States. The
collective message we are sending today is an appeal
for a halt to violence in every form - not just heavy
artillery but also torture, arbitrary arrests, forced
disappearances and sexual violence, all of which are
violations of human rights and have been committed
systematically and on a huge scale by the Syrian
regime's security forces for 13 months.

Today's resolution enables the deployment of an
advance mission to observe and assess the halt to the
violence and to test the seriousness of the Syrians'
commitment before authorizing a mission with enough
scope to cover the whole territory. Such a mission
cannot act without the withdrawal of the Syrian
authorities' troops and heavy weaponry, as Mr. Annan

requested in the Security Council and as today's
resolution recalls. Nor can it act if the Syrian regime
does not respect the guarantees required of it by the
Council. It is up to all Council members to reinforce
that message to the Syrian authorities.

In sending this first mission, and, we hope, a
second one soon after, we are not seeking merely to
freeze the situation on the ground. The Council is
supporting Mr. Annan's plan of action, designed to
facilitate Syria's political transition to democracy in
order to meet the aspirations that the Syrian people
have so courageously expressed. Those are the
conditions for launching the political process that we
are attempting today to create on the ground by ending
the violence and restoring the hope of the Syrian
people that a peaceful political solution is possible.

This resolution marks another turning point: the
rediscovered capacity of the international community
to speak with one voice in response to the Syrian crisis
and to contribute to a peaceful transition to democracy.
That return by all to responsible action is another
reason to rejoice. It is unquestionably a genuine reason
for hope for the people of Syria. I would also like to
stress France's appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations, the Secretary-General and Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan, whose task is as difficult as
it is crucial. It is thanks to all of their efforts that we
have been able to act as one.

But that consensus is fragile. The line separating
us from the abyss of a civil war or its regional
ramifications is a narrow one. Let us not deceive
ourselves: there can be no other process if this one
founders through the irresponsible actions of some who
have stubbornly propped up a regime that has given
proof of how unworthy it is to govern Syria. Today we
finally have a hope of a peaceful solution to the crisis
in Syria. France therefore solemnly calls on all
members of the Council to support unreservedly the
efforts aimed at meeting the aspirations of the Syrian
people.

