Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): My
Government's position on the substance of the question of
the Israeli expropriation of land in East Jerusalem was
made clear in the statement I made on 12 May, which
complemented the statement you yourself, Mr. President,
made later that day on behalf of the members of the
European Union. I would like to explain briefly why the
United Kingdom has just voted in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

In our View the draft resolution represents a calm but
clear statement of the legal position. The cosponsors of
the draft resolution accepted all the amendments proposed
by the European Union members of the Council, and, as
a result, the text avoids any reference to wider issues,
apart from a clear declaration of support for the peace
process.

We very much understand and sympathize with the
attachment to Jerusalem of the Israeli people, which was
expressed by the Permanent Representative of Israel
during the debate. But we believe that the Government of
Israel should recognize that others feel equally strongly
about the city, and should refrain from taking actions
which seek to change the status quo on this most sensitive
of all issues before the conclusion of the final-status
negotiations.

We very much regret that this issue has caused
divisions in the Council. We do not believe this will be
helpful to the peace process. That is why we worked hard
to avoid that outcome. We welcome the fact that during
the debate earlier this week all members of the Council
expressed concern about the Israeli expropriation orders.
We believe this is an important message for the Israeli
Government, and we hope it will consider its future
actions carefully in the light of it. We note the intention
of the Israeli Cabinet, expressed at its meeting on

 

14 May, not to carry out additional expropriations of land
in Jerusalem for housing purposes.

Throughout the consultations which have taken place
over the past few days, my delegation has had as its
overriding objective the protection and the furtherance of
the peace process. That is the priority. We look to all
parties to continue, and to redouble, their efforts to make
progress. The peoples of the region deserve no less.

