The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Wittig for his statement.

I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Eugene-Richard Gasana, Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda), Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission: Over the past year, the
Security Council convened a number of thematic
debates on post-conflict peacebuilding. The frequency
of the meetings and the scope of the discussion testify
to the growing sense of commitment by the Council to
take into consideration the complex challenges facing
countries emerging from conflict. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) could certainly help the Council to
deepen that commitment by providing three main
advisory functions.

The first is an early peacebuilding perspective,
which could contribute to the Council's consideration
of the scope of the roles of peacekeeping missions in,
and contributions to, the broader peacebuilding efforts
undertaken by other actors in the field.

The second is an inclusive and flexible platform
to forge partnerships and engagement with those key
actors, thereby ensuring broader buy-in to
peacebuilding processes and facilitating informed
drawdowns of peacekeeping missions.

The third is supporting the countries on its
agenda and monitoring the progression from
stabilization to consolidation of peace on the basis of
country-specific analyses of risks and opportunities.

I welcome the initial steps taken by the Council
thus far to engage the Chairs of country-specific
configurations in more interactive and informal
dialogues around peacebuilding opportunities and
challenges in certain countries on the PBC's agenda.

(spoke in French)

In reviewing the peacebuilding architecture, the
co-facilitators underscored the potential advantages of
broader and more frequent interaction between the
Security Council and the Commission. In that regard,
the contributions of members of the PBC that are
members of the Council are important to achieving that
goal. As the new Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I am prepared to work closely with those
members of Council, as well as with all other
members, in order to identify appropriate measures to
inject new momentum into that interaction.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Gasana for his briefing.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.


