Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Germany's initiative to convene today's
meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his statement, as well as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and
UNICEF Executive Director Mr. Anthony Lake for
their respective briefings.

China attaches the utmost importance to the issue
of the protection of children affected by armed conflict.

China rejects the recruitment and use of child soldiers
and other acts that violate the rights of children in
armed conflict. China supports the continued efforts of
relevant United Nations bodies to protect children
affected by armed conflict in accordance with their
respective mandates and based on their advantages and
strengths. In this connection, I would like to emphasize
the four following points.

First, in order to ensure that Children affected by
armed conflict are protected against harm, the issue
must be tackled from its root causes. More attention
should be focused on the prevention, control and
elimination of armed conflicts. The Security Council
should effectively implement its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. It should
strengthen preventive diplomacy to encourage and
support the peaceful settlement of disputes by the
parties through good offices, mediation, dialogue,
negotiation and reconciliation, and should work to
reduce and respond in a timely and appropriate manner
to situations of conflict so as to create a safe and
favourable environment for the healthy development of
children.

Secondly, the mandates of Security Council
resolutions must be strictly implemented, in
accordance with provisions of the Charter as well as of
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Council
should give priority attention to the issue of children
affected by armed conflict. China supports the
important role of the Special Representative on the
issue of the protection of children affected by armed
conflict, in accordance with the Council's mandate.

Since armed conflicts have varied causes,
protection measures for children affected by armed
conflict should be established based on relevant factors
of each particular situation. There is no on-size-fits-all
solution. Sanctions remain the choice of last resort at
the Council's disposal to address situations that pose a
threat to international peace and security. China has
always advocated caution in adopting sanction
measures.

Thirdly, efforts should be made to ensure the
effectiveness of various programmes and plans to
protect children while adhering to the principle of
national ownership. Governments bear the primary
responsibility to protect children affected by armed
conflict. The actions of relevant United Nations entities
are meant to support and supplement Government
actions. The Security Council and its Working Group
in Children and Armed Conflict should strengthen
communication with the Governments concerned. The
Secretary-General and his Special Representative
should establish a channel for sharing information at
the earliest possible moment and maintain contact
thereafter. The Council should consider the information
provided by all the relevant parties to an armed
conflict, particularly that of the Government.

Fourthly, the long-term impact of armed conflict
on children must be addressed seriously.
Comprehensive measures must be adopted to ensure
the return of children affected by armed conflict to
society and the resumption of their normal life. In
promoting post-conflict reconstruction, the
international community should ensure the return of
children to their families, schools and societies as a
priority matter. In this connection, the international
community must provide sufficient resources, scale up
development assistance and redouble efforts in the
areas of poverty elimination, universal education and
the promotion of sustainable development in order to
provide safe and favourable conditions for the
development of children.

