Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): As this is the first
time my delegation has spoken in a formal meeting of the
Security Council this month I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for July.

The Czech delegation strongly condemns the offensive
by the Bosnian Serb forces against the safe area of
Srebrenica. During the fighting the Bosnian Serb forces
occupied the town of Srebrenica, attacked with heavy
weapons United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
positions and detained a number of UNPROFOR personnel.
More than 20,000 civilians fled Srebrenica in the face of
the Bosnian Serb onslaught, and they are now at the centre
of a grave humanitarian crisis. The attack by the Bosnian
Serbs against Srebrenica is totally unacceptable, and we
strongly condemn it.

At the same time, we salute the brave soldiers of the
Dutch battalion of UNPROFOR who, in a very courageous
way, resisted the assault by overwhelming Bosnian Serb
forces and who are now providing humanitarian assistance
to the refugees from Srebrenica.

The significance of the Bosnian Serb attack on
Srebrenica for the overall situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the neighbouring regions, and its
impact on that situation, cannot be overestimated. This
attack constitutes a grave escalation of the Bosnian conflict.
For the first time, a United Nations-declared safe area has
been occupied. By occupying it, the Bosnian Serbs have
crossed a new and dangerous threshold. It is clear that they
are testing the patience and resolve of the international
community, to see how far they can push and bully with
impunity.

Past experience shows that the status of the safe areas
is imperfect - the whole concept is unclear - but they
constitute an important part of our policy aimed at the
protection of civilians affected by the terrible conflict in
Bosnia.

The latest offensive by the Bosnian Serbs shows yet
again that in their quest for more territory that does not
belong to them, the suffering of thousands of innocent
civilians has no meaning for them. The Security Council
cannot ignore such an attitude. How the Council will
respond to this situation is therefore of great significance.

Very rightly, the resolution that we have just adopted
condemns the Bosnian Serbs for their offensive and for
detaining UNPROFOR personnel. It also makes a number
of demands. It demands that the Bosnian Serbs cease their
offensive and immediately withdraw from Srebrenica. It
demands that the Bosnian Serbs immediately and
unconditionally release all detained UNPROFOR
personnel.

It also makes a number of demands. It demands that
the Bosnian Serbs cease their offensive and immediately
withdraw from Srebrenica. It demands that the Bosnian
Serbs immediately and unconditionally release all
detained UNPROFOR personnel. It also demands
unimpeded access to the refugees. It calls on both parties
to respect the status of the safe area of Srebrenica and the
agreement on the demilitarization of Srebrenica of 18
April 1993, which, regrettably, neither of the parties has
respected in the past.

The demands contained in the Security Council
resolution which we have just adopted are fair and should
be met. However, past experience shows, and not only in
the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina, that unless our
demands are underpinned by a genuine resolve and
determination to see them through, they will remain
unfulfilled.

The party to which today's resolution is particularly
addressed knows this, and I am sure that its leaders will
be very carefully assessing our response to their
challenge. If today we have adopted just another
resolution full of demands that will not be underpinned by
our determination to see them fulfilled, then we will be
doing more harm than good, not only to the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina but also to the position of the
Security Council. The Bosnian Serbs will be reaffirmed
in their belief that Security Council resolutions are just
paper tigers. They will be tempted to repeat what they did
in Srebrenica in Zepa, Gorazde and other so-called safe
areas, knowing that they can do so with impunity.

We believe that in the aftermath of the Bosnian Serb
aggression against the safe area of Srebrenica the United
Nations and its Security Council should reflect on what
they want to achieve in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
the region as a whole, and on whether there is the
necessary capability and will to see it done. If at the end
of the day they come to the conclusion that their goals
cannot be achieved, either due to the lack of resources or
cooperation or due to the lack of determination, they
should consider other possibilities.

The attitude of the Bosnian parties has made it
difficult for UNPROFOR to carry out its mandate. Of

 

course, the bulk of the blame for this situation rests on the
Bosnian Serb party, which shows absolute disrespect for
human lives, as well as disrespect for the efforts of the
international community, including the decisions of the
Security Council aimed at ending the conflict.

In effect, UNPROFOR is being pushed in the wrong
direction. Instead of being a part of the solution to the
conflict, UNPROFOR is dangerously close to becoming a
party to the conflict.

