Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are confident in your talents and in your
ability to lead the Council's work. I should also like to
pay a well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Gunter
Pleuger and his team for an admirably efficient and
professional presidency. In addition, I thank Mr. Danilo
Turk for his comprehensive briefing on developments
in the situation in Bougainville. We commend
Ambassador Noel Sinclair and the staff of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB)
for the excellent work they have accomplished.

We welcome the progress made in implementing
the peace process in Bougainville. After the success
achieved in phase II of the weapons collection process,
we have noted that phase III - which consists of
eliminating the weapons - has made significant
progress: more than 80 per cent of the collected
weapons have been destroyed.

We welcome the efforts of the Papua New Guinea
authorities to advance the constitutional process, which
is now at an important stage before the holding of
elections resulting in the establishment of an
autonomous Government. From that perspective, we
have noted the progress made in elaborating the third
draft of the constitution, which will soon be submitted
to the Government of Papua New Guinea so that the
Constituent Assembly can be convened to approve it.

The delegation of police powers and functions to
the interim Government of Bougainville is a significant
development that will help to establish an atmosphere
conducive to the holding of elections.

Finally, as socio-economic development of the
island is essential for Bougainville's autonomy, we
believe that the donor community should provide
enough financial support to Bougainville to promote its
economy, it being understood that participation by
United Nations funds and programmes will supplement
donor efforts.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
presence of the United Nations is very necessary until
the completion of the peace process. The Mission's
natural exit point will be the holding of free and
democratic elections and the formation of an
autonomous Government. In that regard, we are open
to the idea of extending UNOMB's mandate until that
time.

