Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to convey to you, Sir, the Republic of
Argentina's pleasure at seeing you preside over this
meeting. In addition, I wish to express my country's
gratitude at the exemplary and dedicated manner in which
your predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya,
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
May.

Our gratitude also goes to all those who made possible
this open debate on an item of grave concern to the
international community. We are particularly grateful to
your own delegation and to Japan, Costa Rica, Sweden
and Slovenia.

In 1995 Argentina participated actively in the
Conference on the Review and Extension Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Shortly thereafter, in September
1996, Argentina joined the 130 countries that signed the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). While
we regretted the absence on that memorable occasion of
a group of nuclear-weapon States, we had thought it only
a temporary situation. Today we see that the non-
proliferation regime is in danger, with serious
consequences for the established equilibrium and for
international peace and security.

It is necessary, now more than ever, for all those
States that have not acceded to the NPT or the CTBT to
take the necessary steps to become full members of those
instruments.

In this connection, we are following closely the
process begun in Geneva on 4 June aimed at dealing with
the situation created by the recent nuclear tests, because
we believe that it is directed towards strengthening the
non-proliferation regime. Argentina, as on previous
occasions, expressed in a timely manner its concern about
those underground nuclear tests.

The message that Argentina would like to send today
is based largely on our own experience. Influenced by the
cold-war atmosphere, Argentina debated for decades what
turned out to be a spurious dilemma. Having achieved
early on complete mastery of the nuclear-fuel cycle, we
came to understand fully the dangers and the temptations
inherent in the possession of such technology.

Fortunately, however - though not without different
kinds of obstacles - we then embarked on a cooperation
programme with our neighbour, Brazil. When in 1985 the
two countries signed a Joint Declaration on Nuclear
Policy, few in either country would have believed that in
1987 the President of Brazil would visit the uranium-
enrichment plant in Pilcaniyeu, in Argentine Patagonia,
and that one year later the Argentine President would visit
a similar installation in Ipero, Brazil. In 1990 both
countries implemented this joint nuclear policy, and to
this end they created, one year later, the Argentinian-
Brazilian Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear
Materials. This was an unprecedented step in the region.

 

The increasing cooperation and the encouragement of
the international community prompted Argentina, Chile and
Brazil to ratify in 1991 the Treaty of Tlatelolco, It is only
right to emphasize once again here in the Security Council
the far-sightedness and leadership of Mexico in the creation
of what became the first nuclear-weapon-free zone on earth.

All of these concrete policies led to increased
investment in the Argentine energy sector, and our nuclear
companies embarked successfully on cooperation
agreements with other States as well as organizations such
as the European Atomic Energy Community. In addition,
with a view to enhancing vital South-South cooperation,
Argentine companies transferred technology to neighbouring
countries such as Peru and assisted in the construction of
nuclear reactors in Algeria and Egypt, inter alia.
International cooperation also reduced costs for Argentina's
nuclear industry, making it possible to channel resources to
areas of genuine priority such as health, education and the
infrastructure.
Argentina is proud of the role it has played in Latin
America and the Caribbean to ease the tensions resulting
from those problems. It is for this reason that today we join
those countries that have taken the floor to offer
alternatives to the situation created in South Asia.

We support the resolution just adopted and in
particular the efforts by the Secretary-General to restore
stability to relations between India and Pakistan. Our
message to the Governments of both countries is simple:
there is always time to initiate sincere and productive
dialogue. We must not stand idle in the face of a situation
that could affect the established equilibrium and the security
regime of an entire continent or, even worse, revive the
spectre of nuclear proliferation elsewhere in the world.

In this respect, we feel that it is precisely those
countries that have been able to limit themselves with
concrete and transparent measures that could exercise
beneficial influence in such a delicate situation, since they
offer the best example to follow.

For our part, we trust that the parties involved will
take advantage of the experience offered in the reduction of
tension and conflict resolution through confidence-building
measures. The leaders of Pakistan and India are perfectly
familiar with the steps that the international community
hopes they will take. We encourage them to take these
steps and hope that they will assume the initiative in that
direction.

