Mr. Ubalijoro (Rwanda): My delegation would like
to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for his useful,
stimulating and encouraging "Supplement to An Agenda
for Peace". We should also like to express our solidarity
with and convey our condolences to the people of Japan
for the suffering they are enduring as a result of the
disaster created by the earthquake in their country.

After the end of the cold war, many African
countries had hoped that the new era of political detente
would open new horizons for them. As the new
geopolitical order was forming, we realized that we had
fallen into another vain illusion. It is fitting to note that
some countries have even been victimized by this new
political scenario.

After the genocide it experienced, our country is
facing a challenge unprecedented in its history. We fully
concur with and support the Secretary-General's idea on
the concept of peace-building, because it is very relevant
to our status quo. Currently, we are facing huge problems
regarding reconstruction, rehabilitation and socio-
economic development. Our greatest preoccupation is the
reconciliation of the Rwandese people. The international
community should realize that if it is to promote peace,
stability and prosperity in developing countries, its efforts
should be aimed at strengthening and reinforcing the
pillars of such factors as unity, justice and social well
being in developing countries. Our Government is more

 

than determined to take the reins of its destiny and lead its
people to the brightest, most peaceful and prosperous future
that its current limited economic, infrastructural and
organizational capacities can provide.

Our country wishes to convey its appreciation to all
the troop-contributing countries, especially those that are
presently based on our territory. Given that our country is
a beneficiary of such aid, we believe that it would be
constructive to make a fundamental suggestion to all troop-
contributing countries. We should like to express our
concern at the lack of dialogue between troop-contributing
countries and parties that are concerned with peace-keeping
activities. As the Secretary-General points out, it is more
than necessary to overcome the reluctance of countries that
are a part of a conflict in which the United Nations desires
to intervene. Therefore, dialogue should be encouraged
between all parties concerned, either directly or indirectly,
in order to harmonize the activities of peace-keeping.

Our delegation feels that, after the traumatizing
genocide experience in our country, the United Nations
should treasure one of the most important and valuable
lessons it has learned in its 50 years of activity. We are
sorry to have to continuously reiterate our allegations as we
recall for the umpteenth time the Security Council's
resolution of April last year to decrease the United Nations
troops at the most crucial, dramatic, needy, indeed helpless,
moment in our country's history. It is pitiful to have to note
this contradiction: that one month later the same Security
Council that had decided to pull out the United Nations
peace-keeping troops reviewed its position by proposing to
redeploy its troops in Rwanda. Unfortunately, the time-table
was no longer on the side of the United Nations. The
United Nations was not able to intervene in a rapid, correct
and efficient manner as thousands of human lives were
being extinguished.
In conclusion, we would like to recall the Secretary-
General's view on the subject of "micro-disarmament".
Even though our country adheres to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, our concerns and
preoccupations on this issue are oriented in a different
manner. We are appalled by the volume of trade in light
weapons, which are a major threat to the security of most
developing African countries. We do not wish to speak
rhetorically on this matter, but our assessment - made
with extreme caution and realism - is that we judge such
weapons can create a disaster that can compare to the
dangerous effects of a nuclear explosion. In our country,
such weapons have created genocide, causing more than a
million deaths in only three months - a world record for
the intensity of massacres.

