Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I would
like also to express my sincere congratulations to you,
Sir, for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. I wish you every success and
express my thanks to you for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine.

After almost 50 years of the Israeli occupation, the
deadlocked political horizon and the fact that the peace
process is at an impasse continue to present a serious
challenge to the international community owing to the
intransigence of Israel, the occupying Power, and its
disrespect of the will of the international community
and international resolutions.

At every juncture, Israel has rejected and
obstructed international and regional peace efforts
that have been based firmly in international law and
United Nations resolutions. Instead, it has sought
to justify its illegal behaviour with empty, distorted
pretexts and has persisted with such illegal behaviour
on the ground, causing deep suffering to the Palestinian
people under its occupation and further entrenching its
illegal occupation.

Among the primary methods by which Israel has
pursued its illegal agenda in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, has been its building
and expansion of colonial settlements and the transfer
of its own civilians to the occupied land, in grave
breach of international humanitarian law. It should be
emphasized that Israel's settlement practices, which
involve the illegal confiscation of Palestinian property,
the demolition of Palestinian homes and the forced
eviction and displacement of Palestinian civilians,
unmistakably underpin a policy of colonization and
ethnic cleansing and constitute blatant violations of
the inalienable and national rights of the Palestinian
people.

Recent figures reveal that the socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian population in
the Gaza Strip in particular, where Israel for nearly 10
years imposed an illegal blockade, is the worst it has
ever been since 1967, when the occupation began. At
the same time, other unlawful Israeli practices, such as
the ongoing arrest, detention and abuse and captivity of
Palestinian civilians, including children, and military
raids in which Palestinians are killed, injured or extra-
judicially executed, have become a pattern of daily life
in Palestine, which constitutes a vicious and destructive
cycle, with both short and long-term consequences on
the occupied population, as well as on the prospects for
peace and stability.

It is clear and should be of extreme concern to
the international community, including the Security
Council, that Israel's persistent pursuit of such
aggressive policies not only undermines international
efforts to ensure peace and security and the vision of
the two-State solution, based on 1967 borders, but also
constitutes flagrant breaches of international law and
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the relevant resolutions of
the Council. That lack of accountability undermines
international law, the credibility of the Security Council
and the international system as a whole. In that regard,
the OIC underlines the urgency of the Security Council
assuming its Charter-mandated role and taking the
necessary measures to end the deteriorating situation.

A clear and unequivocal draft resolution should
be adopted to address Israel's violation of the law,
including its settlement policy, the demands for a halt
to the illegal colonization campaign and an end to
Israel's prolonged occupation. Such a draft resolution
will constitute a meaningful contribution to, and real
support for, the ongoing international efforts aimed at
preserving and attaining the two-State solution, on the
basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid land-for-peace principle and the Arab Peace
Initiative, which sets forth a clear and just path for
peace.

In that regard, the OIC reiterates its support for the
French initiative to restore a political horizon under
international, multilateral patronage and within a
specified time frame, with a view to ending the Israeli
occupation and achieving ajust, comprehensive, lasting
and peaceful solution, which has been obstructed and
delayed for far too long. Fifty years of occupation,
oppression, humiliation and the worst kind of human
rights violations is enough, and it is morally, legally
and politically unacceptable to allow that to continue.

The OIC warns against the repeated provocations
and attacks by extremist Jewish groups on worshippers
at Islamic and Christian holy sites, namely, at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and a number of churches in Jerusalem.
The dangerous consequences of such extremist action
could be far-reaching and grave and must be averted.
Israel's illegal practices and measures are aimed at
falsifying the history of the occupied city of Jerusalem,
obliterating its Palestinian Arab identity and attempting
to alter its indigenous, demographic composition. The
expansion of colonial settlements and the expulsion
of Palestinian citizens must end. In parallel, we must
caution against the grave impact of the actions of
Israel's terrorist settler groups, including "price-tag"
and "hill-top youth" militias, which continue their
incitement and terrorist attacks against Palestinian
civilians 4 all with the support and protection of the
Israeli occupation forces.

Such Israeli practices have created a tragic
situation that calls for serious action by the Council to
stop the ongoing violations, as they nurture extremism,
violence and racism and further destabilize an already
fragile situation. Such action also further fuels religious
conflict, which endangers regional and international
peace and security. It should be stressed that the right
to security is not exclusive to Israel; security is a right
that should be provided to, and enjoyed by, all nations,
especially the victims of occupation. We call on the
Council to assume its responsibility and provide the
Palestinian people with international protection in
accordance with international humanitarian law. In
line with the duty conferred upon it by the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain international peace and
security, the Council must also act to safeguard the
prospects for peace and chart a way forward to finally
and justly resolve the question of Palestine, after all of
these decades, and contribute to the establishment of
lasting peace and security in the Middle East region.

A just peace would be one through which the
Palestinian people recover their inalienable rights,
including their right to return, self-determination and
independence in the State of Palestine on Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and would include reaching a just solution
to the Palestinian refugee issue, in consonance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

