Let me begin by expressing my gratitude to his Excellency Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, for his kind intervention and for convening this important meeting. We also express our gratitude to the briefers and to all the countries that have co-sponsored this important event. The topic under discussion is very dear to my country, Kenya. As the Council may be aware, Kenya hosts the only United Nations headquarters in the global South, housing the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and UN-Habitat. That is why we continue to call for the allocation of more resources and the progressive consolidation of the functions of the Nairobi office to efficiently deliver on its mandate, which includes tackling the pressing challenge of climate change. Climate change, as we know and as we have generally agreed, is an existential threat to most of our States. It is already having an impact on peace and security, not only as a risk in itself, but as a risk multiplier of conflict, insecurity and State fragility. We know that climate change makes things worse. It exacerbates water scarcity and food insecurity. It increases the prevalence of disease and leads to intercommunal conflict over resources. In addition, it brings about the forced migration of communities and the haphazard urbanization of many areas in Africa. That is quite evident in the Horn of Africa, where many States are confronting extreme climate events, the coronavirus disease, terrorism and the worst infestation of locusts in the past 70 years. Climate change pushes State capabilities to the limit. We know the impact of climate change, but despite the mounting evidence of global warming, our response as a community of nations has been plagued by doubt and reversals, making it difficult to progressively move to a low-carbon pathway, which is critical to saving our planet. It is not enough to continually narrate the problem. It is not enough to emphasize what is wrong. We must move away from the arena of rhetoric towards one of real concrete action. In that regard, we would like to offer some recommendations. First, there must be broad acceptance of the nexus between climate change and peace and security. That is something that is not always easy to agree on within our community of nations. Secondly, there must be a commitment to the climate change responses that are exemplified by key relevant international instruments, which we all must endeavour to ratify. Those include the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In other words, we must walk the talk. Thirdly, as I mentioned initially, we need to strengthen the institutions that have a huge mandate in the area of climate change. Here we wish to emphasize the role of UNEP and UN-Habitat in Nairobi. Fourthly, it is important that countries show commitment at the national level. In that regard, I am proud to say that in Kenya we have put into place policies and legal climate change frameworks, as well as a national climate change action plan to mainstream climate actions into our development planning processes. Fifthly, it is absolutely essential that we find the nexus between the battle against climate change and the push for development. In Kenya, we are trying to recalibrate our development agenda by promoting the idea of green energy and a green economy. Kenya is a leading producer of green energy and has committed to planting 2 billion tree seedlings by 2020 in order to restore 1.5 million hectares of land that has been degraded and deforested. There is still more that can be done to promote more active participation by the Security Council. In that regard, we call for an improvement in our early-warning and predictive systems, which will enable us to identify and to map climate change hotspots in order to procure critical and verifiable data to enable decision-making and conflict prevention at the level of the Security Council. We are clear that if we wish the Council to act effectively, it must have facts and data. That requires a better utilization of Earth observation technologies and scientific research. In that connection, we wish to commend the Federal Republic of Germany for producing an excellent climate risk and foresight assessment report that we believe is driven by science. But even as we call for more collaboration in that area among Member States, international organization agencies like UNEP, private sector research institutions and communities themselves, we must remember that there is a huge digital divide that leaves the developing world behind. Consequently, there must be financing and training to bolster scientific engagement in the developing world. More than this, there must be a democratization of access to critical data and a move towards more data-sharing in that area. In addition, we need to strengthen the linkages between the Security Council and regional and continental agencies, such as the African Union and other regional agencies, which have early-warning mechanisms that can provide timely information and analysis to the Council to bring about the transformation that we need. We must not forget that the impact of climate change is local. It is often community-based and individual. As we tackle climate change, we must therefore think locally and act globally. We also wish to encourage the Council to integrate the subject of climate change into its resolutions. We are beginning to see progress in that regard. In that connection, I note resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad basin, which recognizes the nexus between ecological changes and conflict. It is only when we are able to see the United Nations act proactively in restructuring the value systems that underpin peacekeeping operations and peace support missions that we will be able to see real action on the ground and real collaboration towards dealing with the nexus between climate change and peace and security. We must also rethink peace support missions and reconsider humanitarian action. We may need to retrain our peacekeepers to address climate change issues head-on in collaboration with national stakeholders to improve capacities in environmental restoration, build resilience within our communities, collect data and monitor environmental changes, as well as integrate the green economy and clean energy into State stabilization and reconstruction. If we want to build back better, perhaps we need to build back weak States on a green economy platform. Furthermore, let us not forget the role of women and young women as key actors in addressing climate change. For those of us who live in Africa and understand the power of women and the great impact climate change has had on women, it is essential that the issues of women, peace, security and climate change be brought to the centre of the thinking of the Security Council. It is essential that our women peacekeepers, for example, begin to collect gender-disaggregated data in order for us to really assess the impact of climate change and conflict on women. Finally, we wish to emphasize that the Security Council, as a guarantor of international peace and security, can provide the political will, leadership and courage that will enable us to tackle climate change risks head-on. Our country, Kenya, will be joining Security Council as an elected member for the period 2021-2022. A key portion of our efforts will be dedicated to advancing the environmental and climate change agenda, and we look forward to working with all Council members.
