Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to extend its sincere congratulations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. We have
every confidence that under your wise and able guidance
the issues before the Council will be brought to a
successful conclusion.

Allow me also to extend felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Peter van Walsum, Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, for his skilful
stewardship of the Council's activities last month.

This meeting of the Security Council has been
convened in the light of the decision contained in the
report of the Secretary-General to establish a United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) that will be charged with overall
responsibility for the administration of the territory,
including executive, legislative and judicial duties. It
marks the beginning of a new chapter in the lives of the
East Timorese people and, hence, a moment of great
significance. This is therefore a fitting moment to reflect
on the developments of the past 24 years, for it was the
impact of all those events that has evolved into the
present situation.

Indonesia's responsibilities did not begin over the
last year, or even the year before. It began more than two
decades ago, when East Timor was plunged into civil
war. Abandoned by its former colonial Power after more
than four centuries of colonial rule, the East Timorese
leaders appealed to Indonesia to accommodate the
aspirations of the majority of its people. Through this act
of integration with Indonesia, East Timor was finally able
to seek peace and independence and set out on the
challenging path to nation-building. Indonesia accepted
this solemn responsibility and additional burden, even
though East Timor was not part of the Dutch East Indies,
out of which the Indonesian nation evolved. At this
difficult and complex period of East Timorese history,
Indonesia's actions reflected its sincerity and commitment
to assist the East Timorese in their moment of need and
to improve their quality of life along with that of the rest
of the citizens of Indonesia.

 

Parallel to those untiring endeavors of development,
Indonesia had since 1983 been earnestly engaged in a
tripartite dialogue with Portugal, under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, to find a just, comprehensive and
internationally acceptable solution to the question of East
Timor. Indonesia, on its part, held steadfast to the position
that the venue of the tripartite dialogue, despite the
obstacles and challenges strewn along the way, was the
only forum in which to resolve this issue. The signing of
the 5 May 1999 Agreements on East Timor, a direct
outcome of Indonesia's bold initiative, was not only a
significant event in the conclusion of a 16-year journey but
also a reflection of Indonesia's sincere efforts to reach a
solution within the framework of the tripartite dialogue.
These Agreements offered the East Timorese people the
opportunity to decide their political future, at a time when
fundamental changes were simultaneously unfolding in the
rest of Indonesia. They gave the East Timorese the option
to choose wide-ranging autonomy and special status within
the Republic of Indonesia, or, in the alternative, a peaceful
and honorable parting of the ways. On 30 August 1999,
through a direct and democratic popular consultation
organized and supervised by the United Nations in
accordance with the 5 May 1999 Agreements, the people of
East Timor made their choice: to reject the autonomy
proposal.

In this difficult process, lest we forget, it was the
Indonesian Government that extended full cooperation to
the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET),
including support at every level, to facilitate the holding of
the popular consultation. It provided security personnel so
that the popular consultation could be held in a peaceful
and secure environment, facilitating a large voter turnout -
astonishing even the United Nations - of more than 90 per
cent of the registered voters. It even established a task force
at the ministerial level and a task force for the holding of
the popular consultation to coordinate assistance in all
spheres to assist UNAMET with its mandate.

Lest we also forget, when a number of violent
incidents erupted following the popular consultation,
marring this historic process, the Indonesian Government
immediately declared a state of military emergency, thereby
establishing a legal framework to enable the armed forces
to take the necessary measures to restore law and order.
That decision led to an improvement of security conditions
in the province. Let us not forget either that, imbued by a
desire to do more, it was the Indonesian Government,
following a reappraisal of the situation on the ground, that
invited the assistance of the multinational force - the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) - to restore
peace and security in East Timor, to protect the people
and to implement the direct result of the popular
consultation. By taking this decision, the Indonesian
Government once again demonstrated its firm
determination to bring order and conditions of normalcy
to East Timor. Indonesia continues to render its
cooperation for the effective discharge of the mandate
entrusted to INTERFET.

Let us recall also that the acts of arson which
claimed countless Government buildings and other
infrastructures, as well as the homes of both
pro-integration and pro-independence supporters,
profoundly affected Indonesia. For it was Indonesia that
bore the financial burden of lifting the East Timorese out
of an extremely backward way of life. For instance, an 80
per cent illiteracy rate, primitive agriculture, the lack of
roads and housing in isolated areas - all of them the
legacy of its colonial past - were some of the obstacles
that had to be overcome. Over the past two decades, the
Indonesian Government allocated four times more
resources to these efforts than to the other Indonesian
provinces.

It was also the Indonesian Government that first
launched swift, massive and all-out humanitarian
operations to help alleviate the plight of displaced
persons. Since then, it has taken adequate measures to
facilitate the operations of international humanitarian
organizations.

As to reconciliation among the East Timorese
people, Indonesia has supported every effort towards this
end. From the convening of the two meetings of the All-
Inclusive Intra-East Timorese Dialogue held at Burg
Schlaining, Austria, to the Commission of Peace and
Stability and the various forums of reconciliation held
before the popular consultation, Indonesia has consistently
initiated efforts and extended its moral and financial
support. We have steadfastly maintained that two factions
existed in East Timor whose divergent views have deep
roots in East Timorese history. Given these complex
factors, certain quarters have attempted to hold Indonesia
responsible for certain incidents of Violence that have
taken place recently.

The Indonesian Government is deeply concerned at
the unverified and often exaggerated reports of human
rights violations following the popular consultation. In
this regard, the Indonesian National Commission for
Human Rights has established an independent
Fact-Finding Commission to investigate post-ballot human

 

rights violations in East Timor. It has been mandated to
carry out its task in a transparent manner, and its work will
be open to international participation. This Fact-Finding
Commission will spare no effort in investigating and
clarifying the numerous reports of allegations, suspicions
and rumors surrounding those incidents. Furthermore, the
so-called incidents of human rights violations need to be
Viewed in relation to the prevailing realities. Allegations of
mass killings have not been supported by even a shred of
credible evidence, as reported by the media, officials of the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), the church and other sources of information.
All quarters should therefore refrain from casting aspersions
on Indonesia until information has been verified and the
results of impartial investigations have been made public.
Likewise, self-righteous attitudes have proved, as in the
past, to be of no relevance in rectifying the situation, but
rather could exacerbate the problem.

In response to the reference made by the
representative of Portugal concerning the INTERFET
report, my delegation rejects the allegation that the
Indonesian armed forces are behind the recent activities
occurring in East Timor.

Through all the aforementioned challenges, Indonesia
has never wavered in its commitment to the East Timorese
people. It will continue to abide by its responsibility to see
to it that their choice is fully respected. We will honor the
outcome of the popular consultation and ensure that the
separation from Indonesia is carried out in an orderly and
dignified way.

In accordance with assurances by Indonesia, the
decision of the popular consultation was placed before the
newly elected People's Consultative Assembly. On 19
October 1999, the 1978 decree that integrated East Timor
with Indonesia was formally rescinded, thus closing a
chapter of history during which East Timor was Indonesia's
twenty-seventh province.

The draft resolution before us is a step towards a new
beginning for the East Timorese people. One of the most
important tasks for UNTAET is to promote reconciliation
among the East Timorese, if East Timor is to become a
Viable independent nation. Given that there are two factions,
it is essential for UNTAET to carry out its duties with
impartiality and, especially, to ensure that all sides,
irrespective of their political affiliations, have a place in
East Timorese society. We sincerely hope that once
UNTAET is established it will learn and benefit from the
experience and knowledge gained by INTERFET and
UNAMET.

Finally, the Indonesian delegation would like to
express its sincere appreciation and profound gratitude to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi
Annan, his Personal Representative on the question of
East Timor, Ambassador Jamsheed Marker, and various
Member States for their manifold contributions to
resolving this issue. Our task was greatly facilitated by
their dedicated efforts.

