Mrs. Telalian (Greece): Allow me, first of all, to
express my gratitude to the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda - Judge Fausto Pocar,
Judge Erik Mose, Ms. Carla Del Ponte and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow - for updating the Council on new
developments since their last submissions, as well as
for their respective reports. We appreciate their
continuous efforts to fight impunity, uphold the rule of
law and promote national reconciliation in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we took note of
the important progress made towards meeting the
objectives of the completion strategy. We commend the
Tribunal for its continuous efforts to improve the
conduct of its trials and the efficiency of its
procedures, in particular through the implementation of
the recommendations of the working group on
speeding up trials. The adoption this year by the
Council of resolution 1660 (2006), which increased the
number of ad litem judges to 12 and allowed those
judges to serve as reserve judges in multi-accused
trials, had a serious impact upon the completion
strategy.

We note with satisfaction the transfer to national
courts of cases involving mid- and lower-level rank
accused in accordance with international standards of
due process. However, it is critical that efforts be made
by the international community to continue to support
national capacity to protect through local criminal
justice systems, as has also been rightly pointed out by
the President of the Tribunal.

Despite the positive developments I have cited,
the Tribunal cannot effectively discharge its mandate
unless all the indictees who remain at large - notably
Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic - are arrested
and transferred to The Hague. At this critical stage in
the completion strategy, the cooperation of the States
of the region, and in particular that of Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the Tribunal, is crucial
to securing that result. We therefore strongly urge all
States of the region to cooperate closely with the
Tribunal and to live up to their international
obligations, according to which war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide cannot go unpunished.

We strongly support the ongoing work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and its
efforts to bring to justice those persons who were most
responsible for genocide and violations of international
humanitarian law in Rwanda. We commend the
Tribunal for the good progress it has made and for its
high level of productivity, as well as for the many
measures taken to ensure the timely implementation of
the completion strategy, under the leadership of its
President, Judge Mose. In that respect, we are pleased
by the decision of the Council and of the General
Assembly to extend the terms of the permanent judges
of the Tribunal until the end of 2008. We are pleased
also by the extension of the terms of all 18 ad litem
judges until the same date.

We are gravely concerned, however, at the fact
that 18 indicted persons still remain at large, including
Felicien Kabuga, and we took note with interest of the
decision of the Prosecutor to request the transfer of 12
of those persons to national jurisdictions for trial. Also,
we would like to emphasize that building national
capacity in Rwanda is of particular importance.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
strong commitment to the ongoing work of the two
Tribunals and to their important role in addressing
impunity for grave crimes in their respective regions.
Both Tribunals have built up important international
jurisprudence that considerably strengthens the
principles of international criminal justice and the rule
of law and that can have a deterrent effect in relation to
the commission of grave crimes in the future. The
international community should now closely cooperate
with the two international criminal Tribunals and
should support their important task of expeditiously
completing trials. Member States should provide the
Tribunals with resources and political support. We
should not send the wrong signal, that the international
community is unwilling to bear the costs necessary to
pursue justice. The Security Council too should send a
strong message: that it continues to be committed to
accountability and that it is willing to shoulder its own
responsibilities.

