Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I thank the
delegation of Sweden for organizing today's open
debate. Our special appreciation goes to the briefer
for sharing his insightful perspectives on this very
important subject.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Nigeria notes with grave concern the alarming
situation in many parts of the Middle East, particularly
in Palestine. It is pertinent for all parties to make
genuine and concerted efforts to find peaceful solutions
and to cooperate closely with the United Nations and its

agencies in order to achieve the shared objective of a
two-State solution, in line with relevant United Nations
resolutions and international law.

We must not allow recent developments to obscure
the underlying problem of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. It is evident that a departure from the current
crisis and a revival of the peace process is hardly
achievable without ending or reversing the policy
of settlement expansion in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We believe that there are a number of specific
actions that are necessary to foster mutual respect, to
compromise and to build confidence, as well as to pave
the way for the realization of the two-State solution.

In that regard, we encourage Israel to take concrete
steps to freeze and reverse all settlement-related
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. For
their part, Palestinian leaders must also signal their
readiness to return to the negotiating table by making
enhanced efforts to forge unity and deal with militancy
and other internal security challenges. It is beyond
doubt that violence and unilateral actions will not
resolve the long-drawn-out conflict.

My delegation reaffirms its full support for
the rights of the Palestinian people. Those include
the protection of their fundamental human rights,
particularly their right to free movement and self-
determination, and the maintenance of the dignity of
the individual Palestinian person and their inalienable
right to live without the fear of persecution. To that
end, the Security Council must not fail in its duty and
responsibility to the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, Nigeria calls on States with
influence over the concerned parties to encourage them
to re-engage in dialogue on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Quartet
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing
agreements. We reaffirm our unwavering support for
a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing
side-by-side in peace.

