Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

First of all, allow me to thank the President for
organizing this open debate on an important topic and
for the concept note (S/2016/712, annex) prepared by
the presidency. Indeed, preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and related materials
and technologies to violent, extremist armed groups
and non-State actors is a key concern for the entire
international community.

The European Union is gravely concerned by the
possibility of non-State actors acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Ongoing reports and allegations of
chemical weapons being used in Syria and Iraq are
gravely concerning in that regard. Such risks add a
further critical dimension to the current international
security context - one characterized by more acute
and diffuse threats, in which the distinction between
international and internal security is blurred.

It is vitally important to enhance international
cooperation, both in the framework of the United
Nations and among all Member States, in order to
address those challenges. Moreover, the European
Union calls on all States that have not yet done so to
become party to the International Convention on the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and all other
international instruments against terrorism listed by
the Secretary-General.

Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a central pillar
of the international non-proliferation architecture and
its importance has become even greater in today's
challenging context. Since the beginning, we have
been a staunch supporter of the robust and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), with the
objective of strengthening global efforts in that regard.
The EU has carried out a number ofprojects with a view
to continue promoting the full implementation of the
resolution and to provide assistance to third countries
in complying with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004).

In June, the EU submitted a report entitled "EU
support to the full and universal implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolution 1540".
The report demonstrates the strong and consistent
commitment of the EU and its member States to the
resolution during the past decade and sets out our
proposals on how that instrument should develop in the
future in order to adapt to the new security challenges.
I will not set out in detail all the elements contained in

this report, but let me draw the attention of the Council
to a couple of points relevant to today's meeting:

First, Council members will notice throughout the
report the strong EU commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), both internally within the
EU and on the international scene. I would point,
for example, to the EU-funded chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) risk mitigation
Centres of Excellence initiative, launched in 2010.
With 8 regional secretariats and 54 partner countries,
it has been very successful in strengthening national
and regional CBRN governance. Another example is
the robust EU export control regime, which is directly
applicable and binding for all EU Member States.

EU legislation is updated regularly to take into
consideration technological developments and the latest
decisions of the relevant international non-proliferation
regimes and export control arrangements. The EU
has also developed a dedicated EU P2P export control
programme for dual-use items, worth €30 million, since
2004 and aimed at helping authorities in 34 States in six
regions to strengthen their export control regime and to
better comply with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004) . In close collaboration with EU member
States, the EU continues to implement CBRN action
plans and to strengthen CBRN security throughout
the EU. Likewise, the EU Framework Programme
for Research and Innovation, known as Horizon
2020, encourages novel solutions to protect critical
infrastructure and fight crime and terrorism.

On the international scene, the EU and its member
States continue to strongly support such various regimes
as the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
(BTWC), the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
as well as the global partnership against the spread of
weapons and materials of mass destruction. In light of
new technological advances, current challenges and
future threats, the upcoming Review Conference of the
BTWC will offer an important opportunity to explore
ideas and agree on specific decisions and actions to
ensure the continued relevance and effectiveness of the
Convention in a fast changing world.

My second point is on assistance. The process used
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for matching requests with offers of
assistance should be improved. The 1540 Committee
should have the technical, human and financial
resources it needs to effectively fulfil its responsibilities.
It should support States in developing strong, detailed
assistance requests. Consideration should be given to
providing the 1540 Committee with a permanent or
longer-term mandate, reflecting the long-term nature of
proliferation challenges. The 1540 Committee should
strengthen its engagement with assistance providers,
including with the EU and its member States and other
donors participating in the global partnership. The
comprehensive review will likely result in new needs
and assistance requests. It is important that donors
respond accordingly by making the best use of available
resources and considering mobilizing additional
resources, including contributions in kind.

A third and last point is a very important one for
the EU - outreach to the private sector and to civil
society. The 1540 Committee should promote an active
role for industry, including through close coordination
with relevant EU programmes, the Wiesbaden process,
the Botticelli project and other industry initiatives.
Such efforts should include a broad range of countries,
regions, sectors, sizes - especially small and medium-
sized enterprises - and types of players, including
suppliers, exporters and transporters. Outreach to
industry and the financial sector should in particular
aim at encouraging companies to set up internal
compliance programmes; encouraging cooperation
between Governments and industry/the financial
sector, for instance when drafting legislation or
implementing strategic trade controls; and addressing
the challenges posed by cross-border supply chains.
Increased outreach should also target civil society at
large, as well as academia, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, to raise awareness of the
resolution and its legal requirements.

This year marks the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) , and we expect it to reaffirm the
centrality, importance and authority of the resolution
in the multilateral non-proliferation architecture. The
review should also be used to strengthen support for the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts. The EU and
its Member States believe that the future development
of resolution 1540 (2004) should take account of new
and emerging trends in nuclear, chemical and biological
security. The 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
should be in a position to effectively support States in
implementing the resolution in light of these trends.

As a result of the comprehensive review, the EU
and its Member States favour a strong restatement of
the Council's support for the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), including, potentially, through
a further Security Council resolution.

