Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this meeting and the
briefing by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, as well
as the extremely interesting briefings by the Force
Commanders of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).

I too would like to begin by paying tribute to
the men and women who have given their lives to
the cause of peace, and to the thousands of troops,
police and civilians who every day represent a symbol
of hope, contribute to the protection of vulnerable
populations in various parts of the world and advance
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
in the multiple and complex missions to which they
are deployed.

We believe that this dialogue is particularly
relevant. We will also be brief. The representative of
the United Kingdom touched on the same question
that I have, but I will do my best to approach it from a
different angle. One of UNFICYP's key elements is its
work in establishing mechanisms and measures aimed
at building trust among the parties, which contributes
to the efforts to find a just and lasting solution. In that
context, we believe that it is essential to ensure positive
interaction between the mission and civilians, including
by developing preventive approaches and eventually
mediation, as well as instituting communication
strategies suited to both communities. In that regard,
we would like to ask Major General Pearce to share the
lessons learned in that context, and also if she believes
that the capacities of her staff should, or indeed must,
be included in the training offered to troop-contributing
countries, or ifthey can be learned on the ground, based
on the unique nature of each context.

As a troop-contributing country, Peru strongly
supports the priority that the Secretary-General gives
to the safety and security of Blue Helmets. Among
other measures, we believe that this requires training on
specific challenges and performance evaluations that
should be designed to correct any shortcomings that
are detected rather than being punitive. In the case of
Darfur right now there is a critical situation with regard
to human rights violations, including numerous cases
of sexual violence, many of which have been attributed
to the Government's own forces. In that regard, we
would like to ask Lieutenant General Ngondi how the

Security Council can help to establish better channels
of communication with the local authorities in order to
address such serious problems.

