Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Their Excellencies
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Qatar and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, who have come to the Council today to make
their contribution to our consideration of the situation
in Syria. The terms in which they have appealed to the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities deserve our full
respect. I believe it is highly significant that we have
with us the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the United
States, France, the United Kingdom, Guatemala,
Portugal, Morocco and Germany.

Colombia attaches the greatest importance to this
meeting of the Security Council because we believe that
together we can work to create conditions conducive to
finding a political solution to the crises in Syria and try
to put an end to the unjustified repression and violence
inflicted on the country for more than 10 months.

Respect for individual freedom and the protection
of the fundamental rights of all citizens are the
responsibility of all Governments. The Syrian authorities
have the duty to fulfil their responsibilities under
international law and to ensure the protection and
respect of the human rights of the population as they
set about restoring social order and stability. Colombia
condemns and rejects the violent crackdown on
demonstrations by civilians exercising their right to
free association, free expression and peaceful assembly.
We are therefore alarmed at the ongoing deterioration
of the situation in Syria, the wanton violence and the
death toll, with more than 5,000 lives lost in the
protracted crisis.

We favour regional initiatives in quest of a
peaceful solution to situations that may jeopardize the
maintenance of peace and security. We therefore
support the efforts of the League of Arab States to
provide a political solution to the situation in Syria. As
we have mentioned previously, a long-term solution
requires a process led by Syrians, taking into account
the legitimate aspirations of the people and the various
political actors, and respecting Syria's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity. We regret the fact,
expressed in the report of the Arab League's observer
mission (S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4), that the
actions of the Government have been insufficient for
the effective fulfilment of the commitments the Syrian
Government undertook with the League. It is also
regrettable that, given the resurgence of violence and
the lack of guarantees for its safety, the mission had to
suspend its activities.

Concerning the draft resolution submitted by
Morocco on Friday, 27 January, my delegation
considers the text to be an apt response to the Arab
League's concern that the Council endorse elements of
the League's plan, and we lend it our full support. The
gravity of the circumstances demands a pronouncement
by the Council that will help create a basis and
conditions for the restoration of order and the
implementation of the institutional reforms necessary
to end the violence and to reach an understanding
leading to peace in the country.

My delegation believes - and all members of the
Council agree - that the Arab plan contains elements
that could lead to an accord, such as the call on the
Syrian Government and all the various opposition
groups to enter into a genuine political dialogue; an
end to all violence, no matter on whose part, so as to
protect the civilian population in Syria; the release of
those detained in the course of recent events; and
access for relevant agencies of the League and Arab
and international media to establish the facts.

Colombia hopes that a consensus on those worthy
proposals will be possible and that the Council will
adopt a decision inspired by the guiding principle of
the United Nations - the maintenance of international
peace and security.

