Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Let me thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Ms. Susana
Malcorra for the briefings they just gave us. I would
also commend the participation in this debate of our
colleague from Somalia.

Burkina Faso is very concerned over the current
situation in Somalia, which is marked by a very serious
deterioration in terms of security, particularly in
Mogadishu, as a result of the clashes between illegal
armed groups and Government troops, and this despite
for the calls for calm and restraint issued by the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

Attributed to the militia of the Al-Shabaab
movement, assisted by foreign fighters, these attacks
have caused many victims, particularly among the
civilian population. Political officials, including the
Minister of the Interior, have been assassinated. The
magnitude of the attacks and the intensity of the
fighting corroborate the thesis of the involvement of
the foreign forces that support the insurgents in terms
of weapons, fighters and logistics. All of that once
again confirms the fact that the settlement of the
Somali crisis will depend to a great extent on the
position of its neighbours. That is why it is absolutely
indispensable that all States of the region, without
exception, fully comply with the arms embargo and
refrain from provided military, logistical or any other
kind of support to the illegal militias active in Somalia.

Given the seriousness of these events, the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in its communique
of 15 June 2009, reiterated its deep concern over the
growing presence of foreign elements in Mogadishu
and in other parts of Somalia and therefore urged the
Security Council to impose sanctions against those
individuals or States who oppose the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia.

That recommendation was ratified in a decision
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, held from 1 to
3 July 2009, which called on the Security Council

"in accordance with the communique of the Peace
and Security Council and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to take the necessary

09-3985]
immediate steps to prevent the entry of foreign
combatants into Somalia, as well as to impose
sanctions against any foreign actor, whether in
the region or outside it, in particular Eritrea,
which is providing support for armed groups
involved in destabilizing activities in Somalia".

My country, which recognizes as legitimate only
the Transitional Federal Government, certainly
supports that decision. We therefore call on the
Security Council to take full note of it. I would also
like to call on the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) to speed up its work, in
cooperation with the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to establish a
list of individuals opposed to the peace process in
Somalia.

We must also note that peace is receding daily in
Somalia. The responses to date appear to have served
merely as stop-gap measures. Without minimizing the
difficulties such an endeavour would entail, it seems
that deploying a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to join AMISOM. would be the last recourse.
In the meanwhile, it seems to us that the current
situation calls for two different steps, namely, the
provision of direct emergency assistance to Somalia to
help it to re-establish security in Mogadishu and
throughout the rest of the country, and the speeding of
the deployment of the United Nations support package
for AMISOM.

We would like to thank Uganda and Burundi for
the commendable efforts they continue to make. Given
the seriousness of the situation, we call on African
countries that have already promised troops for
AMISOM. to honour their commitments as soon as
possible in order to be able to strengthen the Mission.

With regard to the political situation, we reiterate
our commitment to the implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement, which we believe to be the sole framework
for a resolution to the Somali crisis. The efforts already
made as part of that framework are encouraging and
merit ongoing support, in particular in order to bring
all political factions into the political process. Burkina
Faso also encourages the new Somali leaders to
continue their policy of openness in order to strengthen
the trust of partners.

With regard to the human rights situation, it
undoubtedly continues to be a source of concern, given
the ongoing occurrence of assassination attempts and
attacks against Somali leaders and civilians alike.
AMISOM. troops and humanitarian personnel are not
immune from threats and attacks, either. We condemn
all violence against them and call on the Security
Council to take the necessary steps to ensure their
protection.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretariat
to help Somalia. In particular, we commend the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who despite the huge
difficulties continues to display unrelenting
determination and commitment to peace in Somalia.

We have no doubt that a stable and prosperous
Somalia will one day emerge, so long as there is
ongoing support from the international community,
continued commitment on the part of all Somali
stakeholders and the support of the States of the region.

Lastly, we support the draft presidential statement
that has been submitted by the delegation of the United
Kingdom.

