Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by expressing my pleasure in very warmly
welcoming Ambassador John Bolton, the new
Permanent Representative of the United States to the
United Nations. I would like to assure him of our full
readiness to work with him as closely as possible and
in an open and constructive spirit.

Algeria voted in favour of the resolution on Iraq
because it represents a very timely response to the
worrying resurgence of terrorist violence in Iraq and
around the world. Given that the resolution addresses
Iraq in particular, my country, like other members of
the Council, cannot but condemn in the strongest terms
the appalling attacks being committed there daily,
which are causing the deaths of hundreds of innocent
people, including children, diplomats and even
journalists.

In accordance with the Charter, the Security
Council's mandate is to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations with the greatest
determination until it is finally eradicated, including by
addressing its underlying causes. All Member States
have an obligation to cooperate actively and effectively
in efforts aimed at combating terrorism.

In Iraq, combating terrorism must go hand-in-
hand with heightened efforts to bring the political
process to conclusion and to ensure a transition that
will enable that fraternal country to regain its full
sovereignty and to preserve its unity and territorial
integrity. In that regard, it is essential that the draft
constitution be finalized in an inclusive manner and
within the time frame that has been set, and submitted
to the Transitional National Assembly and
subsequently to the Iraqi people for approval.

Algeria, which has just lost two of its courageous
sons in the service of peace in Iraq, will continue to
stand alongside the Iraqi people during the difficult
phase they are undergoing, as well as to lend its
support to the political process that will enable them to
regain the peace, stability and progress they so ardently
aspires to and to seize their destiny with independence
and dignity.

