Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First and
foremost, Mr. President, allow me to thank you,
personally, and the delegation of the Russian
Federation for convening this important open debate on
the renewal and updating of the mandate of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED).

In turn, I would like to thank Ambassador Mike
Smith for his detailed briefing on the review and
suggestions regarding the organizational plan and
working methods of the Executive Directorate.

I would like to start by indicating that, in the
opinion of my delegation, the success of the efforts of
the United Nations in the fight against terrorism will
largely depend on the acceptance of these efforts by the
Member States and their cooperation in them.

Therefore, Panama welcomes the process
launched by Mr. Smith, who, through a broad-ranging
process of consultations with the membership of the
Organization, has recommended a number of
modifications to the organizational plan and to the
working methods of the Executive Directorate. It is
important for the Executive Directorate to maintain this
approach of organizing consultations with the
membership whenever it takes action.

Among the proposed changes, we would like to

single out the following: the format of visits, the

intention of the Executive Directorate to participate

more actively in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation

Task Force and the internal reorganization of the
Directorate.

With regard to the visits of the Executive
Directorate, it is worth recalling, during the year when
we chaired the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
visits to specific countries were the subject of lengthy
discussions. At that time, the Committee and its
Executive Directorate lacked the necessary procedures
to set clear objectives for these visits. This, combined
with the fact that only developing countries were
visited, could be perceived as a selective decision.

The new proposal, which will allow for greater
flexibility in the nature and aims of the visits, will both
have positive results and establish criteria for deciding
which countries are to be visited. In particular, we
welcome the planned visits to developed countries in
order to monitor their compliance with resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) and in order to draw on
their experience in providing technical assistance to
countries which need it and have sought it.

With regard to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as adopted by the General
Assembly, we wish to emphasize that its
comprehensive nature gives scope for addressing
issues, such as the root causes of terrorism, which,
given their nature, are not, strictly speaking, within the
mandate of CTC.

In this regard, we welcome the decision of the
Executive Directorate to step up its involvement in the
Task Force, and we recommend that it make
contributions alongside this Task Force, in accordance
with its mandate. This would avoid duplication of
effort and enhance the coordination of the entire
United Nations system in combating this scourge.

We also support greater interaction between the
CTC and CTED on the one hand and the Human Rights
Council and the Office of the High Commissioner on
the other.
With regard to internal reorganization, we take
note, with interest, of the establishment of thematic
groups, as well as the two new entities, one, dealing
with the quality control of documents, the other dealing
with communication and outreach.

We take note of the relevance of these new
innovations in order to achieve greater accuracy and a
closer and enhanced style of the work in question
between the Executive Directorate and the Member
States. This would thus contribute to the effective
implementation of its mandate.

Finally, we agree with Mr. Smith regarding the
importance of ensuring consistency in the work of the
Executive Directorate. This is a technical Secretariat,
composed of various experts with a specific mandate.
All documents and evaluations submitted by the
Executive Directorate should be based on technical
criteria, avoiding any form of political consideration.

It is only thus that the Executive Directorate will
be able to fulfil the mission entrusted to it. Taking into
account the information submitted to us by Mr. Smith,
Panama supports the renewal of the mandate of the
Executive Directorate and wishes it every success in
carrying out its functions.

