Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the briefers for their insightful
briefings on the situation in Somalia.

Today I will focus on the political situation, security
issues and, lastly, the humanitarian situation.

Elections will be held in Jubaland tomorrow.
Presidential elections at the level of a federal member
state provide an opportunity for the Somali political
class to demonstrate its willingness to participate fully
in the exercise of democracy. We hope to see a calm
and transparent process and a peaceful and non-violent
transition of power, regardless of the outcome of
the election. The future president of Jubaland must
contribute to rebuilding relations between the Somali
Federal Government and its federal member states.

Federalism can work, but only if there is readiness
to engage in dialogue along with a spirit of cooperation,
as well as an ongoing quest by the Federal Government
and member states to reach compromise. That also
means being ready to cede some power and share rights
and responsibilities. It is also time to make progress in
preparing for the general elections to be held in 2020-
2021. We call on the federal authorities to redouble their
efforts to adhere to the electoral timetable by reaching
an agreement with the federal member states on key
electoral issues and by rapidly adopting the electoral
law with the necessary amendments.

The Secretary-General's report (S/20l9/66l) once
again confirms that Al-Shabaab is the primary threat
to the country's security and stability. Terrorist attacks
have continued to plunge Somalia into mourning.
Government ownership of security - that is, by the
Somali armed forces - is a priority. The continued use
by Al-Shabaab of improvised explosive devices makes
clear the need to maintain and implement the arms
embargo in a prudent and thoughtful manner.

We would like to see a greater number of initiatives
aimed at creating the conditions necessary for a gradual
withdrawal of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). In that regard, we thank Ambassador
Madeira for the importance he attaches to monitoring
the transition, as set out in his briefing to the Council.

We pay tribute to the men and women who are
risking their lives for Somalia as part of AMISOM. and
mourn the victims of the recent attacks. Weapons alone
are not enough to protect people from security threats;

well-trained, well-prepared and well-supported armed
forces and police, with a well-thought-out strategy and
a clear code of conduct, are needed. I would add that
successful security-sector reform requires coordination
among all relevant actors, including international actors.

The plight of the people of Somalia remains at
the heart of our concerns, as 5.4 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance, including more than
2.6 million internally displaced persons, of whom
220,000 were newly internally displaced in the first
half of the year. Somalia is also particularly vulnerable
to climate shocks. Droughts are increasingly frequent
and undermine the resilience of the population.

The issue of sexual violence in conflict and the
plight of the tens of thousands of women and girls
who are victims of that barbaric practice remain one
of Belgium's major concerns. We advocate a victim-
centred approach and the need to make further
progress in ensuring that the perpetrators of sexual
violence are held accountable, as underscored by
resolution 2467 (2019). Justice must be served for those
crimes. We advocate the specific inclusion of sexual
Violence as a designation criterion for sanctions. It is
encouraging that the Federal Government of Somalia
has committed to working on a new national action
plan and to encouraging the involvement of the federal
member states.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate Special
Representative Swan on the dynamic manner in which
he has begun the first few weeks of his mandate. The
upcoming months look to be complex, and Somalia has
everything to gain from full and sincere cooperation
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We have every confidence in him.

