Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution
2182 (2014). We welcome the renewal of the mandate
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The Security Council is united in its praise for the
achievements of AMISOM. The bravery and sacrifices
of its personnel in the fight against Al-Shabaab will
never be forgotten.

And it is the fight against Al-Shabaab terrorists that
is at the heart of the naval authorization in the resolution.
In February 2012, the Security Council banned the
export of Somali charcoal. We took that step because
of the clear links between the illegal charcoal trade and
Al-Shabaab. But since that ban was imposed, the trade
in charcoal from Somalia has actually increased. This
year, the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group has
estimated that Al-Shabaab has kept up to one-third of
the revenues of the $250-million annual trade. Charcoal
is giving Al-Shabaab a lifeline.

The Monitoring Group subsequently recommended
maritime interdiction on the high seas. On 8 October,
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud wrote to the
Council specifically requesting it to take that step.
Today, we have responded to that call for help. The
United Kingdom is confident that the provisions set out
in the resolution will ensure that it is not abused. In
particular, I would highlight the need for the Federal
Government of Somalia to notify the Secretary-
General of any Member State taking part in the naval
interdiction of Somali charcoal and weapons, with a
subsequent obligation for the Secretary-General to
inform the wider United Nations membership.

The United Kingdom has every confidence that the
Federal Government of Somalia and its international
partners, including in the region, will work together
constructively to ensure that the resolution delivers
another blow to Al-Shabaab and its murderous
ambitions. The adoption of the resolution demonstrates
that the Council is determined to take practical steps in
response to tackling the threat from terrorism that each
and every one of us faces.

