Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and to express my
gratitude for the presidency of Ambassador Jones
Parry.

The delegation of Cuba strongly condemns the
military attack launched by Israel on 5 October against
the Syrian Arab Republic in flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the very resolutions of the Security Council. An act of
aggression has been committed, in the light of which
the Council must exercise its functions under the
mandate of the Charter.

The Security Council has the duty to prevent a
dangerous escalation in the Middle East conflict.
Approximately 3,600 people - nearly 2,800 of them
innocent Palestinian civilians - have died since
September 2000. A wall is being built to segregate the
Palestinian people. There are repeated violations of
airspace and attacks against southern Lebanon. The
provocations and slanderous statements against Syria
are increasing.

While we reiterate our condemnation of suicide
bombings against Israeli civilians - who continue to
be innocent victims of the spiral of violence caused by
their Government's policy - Cuba rejects the use of
such individual actions to attempt to justify State
terrorism against Syria and Lebanon and atrocities
perpetrated by an army that possesses the most modern
and lethal means for indiscriminately killing targeted
persons as well as numerous other victims.

The veto of the United States - repeated 37
times - has thus far prevented Security Council
resolutions from being implemented, has prevented
Chapter VI of the Charter from being invoked, has
prevented appropriate actions from being taken to
ensure Israel's withdrawal from all the occupied
territories, and has prevented peace from being restored
in the Middle East.

Cuba confirms its full support for the cause of the
Arab peoples against Israeli occupation and aggression,
and we express our deeply felt solidarity with their
resistance. A just and lasting peace cannot be achieved
in the Middle East unless there is an end to Israeli
occupation, unless the Palestinian people can exercise
their legitimate right to establish an independent State
with its capital in East Jerusalem, until there is a return
of all the occupied territories, until Israel withdraws
from the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and Syrian Golan
back to the line held on 4 June 1967. There will not be
peace until the Israeli provocations in southern
Lebanon cease, until the rights of the Palestinian
refugees are guaranteed and until the illegal Israeli
settlements are eliminated, in conformity with Security
Council resolutions.

