Mr. Muhriddin (Tajikistan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate France on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We welcome the
convening today of an open debate on such an important
topic as combating the financing of terrorism.

Terrorism and its financing, as well as illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime, continue to pose major
threats to international peace and security. Moreover,
they undermine regional and international efforts to
ensure stability, economic and social development, and
respect for fundamental human rights.

Acknowledging the seriousness of the aforementioned
threats, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan
has been taking decisive and comprehensive measures
aimed at preventing and combating terrorism, in
particular its financing. Those measures including
the approval of the National Concept on Countering
Money-laundering, the Financing of Terrorism and
Weapons of Mass Destruction for 2018-2025, and the
plan for its implementation adopted on 5 March 2018.

Following the Financial Action Task Force guidance
on national money laundering and terrorist financing
risk assessments, Tajikistan implemented a similar
assessment between April 2015 and September 2017.
The assessment indicated that methods of laundering
the funds generated through illegal activities have
become more sophisticated and that the volume of
terrorist financing has increased. In addition to such
funds, advanced technologies are being employed
in the process of financing terrorism. Moreover, our
assessment indicated that drug-related crimes have
become a significant source of illicit funds that can
make contribute considerably to money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism.

Stability and security in Tajikistan and in the
entire Central Asian region are, to a great extent,
related to and depend on the situation in Afghanistan.
Tajikistan shares a long border with Afghanistan and
remains concerned at the current situation in the border
territories of Afghanistan. Intensified activities on the
part of terrorist groups, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, in the northern districts of the
country, against the backdrop of a significant influx of
narcotics and weapons, is a matter of great concern.

The law-enforcement agencies of Tajikistan
and Afghanistan have been closely cooperating in
addressing these complex problems. We support the
constructive efforts of the international community and
the Government of neighbouring Afghanistan aimed at
building lasting peace and stability.

The current situation requires that the countries
of the region take more robust action and make firm
commitments by facilitating regional cooperation
and partnership. We are committed to continuing to
contribute to this process.

Specific measures have also been taken in Tajikistan
to implement resolution 2178 (2014), of 2014, which
calls on States to prevent and counter the financing
of foreign terrorist fighter travel and activities. One
of the steps in the implementation of that resolution is
the adoption of the national strategy of the Republic
of Tajikistan on countering extremism and terrorism
for 2016-2020, approved by presidential decree on
12 November 2016.
The goals of the strategy include increasing the
efficiency of the competent agencies' interaction
on preventing and combating the manifestations of
terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking and legalization
of the income generated through crime that provide
a source of financing terrorism and extremism.
The implementation of the strategy involves civil-
society institutions and is based on international and
regional cooperation.

We believe that efforts should be focused on
eliminating the military infrastructure of international
terrorism, depriving it of political, military and
financial support; and on preventing the use of the
Internet for the radicalization of minds, recruitment
and propaganda on extremism and violence.

Drug trafficking as one of the channels for financing
terrorism and violence is yet another challenge that is
causing deep concern in the region and across the world.
Combating illicit drug trafficking requires concerted
and coordinated action at the regional and international
levels. There is still a need for extensive international
cooperation to counter narcotics.

Given the long-term experience of the Republic
of Tajikistan in peacebuilding and in preventing and
combating terrorism, we are planning, in cooperation
with the relevant United Nations agencies and other
international and regional organizations, to hold a high-
level conference entitled "International and Regional
Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and its Financing
through Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime"
in Dushanbe on 16 and 17 May.

The goals of the conference are: to promote and
strengthen international and regional cooperation; to
identify effective measures to combat the financing
of terrorism; and to promote expert discussions on the
response to the changing forms of financing used by
terrorists for their activities, including through illegal
drug trafficking and organized crime. This event
will serve as a platform for an exchange of views and
deliberations on the complex issues and multifaceted
problems related to countering terrorism and its
financing. We look forward to welcoming delegations
from all States Members of the United Nations to this
important event.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Tajikistan
stands ready to engage in an open and constructive
dialogue in this area.

