Mr. Laher (South Africa): Allow me to thank Justice
Shireen Avis Fisher, President of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, and Ms. Brenda Hollis, Prosecutor of
the Special Court for their comprehensive briefings
on the current status of the work of the Special Court.
We also appreciate the perspectives put forward by the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone.

The fight against impunity remains an important
building block for an international community free of
conflict and violence. Long-lasting peace must therefore
include the establishment of the rule of law and the
promotion of justice.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone should be
commended for the positive role it has played in
strengthening stability in Sierra Leone and the wider
subregion, The Court is an example of how the fight
against impunity can be promoted by international
cooperation between situation countries and the
international community.

South Africa pays tribute to the Court for its sterling
work in the fight against impunity and in particular,
for the fact that it remains on track to complete its
substantive work by September 2013. Three major cases
have already been completed up to the appeals phase,
while the trial judgement has been delivered in the final
case of the Prosecutor, namely, the case of Charles
Taylor, which is now in its appellate phase.

As highlighted by both the President and the
Prosecutor of the Court, the contribution and achievement
of the Special Court in setting jurisprudence precedent
will have a lasting impact on our collective efforts to
ensure accountability and establish rule of law.

We are also pleased to note the smooth
implementation of the prisoner transfer agreement with
Rwanda.

We commend the Special Court for its efforts to
reach out to affected communities. The outreach to
victims of sexual and gender-based crimes is particularly
welcome, given that women, girls and children often
carry a heavy burden of conflict. The outreach activities
are critical in ensuring the reintegration of societies and
breaking the circle of violence.

That the outreach work has been successful is
borne out by the approval figures produced in the
recent surveys on Sierra Leone and Liberia. As the
report before the Council notes, the Court is a model of
positive complementarity. That is a principle that South
Africa strongly advocates.

My delegation wishes to reiterate what the President
of the Court has said. The Special Court shows that
complementarity is a reality, not simply an aspiration,
and that it works.

We have taken note of the preparations for the
winding down of the Court, including the signing and
ratification of the Agreement on the Establishment of
the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
minimal functions it is expected to perform. We are
particularly pleased that the agreement provides for
assets of the Special Court to be transferred to Sierra
Leone.

We hope that the lasting legacy of the Court will
not only be the accountability of those responsible
for egregious crimes, but also national reconciliation
and sustainable peace, not only in Sierra Leone but
throughout the region and our continent. We are
confident that the Peace Museum will contribute to that
very important objective.

The Special Court has made an important
contribution to the cause of international justice. In that
regard, it is be vital for the international community to
continue its support for the work of the Special Court
until the completion of its mandate.

