Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, for his comprehensive update on
the reporting period based on the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/981).

The current state of affairs in Kosovo requires the
continued attention of the Security Council as a matter
on its current agenda. Our priorities in that regard
should be to continue promoting dialogue between
the parties, as well as confidence-building measures
in the political-military, socioeconomic and human
dimensions, in compliance with resolution 1244 (1999)
and under the auspices of the European Union (EU) and
with the involvement of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other relevant
regional organizations to maintain comprehensive and
sustainable security and development in Kosovo. In that
regard, Astana supports the initiatives and concerted
efforts of the global community, including the United
Nations, the OSCE and the EU, aimed at achieving
mutually acceptable conditions for resolving the
situation in Kosovo. We consider it important for the
parties to adhere to the agreements previously reached
through the mediation of international organizations.
Kazakhstan commends the steps by Belgrade and
Pristina under the auspices of the European Union High
Representative Federica Mogherini for continuing
dialogue by holding a series of technical-level meetings
in Brussels. We positively note that both leaders met in
person in Brussels on 8 November.

At the same time, taking note of the 29 September
incident related to the Gazivode reservoir, we strongly
believe that both parties should avoid any steps leading
to further tensions and instability. Kazakhstan also
considers it highly important to thoroughly study the
issue of border delineation, which was reintroduced
by both leaders of the two parties as part of their
continued efforts to reach a comprehensive agreement
on the normalization of relations, as it has the potential
to bring about a negative effect on existing peace and
stability in the region.

There are still a number of sensitive issues left to
be resolved, such as the lack of inter-community trust
and a large number of persons still missing. Of equal
critical importance is the protection of vulnerable
groups, including the Roma and the Ashkalija, and
the cultural heritage and diversity in Kosovo. To that
end, Kazakhstan calls both parties to strengthen their
political will to further normalize relations between
Belgrade and Pristina.
Without neglecting the importance of a political
settlement of the situation in Kosovo, we consider it
instrumental to tackle the issue through the nexus of
security and development leading to sustainable socio-
economic recovery of Kosovo. In that vein, there is a
need to implement resolution 2250 (2015), on youth,
peace and security, and provide full support and access
to the youth of all ethnicities to education and skills-
development to fulfil their potential, as young people
are a key determinant in preventing conflicts and a vital
driver of future peace and development in the region.

In addition, we need to pay special attention to the
implementation of the resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and subsequent resolutions for
enhancing gender equality and empowerment. Our
delegation welcomes the efforts of UN-Women and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting social stability in
the region, which can be achieved only with the full
engagement of the United Nations country team,
regional organizations and civil society groups
working towards peacebuilding and conflict prevention
and mediation in Kosovo. We note the positive work
of UNMIK on the question of returning refugees and
displaced persons, together with their resettlement. We
call to strengthen the international work on the matter.

We believe that peace and stability in this part of
the world will be achieved only if the parties continue
to fulfil their commitment in the good spirit of mutual
respect, understanding and compromise. To that end,
Kazakhstan firmly believes that long-lasting peace
and stability in Kosovo could be achieved if the parties
follow agreements, while focusing on promoting
inter-community dialogue and trust, mutual respect
and understanding.

