Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
ofthe Kingdom of Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo,
for presiding over and convening this important debate
on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
We also welcome the briefings made by the Deputy
Secretary-General and other invited speakers.

Resolution 1540 (2004), adopted unanimously
on 28 April 2004, is a milestone to which Chile
contributed, as it was then a non-permanent member of
the Security Council. It is the first Council resolution
that, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, established concrete measures to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery among non-State actors.

The terms and objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
remain fully in force because, as threats evolve, it is
necessary for States to develop effective measures
to combat them. In that regard, we wish to highlight
the final report of the 2016 comprehensive review
of the status of implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) - under the leadership of Spain, as Chairman
of the Committee 4 as well as the adoption today
of resolution 2325 (2016), which our country has
co-sponsored and which reflects the results and
recommendations of the aforementioned report.

We are convinced that strengthening national
capacities, assistance and cooperation are essential to
advancing the implementation of the resolution. That is
why Chile has made a significant effort at the level of
national agencies to adopt the necessary measures for
its implementation. In keeping with our commitment to
the United Nations and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Chile
hosted a training course for focal points and contacts
in Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Santiago
from October 24 to 28, and attended by experts from 21
States of the region.

It is important to stress that the use of chemical
weapons or toxic chemicals has gone from being
a threat to a worrying reality, as confirmed by the
investigations carried out by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as well
as by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigation
Mechanism (JIM). We hope that their findings will
have a deterrent effect on those who intend to continue
to use chemical weapons in the future. Our country's
commitment to addressing the challenge of preventing
the resurgence and use of chemical weapons is tangible
insofar as the work we do through our mission to the
OPCW in the areas of prevention, responsiveness and
legal issues, under the heading of the Sub-Working
Group on Non-State Actors and in close collaboration
with the Director-General of that organization.

To conclude, I would like to emphasize that our
country is making ongoing efforts to establish effective
national controls with aview to combating the trafficking
in weapons of mass destruction and dual-use material.
In that regard, we are grateful for the support shown
by the 1540 Committee, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, partner countries and especially
the Organization of American States, a key regional
body in the area that has facilitated and supported such
efforts. We also thank the leadership of Spain and the
excellent work it has done during its presidency of the
1540 Committee.

