Mr. Karzai (Afghanistan): I am privileged to
address the Council on behalf of the people of
Afghanistan.

Having experienced the ravages of war for 23
years and having been taken hostage by a group of
terrorists, we are once again free to determine our
destiny. We will strive to build a Government that
responds to the wishes of our people and behaves as a
responsible member of the international community, to
which we owe a great deal. We could not have
achieved our freedom without the sustained help and
attention of the international community. The United
Nations, and particularly this Council, played a pivotal
role in making the historic Bonn Agreement possible.

On 22 December 2001, power was peacefully
transferred to the Interim Administration of
Afghanistan. A Loya Jirga is to take place by 22 June
this year and we fully intend to abide by its decision to
select a head of State and a transitional Government. A
constitution is to be prepared during the transitional
period and ratified by a constitutional Loya Jirga. Our
people desire the creation of a democratic Government
and we intend to act upon their wishes.

Our people understand and appreciate the efforts
of the United Nations in laying the foundation of a
peaceful Afghanistan. We are grateful to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan for his personal and continued
engagement in seeking a resolution of the Afghan
crisis. The Afghan people are appreciative that he
personally visited Afghanistan and took time to see for
himself the devastated parts of the city of Kabul.
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, has earned the gratitude of our
nation for his tireless efforts in making the Bonn
Agreement possible and for his continued efforts to
implement its provisions.

On 25 January 2002, we completed one of the
major provisions of that Agreement. The United
Nations appointed a 2l-member commission to
organize the emergency Loya Jirga. We count on the
sustained engagement of Mr. Brahimi and the entire
United Nations body to continue their partnership with
us. I would also like to thank the United Nations staff
and the international community for their continued
and vital efforts in helping us deal with the ongoing
humanitarian crises in Afghanistan.

Security is the foundation for peace, stability and
economic reconstruction. I have personally spoken to
hundreds of delegates from different parts of
Afghanistan; all of them have strongly expressed that
security is the key issue. Thanks to this Chamber's
resolve and unity, multinational forces have been
deployed in the capital city, Kabul. Our people look
upon the presence of these forces as a sign of the
continued commitment of the international community
to peace and security in Afghanistan. Our nation has
been reassured of the commitment of many world
leaders, many of whom are represented in this
Chamber.

We are committed to creating the national
institutions that would ensure the security of our
people. The creation of a national police force and a
national army, however, will require some time.
Extending the presence of multinational forces in
Kabul and expanding their presence to other major
cities will signal the ongoing commitment of the
international community to peace and security in
Afghanistan. We hope that the Council will authorize
an extension and expansion of the mandate of these
forces.
Although the Interim Administration has been in
place for one month, we have already agreed on a
vision for the road ahead. Our vision is one of a
prosperous, secure and peaceful Afghanistan. We are
marching ahead with the objective of building a
credible State with an efficient and transparent
Government.

Our Government will be accountable to its
citizens as well as to the international community. We
will build an effective and competitive private sector,
harnessing the entrepreneurial abilities of the Afghan
people, and will develop a civil society with
democratic institutions. Our goal is to establish the rule
of law and an accountable, transparent governmental
system. We will work hard to attract foreign direct
investment, thus generating sufficient revenue to
replace international assistance over time. This new
Afghanistan will bring prosperity to its trading partners
and stability to this region of the globe.

The Conference in Tokyo provided a venue for
the international community to make an initial
financial commitment to the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. We intend to use these resources in an
accountable, transparent and efficient manner. We will
not permit the evil of corruption to rob our people of
the opportunity to build prosperous lives.

We intend to reintegrate our women as full
partners into every facet of our society, polity and
economy. We will invest in the education of our
children, particularly our girls. We intend to build a
health delivery system that will offer affordable and
effective health-care services to all. We will rebuild
and modernize our agricultural sector and rehabilitate
and expand our communication system. In short, we
will make every effort to lay the foundation for an
economy and polity that will lead us to self-reliance.

Our country became an exporter of narcotics and
a haven for drug traffickers and terrorists. We are
committed to taking vigorous action to contain and
eliminate the cultivation of poppy. We have issued a
decree imposing a complete ban on the cultivation of
poppy. We look forward to the cooperation of the
international community to help us design and
implement a comprehensive strategy for dealing with
this serious problem. We fully intend to expand the
removal of mines - a sad legacy of the continued
warfare - from our land.

Some 5 million of our people live as refugees. We
look forward to the repatriation of our citizens. We
hope, however, that our neighbours will assist us in
designing and implementing programmes for the
orderly and gradual return of our refugees. We will also
address vigorously the plight of internally displaced
Afghans.

We extend the hand of friendship to all of our
neighbours. We are not prisoners of the past, but are
interested in living peacefully with our neighbours in
an atmosphere of mutual respect, based on the
principles of sovereignty and self-determination, with
an emphasis on open trade and regional economic
cooperation.

Let me conclude by expressing our sincere thanks
to the United Nations as an institution; the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan; his Special Representative,
Lakhdar Brahimi; and the members of the Security
Council for their invaluable help. We count on the
international community to give us the necessary help
as we proceed towards a democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan. On our part, we are committed to meet
the challenges that lie ahead of us. Together, I am sure
we will fulfil the dreams of the Afghan nation, which
has been immensely brutalized by the devastation of a
protracted war and neglect.

Before I conclude, let me thank Mrs. Ogata and
the Government of Japan.

