Mr. Zawieja (Poland): I would like to begin
by thanking our briefers for their comprehensive
briefings today.

Poland appreciates the progress made so far in the
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
We fully support all the efforts of the Central African
Republic authorities, which are a testament to their
leadership and sense of responsibility.

We nevertheless remain seriously concerned about
the persistent violence against the civilian population
and other significant violations of the agreement by
armed groups, including illegal taxation and obstructing
the deployment of State institutions. Poland strongly
condemns attacks on the people of the Central African
Republic, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.
We call on all armed groups to immediate cease the
violence against civilians, honour their obligations and
ensure the full implementation of the agreement. We
also call for the continued constructive engagement of
stakeholders in the region, notably the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African States,
as well as the Central African Republic's neighbours.

A peace agreement is critically important, but
the process will not be complete without the holding
of credible and inclusive elections in late 2020 and
early 2021. Poland commends the Government of the
Central African Republic for initiating preparations for
the elections, and we call on the National Assembly to
swiftly finalize its work on the electoral code, including
respect for the gender parity law, as decided by the
Constitutional Court. The inclusivity of the process,
especially for women and young people, will contribute
significantly to the success of the initiative and the
normalization of the situation in the longer term.

The reconciliation process should be conducted
in parallel with the strengthening and deployment
of the State's authority throughout the country, as
well as the delivery of basic services. We call on the
legislative institutions of the Central African Republic
to accelerate their work on necessary political reforms,
including the laws on decentralization and on the status
of former Heads of State, as well as the bill on political
parties. It will be impossible to promote peace without a
functioning justice system. Poland welcomes the launch
of consultations for the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission. However, the transitional
justice process and the fight against impunity must
be significantly accelerated if the basic aspirations of
Central African society are to be met. Poland supports
the plans to reinforce local peace and reconciliation
committees as part of broader nationwide reconciliation
efforts to overcome intercommunal tensions, and
welcomes the fact that women play such an important
role in those processes.

The redeployment of the national security forces
remains a key component in the restoration of State
authority. We appreciate the work being done by the
European Union Training Mission to enhance the
capacities of the Central African Armed Forces.
At the same time, the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to the
redeployment of the security forces of the Central
African Republic remains indispensable. The Unites
speciales mixtes de securite are also an essential element
ofthe peace agreement as one of its confidence-building
measures, but they cannot succeed without the prior
vetting of combatants, comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and training
processes and the establishment of a clear chain
of command.

In conclusion, the political agreement should be not
just a promise of normalization for the people of the
Central African Republic but also an actual platform
for dialogue among the authorities, armed groups
and civil society, with a view to preventing further
conflict, de-escalating tensions and building trust.
Poland calls on all the stakeholders on the ground, as
well as regional and international partners, to work
constructively together for a better future for the
people of the Central African Republic. We commend
the important work being done by MINUSCA, the
European Union Training Mission and other partners
in the Central African Republic. I would like to assure
Mr. Ndiaye and his team of our full support.

