Mr. Sharma (India): I see you, Mr. President,
and members of the Council looking at me with some
alarm, but I speak on the trochaic principle: the short
follows the long. We are happy that you have been
detained for a day to preside over this Council meeting.
We gain by your presence, as we did from that of the
Minister of International Development of Norway, Ms.
Ann Kristin Sydnes.

In resolution 1308 (2000), the Council, bearing in
mind its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, stressed that
HIV/AIDS, if unchecked, may pose a threat to stability
and security. We have tried to follow the Council's
reasoning, because AIDS is not, and has not been, a
cause of conflict; no country has gone to war because
of AIDS. Resolution 1308 (2000), of course, made no
such claim, but it did say that the pandemic is also
exacerbated by conditions of violence and instability.
The evidence does not support this either.

In Africa, the area of gravest concern, the
countries with the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS are,
without exception, democracies with stable recent
histories, either completely or largely free of conflict.
The countries in conflict, including those where
peacekeeping operations are based or planned, are in
fact far less affected. They have frightening problems
brought on by conflict, but a higher incidence of AIDS
is not among them. There is, in fact, a published study
which found that in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the country that, sadly, has been in the most
violent upheaval over the last decade, "HIV prevalence
rates have remained relatively unchanged in selected
populations despite the political instability and poor
environment observed since 1991 in DRC." Even taken
with caution, because data may not be either reliable or
complete in an area of conflict, this finding shows that
there is no organic link between conflict and AIDS.

This should not surprise the Council. In
resolution 1308 (2000), it noted the importance of
epidemiology, and studies throughout the world, which
confirm that HIV/AIDS has spread fastest in peaceful,
settled societies, show that it travels rapidly along
commercial arteries, such as truck routes; through
tourism, particularly the sordid phenomenon of sex
tourism; in countries with large concentrations of
expatriate workers separated from their families; in
societies where it is traditional for teenage girls to have
sexual relations with much older men: and through
intravenous drug abuse. Almost by definition, these
patterns are generally either absent from or cannot
coexist with, conditions of violence and instability.
Commerce, tourism and expatriate workers all flee
from conflict, which also forces changes in traditional
patterns of social behaviour.

The Council expressed its concern at the potential
damaging impact of HIV/AIDS on, and by implication
through, peacekeepers, and asked that they be given
training on AIDS issues. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations has recommended pre-
deployment orientation on AIDS issues. However, we
would find unfortunate the imputation that
peacekeepers are either necessarily at risk or carriers of
the disease. India has participated in almost every
peacekeeping operation, and certainly in every
operation set up by the United Nations in Africa. Not
one Indian peacekeeper has either arrived in theatre in
Africa with HIV/AIDS or left with it. Our soldiers have
died in Africa and elsewhere of diseases - most
recently in Sierra Leone from a particularly virulent
form of cerebral malaria - but not one has died of
AIDS. Preventive measures are part of the preparation
and discipline that all good peacekeeping forces must
have.

Singling out HIV/AIDS awareness for
peacekeepers, as the Council has done in its recent
resolutions, is not only needless, it presents a
misleading picture of the problems that peacekeepers
face and must prepare for. If peacekeepers are properly
trained and disciplined, AIDS awareness will come,
too. If they are not, they and the operation will fail.

We are puzzled, therefore, by the case that the
Council is making, but, if it wishes to make a
difference, it must take action where it can. Over the
last year it has felt it justified to go well beyond its
Charter mandate in investigating, and laying down
conditions for, the international trade in diamonds in
order to root out the trade in blood diamonds, which
constitute less than 4 percent of the global trade but
help to finance conflicts in Africa. The international
trade has cooperated with the Council to prove its bona
fides and to help relieve human suffering.

The problem of the treatment of AIDS also boils
down to one of trade. A small group of pharmaceutical
companies invoke the provisions of the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) to deny affordable medicines to the vast
numbers of patients, particularly in Africa, who cannot
pay what is charged. Cheaper generic alternatives are
available, but TRIPS is used to stop their export.
Millions, therefore - far, far more than the numbers
killed by conflict diamonds - are being condemned to
a painful death through the policies of these
pharmaceutical companies.

The massive number of people who will die from
AIDS, if they do not get treatment, could indeed create
a security problem for several of the Governments most
directly concerned. In some of the countries most
affected, the young and the middle-aged are being
decimated. Societies face the terrible problem of
having destitute old people and bereft orphans left
saddled with the responsibility of looking after each
other.

Societies that have been exemplars of peaceful
development could easily slip into turmoil, or conflict,
or become vulnerable to others, and indeed the fear is
that this is what the looming crisis will produce. This is
how we see and understand the reference made by
Ambassador Holbrooke this morning to a broadened
definition of security which guides our deliberation. If
AIDS is a security problem, this is how it will emerge.
We appreciate the point made by the Permanent
Representative of France, Ambassador Levitte, this
morning, concerning the unacceptable pricing of
pharmaceutical products from the North that are
intended for consumption in the South; and here, the
Council can help.

Members of the Council will know that the
TRIPS Agreement contains a provision for security
exceptions. Article 73 reads, in part,

"Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

b) to prevent a Member from taking any action
which it considered necessary for the
protection of its essential security interests;

(iii) taken in time of war or other
emergency in international relations;
or

c) to prevent a Member from taking any action
in pursuance of its obligations under the
United Nations Charter for the maintenance
of international peace and security."

I put it to this Council that, if it believes, as it has
said, that HIV/AIDS is a threat to international peace
and security, it has not only the right but also the duty,
bearing in mind its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to rule
that article 73 of the TRIPS Agreement must be
invoked to urgently provide affordable medicines that
help in the treatment of the epidemic.

I have listened with great interest to Under-
Secretary General Guehenno, to Dr. Peter Piot,
Executive Director of Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, and to members of the Security Council,
in particular to Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. My
country completely supports the global campaign
against this scourge and is determined to work with this
campaign and to augment it, cognizant of the
importance and gravity of the task. We endorse the
stress laid by the Secretary-General on this issue.

In conclusion, Mr. President, may I take this
opportunity to wish Ambassador Holbrooke and his
family well and all success and distinction in his future
endeavours; we have become quite accustomed to such
success and distinction. I would be grateful if the
delegation of the United States would kindly convey
our sincere sentiments of best wishes and goodwill to
Ambassador Holbrooke. To say that we will miss him
in the United Nations is an understatement.
