Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): Mr. President, I
would like to convey my delegation's appreciation to
you for convening this important follow-up discussion
to the 20 January ministerial-level debate on combating
terrorism. I would like also to thank Ambassador
Greenstock of the United Kingdom for the exemplary
manner in which he has chaired the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Under Ambassador Greenstock's
chairmanship, the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
set new standards of transparency for the Security
Council and has established effective dialogue with
States Members of the United Nations on how best to
enhance our collective capacity to combat the scourge
of international terrorism.

South Africa and other African countries have
fully engaged in the process of self-assessment of our
legislative and executive machinery, initiated by
resolution 1373 (2001). With the assistance of the
CTC's counter-terrorism experts, we have identified
areas that need to be strengthened in our legislative
framework for combating terrorism, and we are taking
the necessary corrective actions. South Africa has
submitted three comprehensive national reports
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and will continue to
work closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Security Council in order further to refine and
improve national and regional counter-terrorism
capabilities. South Africa has also seconded one of its
experts in drafting counter-terrorism legislation to
serve in the CTC's core group of experts.

The ministerial-level debate in the Security
Council on 20 January highlighted the importance of
preserving the remarkable and unprecedented level of
international cooperation that has existed in fighting
terrorism since the tragic events of 11 September 2001
and the recent terrorist attacks carried out in Indonesia,
Colombia, the Russian Federation and Kenya. Some
speakers rightly stressed the fact that we should not
allow ourselves to become divided by new and
controversial military campaigns that would only
distract our focus from the fight against terrorism.

The message that clearly emanated from the
ministerial debate is that no individual Government can
hope to unilaterally defeat non-State terrorist actors
that operate with sophisticated technologies,
communications and resources on a global scale,
virtually oblivious to State boundaries. It is equally
apparent that multilateral cooperation and respect for
international law, human rights and global norms
regarding the protection of civil liberties should
constitute the bedrock of our collective effort to
eradicate the scourge of terrorism.

As the Council correctly stated in the declaration
annexed to resolution 1456 (2003),

"terrorism can only be defeated, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, by a sustained comprehensive
approach involving the active participation and
collaboration of all States, international and
regional organizations, and by redoubled efforts
at the national level."

Such a comprehensive approach necessitates
addressing the root causes of terrorism, such as
poverty, human rights abuses and foreign occupation.
Terrorists take advantage of the sense of despair and
frustration that breeds wherever people are forced to
live without hope and without freedom. No legislative
measures and no amount of police action, intelligence-
gathering or military force can ever guarantee our
safety as long as the basic needs of millions of
disaffected and marginalized people across the world
continue to be overlooked.

Nowhere is this more apparent than in the Middle
East, where the Palestinian people have been subjected
to the devastating impact of more than 30 years of
illegal occupation and the daily humiliations and
sufferings associated with Israel's Violent policy of
settlement expansionism. The success or failure of the
Security Council's counter-terrorism efforts largely
depends on how it addresses crises such as those in
Palestine and other occupied territories.

Terrorism is but one of a number of often
interrelated threats to our security. In southern Africa,
as in many other parts of the world, millions of people
are still threatened by starvation and poverty. State
resources that are already stretched to breaking point in
some countries to address the issue of food security are
ill-equipped to handle the complexities of counter-
terrorism. It is therefore important that the Security
Council harbour realistic expectations of Member
States and intensify its efforts to make counter-
terrorism assistance available to those in need. I make
this point because the CTC will soon expect States to
take more substantive measures to combat terrorism.
One specific issue South Africa would like the
Security Council and the CTC to consider relates to
public perceptions with regard to terrorism. Many
countries, particularly in the developed North, issue
vague, non-specific and unsubstantiated statements or
advisories warning their citizens of the potential threat
of terrorist attacks abroad. Such unsubstantiated and
selective statements have a negative impact not only on
a country's standing, but also on its security situation.
Furthermore, such advisories could cause immense
damage to the economies of the developing nations of
the South by adversely affecting foreign investment
and tourism.

The reality, however, is that the threat of
terrorism is as great, if not greater, in the cities and
tourist resorts of the North. It is my Government's view
that, in instances where credible intelligence
concerning potential terrorist attacks is obtained, that
information should be handed over the to the relevant
foreign authorities so that preventive action may be
taken.

South Africa and other African countries remain
firmly committed to the fight against terrorism and
look forward to increased interaction and ongoing
cooperation with other States, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Security Council on this issue.

