Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of the Philippines for convening this
important meeting on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I also thank Mr. Egeland, who has presented an
excellent and comprehensive report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/431) on an issue of such importance to
the Council's work.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the most important issues on the Council's
agenda because of its close and binding link with the
maintenance of international peace and security and
because, directly and concretely, it provides effective
peace and security to millions of people, including
children, women, the elderly and all individuals who
are the passive victims of the multiple forms of
violence that arise in armed conflict.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
presented to the Council this morning, over the five-year
period since the Secretary-General initiated the discussion
on this issue, there has been significant progress in
understanding and forging a systematic approach to the
problems and needs in this field. The recommendations,
norms and tools that now exist, and which provide for
due attention and solutions, are now taken into account
by the Security Council in the mandates for
peacekeeping operations contained in its resolutions.

Among the concrete advances made during the
18-month period covered in the fourth report of the
Secretary-General, the mandates of peacekeeping
operations have been broadened, enabling their forces
to physically protect civilians under threat of violence.
In addition, those forces can now be deployed more
swiftly when their presence is needed to avert an
immediate crisis of protection and to restore order.
Such action improves the speed and quality of the
response to crises, thanks to increased contributions for
those operations.

The progress also includes a broader and deeper
understanding of the painful and persistent nature of
the situation civilians face in armed conflict. As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General, the greater
experience and understanding acquired warrants
reflection on those areas where the measures taken still
fall short of needs. That remains a great challenge for
the Security Council's work in this field, as well as for
the Secretariat and the Members of the Organization.

In that connection, there are some specific aspects
of the report presented by Mr. Egeland that we want to
underline in order to contribute to this important
discussion, for which meetings such as the present one
are very useful.

Without doubt, the United Nations focus on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has strengths
and weaknesses. One of its strengths is the fight
against impunity through the creation of special
tribunals and, most fundamentally, the International
Criminal Court. The timely use of those instruments
and of other measures recommended by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs could be
very useful for fighting impunity.

Another relevant question is how to promote
responsibility among non-State armed groups. This is a
question of extraordinary complexity and presents
serious dilemmas. At the same time, we all know that
when a conflict erupts, non-State actors disregard their
responsibilities and obligations under international
humanitarian law and cause grave and systematic
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and impede access to humanitarian
assistance.

The Council has done a great deal. It has
demonstrated its ability in preventive action and its
effectiveness in tackling the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts. However, a complex
situation arises during the conflict. There is no doubt
that the Council, by consistently including very
specific demands in its resolutions directed to those
groups, is moving the process forward. However, there
is a clear need to do more.

At the same time, as the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has noted, interaction with those
actors has yielded mixed results. We await with interest
the outcome of the work of the inter-agency working
group on best practices on that question, which
continues to be the main challenge for the United
Nations in terms of improving protection for civilians.
There can be no doubt that other measures must be
developed - timely visits on the part of the
Coordinator or the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as well as other initiatives that do not convey
recognition or legitimacy yet contribute to reducing or
eliminating threats to the civilian population.

Another important topic we deem important is the
shift made by civilians or victims of a conflict to
combatants or actors in that same conflict, which can
happen in the absence of adequate safeguards. That is
another area that requires greater and more detailed
analysis and consideration by the Secretariat, which
would provide a basis for making recommendations
and enhancing the work of the Security Council in that
area.

I will conclude by reiterating Mr. Egeland's call
for the Council to adopt a resolution in this connection,
following up on resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000), which would address the new elements
contained in the report, as mentioned by Mr. Egeland.
It also seems important for the Security Council to take
measures to implement its prior commitments in the
area of the protection of civilians with respect to the
resources needed and on the basis of the situation of
civilians as described in the reports of the Secretary-
General on countries in crisis.

The Council could also consider other measures.
For example, interested countries or groups of friends
interested in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict might follow up on the decisions adopted by
the Council in that connection.

