Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Recently, thanks to the mediation efforts of Mr. Horst
Kohler, Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara, and the bona fide engagement of the
parties concerned and of neighbouring countries, two
round-table meetings on Western Sahara have been
successfully held. The prevailing atmosphere has been
constructive. The parties who attended the events
articulated in no uncertain terms their willingness to
continue the conversation, which China commends. We
hope that mutual trust will gradually increase on both
sides and enable the current positive momentum to
continue. The Council should continue to support the
work of Mr. Kohler and create the conditions necessary
to enable the Western Sahara political process to
move forward.

By working conscientiously under the Council
mandate, the UnitedNations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has been contributing
positively to the recent progress made in the Western
Sahara political process and the overall stability of
the situation in Western Sahara. China supports the
renewal of MINURSO's mandate and will continue to
play a constructive role in properly resolving the issue
of Western Sahara.

Resolution 2468 (2019), which the Council has just
adopted, extends the Mission's mandate by six months
and expresses the Council's full support for Personal
Envoy Kohler's mediation efforts, which signifies the
Council's resolve to uphold MINURSO's mandate and
push for a political solution of the Western Sahara
issue. Going forward, we hope the Council will have
more thorough consultations on a future MINURSO
mandate-renewal resolution. The consultations should
more thorough and more inclusive, with a view to
achieving consensus.

China's long-held stance on the issue of Western
Sahara is consistent. We shall continue to maintain an
impartial and objective position and support United
Nations efforts aimed at finding a political solution of
the Western Sahara issue and encourage the two sides
to use the relevant Council resolutions as a basis and
seek a just, lasting and mutually acceptable solution
through negotiation.

