Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November and thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely debate
on the role of reconciliation in the maintenance of
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, which
showcased his leadership in this area.

Experience has shown us that reconciliation is
not only important for the maintenance of peace, it is
the only way to ensure lasting and sustainable peace
in post-conflict societies and therefore throughout the
world. We have also learned that every case brings its
own challenges. However, I would like to share some
reflections that my delegation believes apply to all
cases. Reconciliation is much more than a matter of
a simple agreement or a fixed point that parties can
reach. It is a broad process that ifit is to be meaningful
must be frank, participatory and comprehensive. It is
neither a point of departure nor one of stasis, but a
gradual process that waxes or wanes based on three
aspects - first, the background and causes of the
conflict in question, secondly, reparation efforts and
thirdly, the inclusiveness of the process.

If we want reconciliation to play a crucial role for
peace, we must ensure that women, young people and
people with disabilities participate in all processes. I
spoke about women's participation in peace processes
during the Security Council's open debate in October
(see S/PV.8649), and I reiterate Ecuador's commitment
in that regard today. The participation of young
people deserves another open debate, but I would at
least like to underscore the importance of harnessing
their resilience and understanding of diversity in
reconciliation processes. That is also why education
and the promotion of tolerance in all societies are vital.
We must foster trust and a culture of peace. At the same
time, we must avoid impunity, for which international
courts and tribunals have a crucial role, including
the International Criminal Court, of course. Ecuador
supports every element of transitional justice. We must
also continue to support special political missions.

The 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture
will offer us a new opportunity to equip the United
Nations with the tools it needs. However, preventive
diplomacy is the best tool we have for peace. As the
international community, we must strengthen early-
warning mechanisms and work to prevent and stop
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights at all times, because any such violence during a
conflict makes any future reconciliation process harder.
For example, sexual violence in armed conflict, or the
involvement of minors, undermines the chances of
early reconciliation even when the violence has ceased.

My country, Ecuador, is a country of peace. That
is why we promote multilateralism as a central element
of sustainable peace and advocate for dialogue and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts, and why Ecuador
responds to violence with peace and to attacks with
dialogue. We defend dialogue as the foundation of any

peaceful society. That is also why - although I am
deviating from the subject ofthe debate -I should point
out that in October, during violent demonstrations that
sought to destabilize Ecuador and undermine peace,
our national Government prioritized an inclusive and
generous dialogue that put the common good and peace
above every other consideration. Ecuador will continue
to defend peace, development and human rights at
both the national and international levels as a matter
of priority.

