Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2235 (2015) in the firm belief
that the use of toxic substances as chemical weapons
is a war crime and a crime against humanity that
we categorically condemn wherever and however it
occurs. My country is a party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and fully committed to its purposes and
principles. My delegation wishes to emphasize the
importance of fulfilment by the Syrian Government
of its plan for eliminating chemical weapons on its
territory and the cooperation of the Syrian authorities
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), as referred to in the OPCW's report
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We
believe that those links between Syria and the two
organizations will continue to be strengthened within a
framework promoting international peace and security.

We hope that the Joint Investigative Mechanism of
the United Nations and the OPCW, to be established
pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015), will enable them
to throw light on the allegations of the use of chlorine
against the civilian population, with the goal of
identifying the people and entities, whether groups
or Governments, that have used or ordered the use of
chemical substances as weapons in Syria. In fulfilling
its mandate, the Investigative Mechanism must respect
the principles of impartiality, transparency and
objectivity, in accordance with the terms agreed on by
the Secretary-General with the OPCW, with the goal of
achieving concrete results based on the investigation of
the issue.

Venezuela reiterates that any solution to the
armed conflict in Syria must be political, peaceful and
negotiated. That is the only way to preserve peace and
stability there with the full cooperation of the people of
Syria and their Government. We must ensure respect
for its sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence, as laid down in the Charter of the
United Nations. Syria has been a victim of barbaric
terrorists whose acts of violence are designed to
impose their totalitarian ideologies and inciting hatred
and religious intolerance. Venezuela firmly condemns
such acts. It is well known that the use of chemical
weapons can be traced to terrorist groups with foreign
financing whose goal is to overturn the legitimate
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad. If those
terrorist organizations should succeed in imposing
their totalitarian solutions, the consequences for the
Syrian people and the Middle East would be even more
devastating than what is currently going on in Libya.
That is why the international community must support
the Syrian Government and people in their fight against
the terrorism afflicting this brother country.

In conclusion, the Security Council should support
every effort aimed at promoting peace and stability in
Syria and reconciliation for its people. In that regard,
we support the diplomatic activities of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura. We believe his efforts will help to put the
country on a path to peace.

