Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
the report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and, of
course, most especially to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
Steiner, for his presence here and for his very timely
and precise briefing on the situation on the ground.

I wish to relate my comments chiefly to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2003/ll3), and to do so
using the Security Council mission to Kosovo and
Belgrade last December as a viewpoint. In that respect,
I associate myself with other delegations in thanking
Ambassador Kolby of Norway, then a Council member,
for organizing and heading that mission very
successfully.

My delegation notes with great satisfaction the
objectives that Mr. Steiner has outlined as central
elements of his effort and of his task in Kosovo: job
creation, the establishment of full security conditions
and, of course, the forging of a multi-ethnic society.

In that regard, and with respect to the tasks
carried out by the United Nations in Kosovo, there
have undoubtedly been advances that we cannot
overlook, advances in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). Noteworthy among those are the electoral
processes of November 2001 and of October 2002, as
well as the establishment of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and of the new Municipal
Assemblies, all of which constitute exercises in
democracy and form the basis of a new political
maturity in that society, which has experienced such
intense violence.

The process of transfer of responsibility to local
institutions is an encouraging element of development,
as is the expansion of UNMIK's authority to northern
Mitrovica and the appointment of judges and
prosecutors belonging to minority groups as part of
Kosovo's judicial system. These latter developments
have resulted from dialogue with the authorities of
Yugoslavia, now Serbia and Montenegro.

The rule of law is a fundamental component for
attaining stability, security and economic development
in Kosovo. That is why my delegation welcomes the
achievements in that sphere, such as last year's
reduction in crime rates and the measures adopted by
the Kosovo Police Service and the judicial system to
make themselves multi-ethnic institutions with trained
personnel.
However, we are deeply concerned at the violent
incidents that have recently occurred within the
Albanian-Kosovar community, apparently for political
reasons, and, of course, at the aggression directed
against minority communities - particularly the Serb
minority - which are serious obstacles to the
establishment of the rule of law. In this respect, we
believe that the messages rejecting political crime,
issued by Kosovar leaders, and the popular
demonstrations in that regard are positive factors
towards creating this new attitude and a new society.
We urge those leaders to repudiate violence against
minorities with the same vigour.

The sustainable return of refugees and displaced
persons, minorities in particular, to their communities
of origin is a fundamental precondition for achieving
inter-community reconciliation, as is resolving the
question of the fate of the missing persons. In this
regard, we see with particular concern that minorities
continue to face grave threats to their safety and
security and that this situation, along with the
consequent lack of freedom of movement, restricts
their access to social services and economic
opportunity, as quite rightly pointed out in the position
paper published by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in January.

The maintenance or creation of parallel structures
does not contribute to reconciliation; indeed, it
militates against it, as do the initiatives designed to
hasten the definition of Kosovo's status. The active
participation of representatives of minorities at all
levels of public administration is among the objectives
of the concept of standards before status. While it is
important for minorities to benefit from the scope for
political and public participation provided by UNMIK,
and while it is the responsibility of their representatives
to promote such participation, it is also true that, so
long as a climate of security and tolerance does not
exist, such participation will continue to be limited. It
is the responsibility of the Albanian majority and its
leaders to create such conditions. That is our view,
shared by the Council's mission during its Visit to
Kosovo.

As far as cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina is concerned, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's appeal to the leaders of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
to agree to embark on direct dialogue with Belgrade, as
well as his request to the federal and Serbian
authorities to do their utmost to promote such dialogue.
Along with other delegations, mine supports the
concept of standards before status, since we believe
that it is the only way for Kosovo to become a
democratic and multi-ethnic society. It is important,
however, for Kosovar society and its political leaders
fully to embrace that concept and its parameters as
their own and not as a process imposed from outside.

The United Nations is in Kosovo with the mission
of achieving the vision of multi-ethnicity. Many
obstacles to achieving that purpose and vision arise on
a daily basis. The United Nations must pursue its work
in Kosovo with this prospect in mind. The international
community must help Kosovar society to live in peace
as a multi-ethnic society. That, in the final analysis, is
the aspiration of Kosovars and the aim of the
international community.

