Mr. Acosta Bonilla: (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): Like all peoples of the world, the people of
Honduras is living through times of extreme disquiet
and anxiety due to the world situation and the possible
consequences for humankind of the solution that the
United Nations decides upon in the conflict with Iraq.

Our people, which wishes to live in peace and
harmony with all peoples of the world, is doing its
utmost to ensure that a full understanding is reached as
soon as possible in the present conflict with Iraq in
order to safeguard international peace, human rights
and the continued normal functioning of the United
Nations, which is the most important organization
created by mankind to regulate relations among
Governments, peoples and individuals, within a
framework of law, justice and mutual respect so as to
work in concert to secure the progress and well-being
of the human race.

Given those goals, it our wish that the United
Nations should attempt by all possible means to ensure
that the Government of Iraq destroys or effectively
eliminates all deadly weapons of mass destruction and
that measures are taken to ensure that Iraq will not
possess such weapons in the future. Such an objective
requires that the United Nations inspectors receive all
possible material and technological support and that
they receive cooperation in the form of broad
information in pertinent areas both within and outside
Iraq so that they can determine with reasonable
certainty either that the aggressive threat by Iraq no
longer exists and will not arise again or that
verification is impossible due to the negative attitude
of the Government of Iraq. In the latter unfortunate
scenario, the Security Council would be obliged to
adopt the appropriate measures to safeguard
humankind from criminal, genocidal acts.

We Hondurans, together with all others who
desire that peace in the world not be disturbed, support
Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his responsible and
forceful stance of ensuring that the Government of Iraq
respects the world Organization and that no hasty or
unwarranted actions are taken which could plunge the
world into chaos. Honduras believes that all countries
and Governments of the world agree on peace, on the
institution of the United Nations and on the
preservation of human rights and of the civilization
achieved by humankind, which constitutes a set of
values that must always be protected and safeguarded.

The dispute among Governments owing to
differing perceptions of the facts, to conflicting criteria
adopted by different cultures or to struggle over
secondary economic interests must not lead humankind
to its destruction.

The Government of Iraq must inescapably accept
its obligations towards the rest of the world. It cannot
shirk its responsibilities or adopt threatening,
belligerent stances towards neighbouring peoples.
Conduct of that kind is utterly inadmissible in the
twenty-first century, which should be an age of respect
for the universal rule of law established by the free
consensus of all nations of the world. The United
Nations represents that new world legal order. The
peaceful settlement of the conflict with Iraq will
confirm humankind's progress towards creating on
planet Earth a way of life that guarantees to all
peoples- weak or powerful, great or small - the
right to enjoy a satisfactory material and spiritual
existence.

