Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Thank you. As this
is the first time that I have addressed the Council since
your assumption of the presidency, allow me to
congratulate you and wish you success in the conduct
of the work of this august body. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report which outlines the
activities of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). I would also like to extend
my thanks to Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for
his very comprehensive briefing on the current
situation this morning, as well as commend the efforts
of the Secretary-General's new Special Representative
in Timor-Leste, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa and his
deputy, Mr. Arul Khare.

During the period since the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 1543 (2004), progress has been
made by the Government towards achieving the goal of
self-sufficiency. I will not dwell on those achievements
as the report of the Secretary-General adequately
highlights them. The challenges are many and both the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste will work

towards the building of a nation based on the principles
of democracy, rule of law and respect for human rights.

However, it is appropriate that I inform the
Council of the Government's actions following the
public demonstrations which occurred on 19 and 20
July in front of the Government building. Immediately
following the incident, both President Gusmao and
Prime Minister Alkatiri publicly acknowledged that the
actions of some officers of the mission of police were a
cause for concern and promised strict actions against
those police officers who were found to be responsible.

In view of the severity of the situation, Prime
Minister Alkatiri wrote a letter to Special
Representative Sukehiro on 21 July seeking assistance
for capacity-building in technical and tactical areas,
leadership and command in the field, discipline and
psychological preparation for the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL).
In addition, on 9 August, the Government
announced the establishment of a commission of
enquiry composed of Vice Ministers for internal
administration and interior, the Prosecutor General and
the Human Rights Advisor from the Prime Minister's
Office, chaired by the Minister of Administration.
These efforts are in addition to the internal professional
standards of investigation undertaken by the PNTL.

The events of 19 and 20 August highlighted the
need for further capacity-building for the PNTL. The
Government remains fully committed to creating a
professional and accountable police force in the
adoption of the organic law of the PNTL in May of this
year. The adoption of the Government decree
establishing the oversight committee is indicative of
this commitment.

However, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report, the effective implementation of these laws will
require continued financial and technical assistance.
The President, the parliament and the Government are
making every effort to address the issues raised by the
veterans and hopes for the continued support of
UNMISET and the international community. With such
assistance, we believe that residual tensions will soon
be defused. Preparations are well under way for the
first local elections the holding of which will further
strengthen the democratic process, accountability and
centralization in our young nation.

Timor-Leste acknowledges and values the
importance of dialogue between State institutions and
civil society, and, in that regard, has continued with the
"open governance" initiative which began in January
2002. It is in this period of world governance, dialogue
and transparency that the Government is currently
conducting public consultations on the draft of
petroleum laws. These consultations are inclusive and
enjoy the participation of Timorese civil society as well
as international institutions, such as the World Bank,
the Asian Development Bank and the International
Monetary Fund.

Timor-Leste continues to enjoy good relations
with its neighbours. The finalization of the border
demarcation activities between Indonesia and Timor-
Leste remains a priority for my Government and all
efforts are being made to conclude an agreement in the
coming months. The finalization of the land borders
will contribute significantly to facilitating cross-border
links to residents on both sides of the border. My
delegation welcomes the recent announcement by the
European Union to support the resettlement of
Timorese living in Indonesia. The recent accreditation
of the first Indonesian Ambassador to East Timor is a
clear indication of the progress made in our relations
with our closest neighbour. Relations between
Indonesia and Timor-Leste will continue to strengthen
in the future as there is much goodwill and a spirit of
cooperation and friendship between both Governments
and peoples.

Negotiations on the maritime boundaries between
Australia and Timor-Leste are scheduled to commence
in September. Timor-Leste is confident that a just and
equitable agreement can be reached. Agreement on
permanent boundaries is essential to ensure future
economic viability and stability in Timor-Leste.

Justice in the reconciliation process is a
cornerstone to guaranteeing a stable society, in
particular for those countries like ours emerging from
conflict. In East Timor, the Commission of Reception
and Reconciliation has played a very important role in
this respect. With regard to the work of the Serious
Crimes Unit, progress was made in the prosecution of
serious crimes, as acknowledged in the Secretary-
General's report. My delegation hopes that the work of
the Serious Crimes Unit will be completed, as called
for in Security Council resolution 1543 (2004). As a
society, we would like to put the past behind us and
look with confidence towards the future.

Institutional capacity-building in a number of key
areas of public administration, such as finance, justice,
infrastructure and economic planning is critical for
Timor-Leste to succeed in its nation-building efforts. In
this regard, we appeal to the Security Council, the
international community and development partners to
continue to support Timor-Leste by means of the
provision of advisers in these key sectors, for
mentoring and for the building of capacities of
Timorese counterparts.

In conclusion, despite some progress and the
forecast of 1 per cent growth in gross domestic product
in the economy, poverty reduction, investment
capacity-building and job creation are still the main
concerns of the Government. In this respect, the
continued support of the international community and
development partners is critical to achieving the
economic and social development, as outlined in the
national development plan, for the consolidation of the
progress made with the help of the international
community and for its importance in the maintenance
of peace and stability.

