Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation at today's
meeting of the Security Council of Ms. Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and thank her for her
substantive statement.

We listened carefully to the statement made by
Mr. Rilcker, head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which
would have benefited had Mr. Rucker not exceeded his
mandate and had he properly complied with the
modalities of today's meeting with regard to his
accompanying delegation.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report.
Despite a few positive advances, the achievements in
implementing the standards established by the
international community with respect to ethnic
minorities cannot yet be described as significant. In
particular, the problem of protecting the religious and
cultural heritage of minorities, decentralization, the
return of non-Albanian refugees and many other issues
are still far from having been resolved.

We commend the enhanced legal basis aimed at
guaranteeing the rights of the non-Albanian population
in Kosovo. Nevertheless, the key problem is still the
same: the growing gap between the existence of
relevant documents and the actual situation in the
province. Unfortunately, it must be said that, at this
stage, the pledges to guarantee the rights and security
of non-Albanians in Kosovo have not yet been

06-6573]
implemented. In that connection, we should recall the
conclusion of the Secretary-General that, in order to
ensure confidence-building and stability, it is important
to guarantee that priority be placed not on symbolic but
on concrete measures.

There must be more attention given to the
property rights of non-Albanians, including Orthodox
churches, during the privatization process in Kosovo.
Any mistakes in that regard could well eventually lead
to the establishment of a single ethnic society in
Kosovo.

A precondition for progress in the standards
programme is to enhance security and to combat
organized crime. Without that, freedom of movement,
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
and economic recovery will be impossible.

We are concerned that, despite the decrease in the
overall number in ethnically motivated crimes, acts of
violence against the security of Kosovo's Serbs
continue.

The periodically heard threats that there will be
mass unrest in Kosovo if a decision on status is not
taken by a given date are also a subject of concern. We
can only interpret that as unacceptable blackmail of the
international community or as an attempt by radicals to
incite acts of violence.

We strongly condemn the organization of mass
unrest in Kosovo on 28 November, which included acts
of violence against the UNMIK office in Pristina. We
believe that the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Kosovo and the international presence
will keep the situation under control. They must not
allow a repetition of such events in the future.

We share the view of the Secretary-General as
regards the unacceptability of allowing political events
or the timetable to be determined by the street. We are
convinced that any measures to destabilize or stir up
the situation in the province would force the Security
Council to review the situation, which could lead to an
immediate halt of the future status process.

As was highlighted in particular during the recent
meeting in Moscow with the UNMIK delegation and
Mr. Ceku, the Prime Minister of Kosovo, the Kosovo
Albanian leadership has the primary responsibility for
not allowing extremist acts on the territory of the
province that can only lead to complicating the
settlement process. We strongly appeal to the leaders in
the province to decisively intensify their efforts to
ensure genuine and lasting progress in the
implementation of the standards, in particular those
essential for ensuring a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.

The Serbian side must, of course, play its part in
that regard. We understand that the Secretary-General
is disappointed with the non-participation of Kosovo
Serbs in the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. At the same time, it does demonstrate that
the confidence of minorities in the Institutions
continues to be very low. The majority community
should establish a climate conducive to encouraging
minorities, and Kosovo Serbs in particular, to
cooperate with provincial authorities and participate in
all areas of life in Kosovo.

Achieving tangible and effective progress in the
standards programme is one of the determining factors
that will influence the rate and outcome of the
negotiating process on the future status of Kosovo
under the mediation of Mr. Ahtisaari, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General.

We welcome the wise decision to suspend the
status talks until the completion of the elections in
Serbia. At this sensitive phase in defining the future
status of Kosovo, it is extremely important to ensure
consistent efforts by Belgrade and Pristina to find an
effective and mutually acceptable negotiated outcome
and to sustain international efforts to assist in
achieving that outcome, on the basis of the
fundamental principles set out in resolution 1244
(1999) and the Contact Group's documents.

The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out the
need for both parties to show more flexibility and
willingness to compromise in the negotiating process.
They are called upon to find areas of agreement and to
take long-lasting and sustainable decisions. We believe
that that should be the focus of the comprehensive
status proposal that the Special Envoy will eventually
submit to the parties. We expect measures that will
return the future status process to its earlier basis on
internationally agreed principles, which are the only
possible way to resolve the situation in Kosovo. In the
first place, that concerns the need to give priority to
negotiations and a rejection of strict timelines that are
not motivated by the effort to gradually harmonize the
positions of the Kosovo Serbs and Albanians. We must
bring the parties back to negotiations, while taking into
account the interests of both Belgrade and Pristina and

not twist anyone's arms. We need to look more
carefully at the concrete proposals coming from
Belgrade, which demonstrate an attempt by Serbs to
participate in the negotiating process.

We see no alternative to a negotiated
compromise, however difficult it may be difficult to
achieve. That is what is most important now.
Condemnation of Belgrade for not showing a
constructive approach or for having prejudged the
status of Kosovo is unfounded. We also wish to align
ourselves with the appeal by the Secretary-General on
all parties to refrain from any unilateral acts or
statements.

In any case, the decision on the future status of
the province will have a universal character. Only a
negotiated decision, rather than a unilateral or imposed
one, regarding Kosovo can be supported by the
Security Council and would avoid setting a negative
precedent in the context of internal crisis resolution.

