Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank the Indian
presidency for convening this timely open debate
on piracy, as well as to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his valuable participation.
Italy fully aligns with the statement delivered by
the delegation of the European Union. I would like to
make a few remarks in my national capacity.

Maritime piracy is a deadly threat to the lives
of all men and women working at sea. It is a threat
to the maritime industry and to international trade
and has a destabilizing effect on global security. As
an international crime, maritime piracy should be
countered through a multi-dimensional approach
focused on prevention, diplomacy, deterrence and
security, as well as on addressing its root causes.

International efforts to protect shipping lanes
and fight piracy can be effective only if all nations
cooperate in good faith, according to the established
rules of the international customary law and United
Nations conventions.

Currently, two Italian marines are being detained
by a Member State on charges of murdering two
fishermen, while they were carrying out antipiracy
activities in their capacity as part of a vessel protection
detachment on board an Italian oil tanker navigating in
international waters.

The freedom of navigation will be a meaningless
concept if the exclusive jurisdiction of a flag State in
international waters is not guaranteed. Counter-piracy
operations cannot exist if States do not respect the
functional immunity of vessel protection detachments.

Any erosion of the sending State's exclusive
jurisdiction over servicemen on official duty would
jeopardize the status of our agents in international
missions. The Security Council can expect no less
from each Member State, especially from those that
aim to have a decisive influence on the rules of global
governance.

Italy's longstanding experience in combating
transnational organized crime clearly indicates that, to
be successful, one has to follow the money trail and hit
the crime leaders -not only their foot soldiers - in what
is dearest to them, namely, their earnings from crime.
Bearing that in mind, Italy chairs Working Group 5 of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which focuses on illicit financial flows connected to
maritime piracy. We are actively engaged in developing
guidelines and promoting concrete measures to disrupt
land-based criminal networks operating at sea. We
therefore expect the Security Council to send a clear
message to States and to the private sector to strengthen
their international cooperation, in particular in sharing
evidence, information and intelligence.
In full compliance with international law and
the ensuing obligations, every State should make a
full-fledged commitment to raising awareness on
piracy and develop appropriate measures aimed both
at keeping seas safe and at protecting seafarers and
ship owners. An essential step in that regard is for a
country's national legislation to recognize maritime
piracy as a serious crime, including under the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime when applicable.

The decrease in the total number of attacks and
hijackings in 2012 is a success story that has to be
consolidated by enhancing protection and deterrence at
sea, capacity-building in law enforcement, the judiciary
and maritime security sectors in Somalia and in the
region as well as socioeconomic development.

Along with broader compliance with the Best
Management Practices of the International Maritime
Organization, the key factor of the current success
in curbing pirate attacks is the increased cooperation
between naval forces and the maritime industry,
primarily through the use of armed protection in the
form of military or private personnel on board.

The Italian Parliament authorized the use of
embarked armed anti-piracy protection only in high-risk
area international waters and solely on board of Italian-
flagged vessels, as part of counter-piracy measures in
fulfilment of every State's obligation as established by
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. In fact,
no ship embarking with a vessel protection detachment
or privately contracted security personnel has ever
been hijacked.

With regard to privately contracted armed security
personnel and vessel protection detachments, the latter
is the preferred option in our new anti-piracy law. Private
guards are permitted only if the Ministry of Defence
has not granted a ship owner military protection. There
is a need for more comprehensive and standardized
regulations for deploying private security personnel
deployment, as well as for a common understanding of
the relevant legal basis. Italy is actively contributing to
that process. Moreover, vessel protection detachments
enjoy a comparative advantage, not only in terms of
specific training experience and having clear rules of
engagement but also as formidable force multipliers in
employing warships in specific operations with greater
efficiency, thereby enhancing the fight against piracy.

