Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis for
the briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/656). We would also like to thank Permanent
Representative Zahir Tanin for his statement.

We share the concerns and anxieties that have
been expressed in this Chamber in regard to the
protracted post-electoral marathon. Today, as a
friendly Afghanistan faces many challenges in various
areas - security, State-building, socioeconomic and
humanitarian - the fact that its long-suffering people
is living in political uncertainty is an unacceptable
luxury. Like all responsible members of the
international community, we are carefully watching
the situation unfolding around the summing up of the
results ofthe presidential elections. We are grateful that
an important milestone has been passed, the recount
of the second round has taken place, and, in parallel,
contacts between the candidates on power-sharing are
continuing, although not always with full success.
We note that in society and the political elite there
is growing awareness of the need to form a Government
of national unity. Without a political agreement
between the candidates in that regard, it will not be
easy for the Afghan people to move forward after so
many years of exhausting war. Repeatedly, the risks
of serious destabilization are growing. We would like
to note, in particular, the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its
leaders in providing assistance to the Afghan people
in coming out of this electoral impasse. We support
the active involvement of UNAMA, together with civil
society, for its work in Afghanistan. We deem it quite
unacceptable that threats are being made against the
staff of the Mission.

We call on the Afghan authorities to settle the
post-electoral situation through peaceful means. The
results of the people's choice must be announced to
the people and supported by them and most political
forces in Afghanistan. It is clear that resolving the issue
of the future presidency is an internal matter. For our
part, we are prepared to work with any leadership of
Afghanistan that supports the Afghan people itself.

Afghanistan is going through one of the most
complex periods for its domestic security. The report
notes that fact in particular, and the prospects in that
area are very unclear. Anti-Government elements,
terrorists and extremists of various stripes are stepping
up their activity and may prepare for a decisive surge
once there is no longer a foreign military presence in
the country. In that regard, we reiterate our surprise
that there has been not even one mention of Al-Qaida,
as if that element no longer existed in Afghanistan. We
are convinced that, without an objective view of today's
current state of affairs, moving forward will be very
challenging.

Ignoring current activities and realities is not an
option, in particular given ever increasing number
of civilian casualties, in particular among women
and children, including as a result of the strikes and
operations of the coalition forces. In the north of the
country in particular, there is an increasingly negative
impact on security and stability, especially of the
Central Asian region. Since we have close allies and
partners, that is of great concern to us.
Adding to the uncertainty is the fact that we do
not know the outcome of the attempts of the various
actors to maintain a military presence in Afghanistan.
We believe that any new forms of military presence
should be carefully implemented, be acceptable to the
entire Afghan people and leadership and be endorsed
by the Security Council. In that context, we would
like to remind the leadership of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) of its obligation
under resolution 2120 (2013) to present to the Security
Council in December a comprehensive, and not simply
anh inconclusive quarterly report, as we are used to,
on the implementation of the mandate of ISAF handed
down to it by the Security Council.

For impartial reasons, in the context ofthe electoral
impasse, the objective of national reconciliation has
been sidelined. We hope that following the completion
of the electoral cycle, the new Afghan authorities
will move forward with renewed energy with the key
element of normalizing the situation in the country on
the basis of the three well-known principles, namely,
the laying down of arms by the fighters, the recognition
of the Constitution of Afghanistan and the final cutting
of ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations,
in full compliance with the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime.

The reports of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime continur to depict a gloomy picture of the
situation with regard to drug production and illicit drug
traffficking in Afghanistan. It is of concern that the
United Nations has affirmed that there has been a sharp
drop in the eradication of opium crops. Last year, drug
trafficking netted almost $1 billion. It is clear that a
large proportion of that goes to fuelling the subversive
activities of terrorist and criminal groups.

The Security Council is still considering its
counter-narcotics initiative. We need to take into
account the activities of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, in particular in that area. We should work
constructively with our colleagues on the Council in
order to adopt a comprehensive programme. Combating
the drug problem in Afghanistan is extremely important,
not only in order to prevent the increased funding of
extremist and terrorist activities but also to protect the
lives of our people and to prevent our young people
from becoming dependent on heroin.

We will insist that the new Afghan leadership
and all those that work in the country in support of
Afghanistan pay more attention to the eradciation of
the drug threat, which presents a great risk to peace
and security not only in Afghanistan but in the region
and far beyond. That fight requires collective efforts
and the abandonment of double standards and various
ideologies. We can no longer tolerate the upsurge in
drug production that has continued for more than 10
years of foreign presence.

The countries of the region and their cooperation
play an important role in the settlement of the Afghan
situation. In that regard, the development of political
and economic cooperation and dialogue is of particular
importance. We believe that the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) is vital in that regard, especially
since, as members or observers, Afghanistan and all its
neighbours are involved. That reality was affirmed at
the most recent SCO summit. Only by coordinating the
efforts of the United Nations mission and international
actors will we be able to ensure the sustainable
development and the establishment of a self-sufficient
State that is free from terrorism and drug crime.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation to Mr. Jan Kubis for his extensive work
at the head of UNAMA. We hope that his experience,
great professionalism and leadership qualities will still
be needed by the United Nations.

