Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
thank Assistant-Secretary-General Jenca and High
Commissioner Al-Hussein for their briefings. I am
grateful for this discussion today, because we must tell
the full story of the North Korean people. Only a few of
them, some of whom are with us today, have escaped to

tell the truth about their struggle for freedom. My hope
is that we will hear their stories today and add our voices
to the cause of basic human rights in North Korea. The
systematic human rights violations and abuses of the
North Korean Government are more than the cause
of its people's suffering. They are a means to a single
end - keeping the Kim Jong-un regime in power. The
regime is using that power to develop an unnecessary
arsenal and support enormous conventional military
forces that pose a grave risk to international peace
and security.

Their menacing march towards building a nuclear-
weapon arsenal begins with the oppression and
exploitation of ordinary North Korean people. By
exporting workers abroad to earn hard currency and
exploiting forced labour at home, the regime uses its
people to underwrite its nuclear and ballisti-missile
programmes. The Government has developed a strict
caste system designed to control and suppress the will
of the people. The regime forces the North Korean
people to work up to 14 hours a day, six or seven
days a week, often with no compensation. Failure to
report to an assigned job can result in imprisonment
in a forced labour camp for six months to two years.
Non-governmental organizations have revealed video
footage of children as young as five years old forced
to carry out heavy labour in dangerous conditions,
including work on railroad lines and in mines.
Meanwhile, the Kim regime not only builds nuclear
weapons, it builds theme parks and high-rises in
Pyongyang for the elite and politically obedient, where
they live in relative comfort. The remaining 85 per
cent of North Koreans must obtain permission to enter
the city. The country is dotted with military checkpoints
to ensure that everyone stays where the Government
wants him or her to be.

Worse, the North Korean Government imprisons an
estimated 100,000 North Koreans, including children,
in political prison camps. There, they face torture,
forced labour, summary executions, starvation, sexual
Violence and other forms of inhumane treatment. Many
of those detained are in the camps not because of
anything they did but because of something a family
member did. The North Korean regime's system of
guilt by association allows for up to three generations
of family members to be imprisoned along with
the accused. Defectors have reported that all North
Koreans aged 12 and older are required to attend public
executions - a graphic reminder of the consequences
of disobedience to the Government.

The regime bans foreign media. Radios and
televisions are fixed to State media channels. State
security officials regularly raid apartment buildings
in an effort to catch individuals with foreign media.
Punishment for possession ofa foreign DVD or SD card
can include imprisonment or even execution.

And it is not just North Koreans who suffer under
this system. A large number of Japanese and other
citizens have been abducted by the North Korean
Government over the past few decades. Many of their
family members still do not know what has become
of their loved ones. Nor can we overlook the terrorist
acts that the North Korean Government has committed
against both its own nationals and other nationals
abroad, most recently in Kuala Lumpur.

But even for North Koreans trying to escape, the
road to freedom is dangerous and sometimes deadly.
They must survive border guards who shoot to kill.
They must contend with traffickers who lure them
into forced labour, sex work or forced marriages,
and then they must remain undetected as they cross
international borders in search of a country that will
provide temporary protection. What makes these
dangerous escapes even more harrowing is that many
defectors do not reach freedom on their first attempt.
North Koreans fleeing to neighbouring States are often
caught, detained and forcibly repatriated. The regime
has subjected returnees to torture, sexual violence,
arbitrary detention and imprisonment. In some cases,
they are killed.

The majority of asylum-seekers are women. They
pay the highest price for being captured and repatriated.
In addition to certain torture, hard labour and other
abuses, the regime subjects returned pregnant women
to forced abortions in an effort to maintain "ethnic
purity". If the baby is born alive, it is killed. These
details are so horrific that they are difficult to believe,
so today I have invited two remarkably courageous
women who were imprisoned multiple times in North
Korea before escaping to China. I should like to ask
these brave women - Ms. Ji Hyeon-A and Ms. Jo
Yuri 4 to briefly stand to be recognized. Given time
constraints, I would like to now share a bit of one of
their stories.

Ms. Jo suffered greatly as she sought to flee the
repressive North Korean regime. After serving in the
North Korean military for several years, she returned
to her hometown to find that her mother had been
detained and tortured for dealing with Chinese traders.
When her mother was released from detention after two
months, she died while Ms. Jo was carrying her home
on her back. To make a living, Ms. Jo continued her
mother's business working with Chinese traders and
also found herself being harassed, jailed and tortured
by North Korean security officials. Eventually, after a
failed attempt to escape, she landed in a North Korean
detention centre, where she was tortured and beaten and
nearly lost her life. But she was determined to create a
better life for her young daughter, so she tried again. In
2014, she escaped to China, where she was caught but
was able to find a way out of detention to reach South
Korea in 2015. She is now a successful entrepreneur
running a small cosmetics company and works to raise
awareness about the terrible conditions in North Korea.

These two amazing women have the kind of courage
and persistence that few human beings can claim. I
thank them and all other North Korean defectors who
survived to tell their stories. They are the voice for the
millions of their countrymen and countrywomen who
remain trapped in a walking nightmare. The tragic
reality, however, is that the North Korean regime and
other enabling Member States are creating new stories
like this every day.
That is why, immediately following this meeting, the
United States will co-host an event on this issue, along
with Australia, Canada, France, Japan, the Republic of
Korea and the United Kingdom, in Conference Room 1.
This will be a rare chance to hear directly from Ms. Ji
about her experience in detail. We will also hear from the
former Chair of the Commission of Inquiry on Human
Rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Justice Michael Kirby, and renowned North Korean
human rights expert David Hawk. I urge all Council
members to join us and participate in our discussion.

The two North Korean women with us here today,
as well as all defectors who have lived to tell their
stories, are a source of hope for millions. We must
tell and retell their stories until the world knows what
is going on in the black box that is North Korea. We
must tell and retell their stories so that leaders inside
and outside of the Council cannot plead ignorance. We
have no excuse not to act. We must insist that the North
Korean Government and other relevant Member States
immediately implement the recommendations of the
Commission of Inquiry, the Secretary-General and the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Member
States must also provide safe passage or temporary
protection for North Korean asylum-seekers. The
forcible repatriation of these women means certain
torture, sexual Violence and hard labour. Too often, it is
a death sentence.

During his visit to the South Korean National
Assembly in November, President Trump described the
obligation we all have to open our eyes to the evil of the
North Korean regime and to act. He said:

"It is our responsibility and our duty to confront
this danger together, because the longer we wait
the greater the danger grows and the fewer the
options become".

The crisis in North Korea is one of human rights
and peace and security. History will judge us on how
we respond.

