Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): The situation across the Middle East continues to be a source of grave concern. Terrorism, violence and humanitarian crises have escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people in the region. In the face of those developments, we must maintain our focus on the urgent need to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Despite the continuous calls of the international community, Israeli violations of international law in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem, have been increasing at an alarming rate. Settlement activities are particularly worrisome. Resolution 2334 (2016) is clear on the destructive effects of illegal settlement activities. Its provisions must be implemented. Israel should immediately cease all settlement activities, as wellas house demolitions, land confiscation and other policies denying the Palestinians' right to development. Attempts to deny the historical and legal rights of the Palestinian people violate international law. Those rights, including the right to return, cannot be withheld. The continuation of such practices will only deepen the sense of injustice and breed desperation. That is in no one's interest. The situation on the Gaza Strip is also deeply worrying. Gazans, who are under blockade, continue to live in tremendous despair and insecurity. Humanitarian organizations on the ground face immense challenges in the treatment of people suffering severe bone infections. The international community should be able to assist the wounded in the long and uncertain period of recovery. The tragedy is compounded by the worst financial crisis in the history of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). At a time when the region is witnessing conflict and significant volatility, the impact of a potential disruption in UNRWA services would be gruesome. By extending the mandate of UNRWA, the General Assembly showed its overwhelming support for the Agency. We should also maintain efforts to put the financial situation of the Agency on a more predictable and sustainable footing. The operationalization of the Waaqf Fund of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation has been a significant step forward in that regard. The latest developments again remind us of the urgency of revitalizing the peace process. A two-State solution, with the establishment of an independent State of Palestine within the 1967 borders, withEast Jerusalem as its capital, remains the only way to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. Any peace plan or initiative should be based along those established parameters. I would also like to briefly touch upon the developments in Syria. In Idlib, the systematic targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure by the regime continues to cause massive waves of displacement. Millions of people are faced with ongoing cycles of violence. Since December 2019 alone, almost 350,000 people have been displaced in Idlib, 80 per cent of whom are women and children. Many left their homes in a rush to stay alive and were unable to bring any belongings vital to their survival. Given the winter conditions, civilians have become even more vulnerable in Idlib. Their lives are threatened both by military attacks and by harsh weather conditions. The current crisis is compounding an already dire humanitarian situation in north- western Syria. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians under the pretext of fighting terrorism cannot be accepted. Respect for international humanitarian law is indispensable. Sustained, unimpeded and safe humanitarian access, including through the United Nations cross-border humanitarian mechanism, is vital. Turkey will maintain efforts to preserve the status quo in the Idlib de-escalation area. Following the first two rounds, it is regrettable that the Constitutional Committee has stalled. It should be ensured that the Committee can function without any hindrance. The members of the international community should work together in order to help advance the political process, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We should all support the efforts of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to that end. As the conflict in Syria enters its tenth year, there is an alarming need for a genuine political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
