Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I am
speaking on behalf of the Arab Group, which would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes for the valuable and
comprehensive briefing he gave during this debate.
Today's six-monthly debate coincides with a
painful event that highlights its importance and places
it in a special light of practicality and everyday life. At
a time when the Council is meeting to discuss the
content, mechanisms and goals of the concept of
protection of civilians, we are witnessing the tragedy
of the Palestinian people in Gaza, which is of direct
relevance to the issue at hand today.

For the past 19 days, Israel has invaded Gaza
using the full potential of its war machine, spreading
terror and destruction, assassinating innocent children,
annihilating entire families and destroying homes,
schools and places of worship. The toll of this
aggression has exceeded 1,000 dead and 4,500 injured,
not to mention the tens of thousands of Palestinian
civilians who have been forced to flee their homes.
Where are we in terms of protecting civilians in times
of war?

Israel has not stopped at this point. Rather, it has
tightened its siege on Gaza and its residents. It has
deprived them of the most basic requirements of life. It
has prevented them from seeking their daily living and
has obstructed the fuel and electricity needed to power
public facilities, including hospitals. It has also
prevented humanitarian aid from reaching those in dire
need of its assistance. What precisely are we doing in
terms of protecting civilians in times of conflict?

Moreover, Israel has attacked a school run by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, in which families had
sought refuge from the Israeli war machine. Instead,
they were met with death. Medical teams and
international staff have also been targeted by the Israeli
military machine. In addition, the occupying forces, in
their vindictive military campaign, have used white
phosphorous bombs, as well as weapons that have been
banned internationally. What, then, are we doing to
uphold our duty to protect civilians in times of
conflict?

The catastrophic situation of civilians in Gaza is a
painful reminder of what the Palestinian people are
suffering every day throughout the occupied
Palestinian territories as a result of Israel's illegitimate
occupation, its illegal settlement policies, its inhuman
siege and its efforts to annihilate the Palestinian
identity and punish Palestinian civilians. The
occupying Power has become more oppressive and
tyrannical as it flouts the principles of international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949, which includes clear provisions pertaining to
the protection of civilians in times of war, clearly
stipulates the responsibilities that Israel as an
occupying Power must uphold and obliges it to
implement and respect those provisions. This was
reaffirmed strongly by the Human Rights Council in
the resolution adopted at its special session of
9January 2009. The Council called "for immediate
international protection of the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory in compliance with
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law". (A/HRC/S-9/L.]/Rev.2, para. 9)

The Secretary-General has repeatedly condemned
the Israeli aggression and has called for its immediate
cessation. Moreover, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has described the
Palestinians' plight as the only conflict in the world in
which people are not even allowed to flee. Recently,
the Council adopted resolution 1860 (2009) calling for
an immediate ceasefire in order to put an end to the
bloodbath, whose price the unarmed Palestinians are
paying more dearly than anyone else. However, instead
of responding to or heeding the call of the Council,
Israel has pursued its aggressive policies and even
escalated its aggression, claiming the lives of dozens
every day with no concern for international appeals,
regardless of their source. What, then, are we doing to
uphold our duty to protect civilians in times of war?

What awaits the Palestinian people, the rest of the
Arab countries and the international community as a
whole? They expect the Council to work to ensure
Israel's implementation of resolution 1860 (2009)
immediately and its immediate declaration of a
ceasefire. Every hour that passes jeopardizes the lives
of hundreds upon hundreds of innocents and increases
the desperate humanitarian situation of the rest of
Gaza's residents. Is this not one of the duties of
protecting civilians of times of war?

The aide-memoire prepared for this meeting
indicates the need for the Security Council to take into
consideration the situation of most civilians, as well as
the responsibilities of parties to a conflict to protect
civilians and to respond to their basic needs. It also
condemned all the aggressor's actions and called for an
immediate end to those and any others that would harm
civilians in situations of armed conflict, in accordance
with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law and the relevant conventions.
Therefore, if there is a way to translate those
good intentions into concrete implementation by
matching the Council's words with actual deeds, and to
gauge their feasibility by their impact on the ground,
then civilians in Gaza and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories must be protected. That would
end the bloodshed and the aggression that has targeted
them, thus preserving the credibility of the Security
Council and enhancing the effectiveness of its efforts.

In conclusion, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, despite its importance, is part of a larger
challenge related to the need to peacefully resolve
conflicts and to positively and effectively address their
underlying causes. That challenge lies at the heart of
the responsibilities of the Security Council, which,
under the Charter of the United Nations, is the
principal organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

