The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has caused over 520,000 deaths and 10.8 million infections around the world since its discovery, over six months ago. While the pandemic is seriously impacting global public heath, it has also challenged international unity and cooperation in response to a global emergency. The unprecedented and devastating consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic are unlimited and unforeseeable. Its impact is greatest on the poor and the vulnerable and on politically unstable and conflict-stricken countries. The current situation highlights the importance of strong leadership and unified responses at the global and national levels. Therefore, the United Nations leading role in the fight against COVID-19 is indeed crucial and central. In this respect, I wish to share briefly what Myanmar is doing to fight against COVID-19 with its own limited resources and with international and bilateral assistance from friends and well-wishers. Myanmar took a whole-of-nation approach at an early stage in the spread of COVID-19 to respond to, prevent and mitigate the pandemic. We mobilized the strength of the people and galvanized public participation, which were pivotal to the success of our national efforts to fight COVID-19. State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi personally chairs the Central Committee for the Prevention, Control and Treatment of COVID-19. The Central Committee launched an intensive public- awareness campaign and disseminated health guidelines and directives throughout the country, including in the internally displaced person (IDP) camps in Rakhine, Shan and Kachin states. In the areas where Internet data access had to be suspended, COVID-19 information has been disseminated via mobile short message service and oral announcements. In response to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, Tatmadaw announced a three-month unilateral nationwide ceasefire to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic. The unilateral ceasefire will be applied to all areas except where terrorist groups have taken positions. The Government has also invited all ethnic armed groups to work together for the prevention, detection and treatment of the virus in rebel-controlled areas along the border with neighbouring countries. Many armed groups have responded positively, and the cooperation has been working well. The economic impact of the pandemic has also been devastating for Myanmar, as a developing country. More than 5,700 factories, workplaces and restaurants have been closed, leaving over 140,000 people unemployed. The situation has been compounded by the return of more than 100,000 migrant workers. To mitigate the economic fallout of the pandemic, a comprehensive economic stimulus plan was announced in April. Moreover, community-based job-creation schemes have been initiated in rural areas for returning migrant workers and local young people. To prevent the spread of the virus from returnees, we are imposing strict quarantine measures through massive facilities in border towns and in major cities. Testing facilities have been increased and conduct testing with all returnees, including those individuals who returned voluntarily from the IDP camps in Cox's Bazar by their own arrangements. Despite the tremendous challenges posed by increased armed clashes in Rakhine state, the Government has scaled up its efforts to grant humanitarian access to displaced people, especially women and children. The World Food Programme and the International Committee of the Red Cross have been granted permission to provide food and emergency items to affected people in Rakhine state and southern parts of Chin state. The Government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic adheres to the principle of leaving no one behind. Recently, Myanmar and the International Committee of the Red Cross formalized an action plan to support Myanmar's efforts to prevent a potential COVID-19 outbreak in Rakhine state. Thousands of people in Rakhine state, including those living in IDP camps, are benefiting under that plan. As we are still quite far from finding a solution to this global pandemic, united and collective global approaches are crucial. Politicizing the pandemic will have long-term negative consequences, the brunt of which will be borne by the most vulnerable and least protected population from poor and conflict-stricken countries, with women and children at the forefront. Myanmar is grateful to the United Nations, international institutions and agencies, as well as individual friendly countries, for their support of Myanmar's efforts to fight the COVID-19 pandemic and mitigate its socioeconomic and security consequences. We are determined to fight this pandemic with our united national strength, with the help of the United Nations and in cooperation with regional and international partners.
