Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I wish at the outset to thank you for
convening this emergency meeting and for your speedy
response to the request from the African group that the
meeting be held forthwith. We feel certain that this debate
will enable us to hear the ideas of many Members of the
Organization about how to react most effectively to the
dreadful crisis in Sierra Leone, which could at any
moment deteriorate further and drift beyond control.

We are sincerely grateful to the Secretary-General
for his intensive efforts and for the important statement he
made here this evening.

I wish also to pay tribute to the soldiers who have
given their lives for peace, and to convey the condolences
of the Government and the people of Tunisia to the
Governments and the families of those who have been
killed in so cowardly a way. Further, my Government
thanks those who have contributed troops in Sierra Leone,
and the troops of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), who continue to face a tense situation.

Tunisia strongly condemns the actions of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and of its leader,
Mr. Foday Sankoh, in deliberate violation of the Lome
Peace Agreement, an agreement they freely signed. These
actions must not go unpunished; the amnesty specified in
the Peace Agreement must be revisited, given the
unacceptable acts perpetrated by the RUF and the
unacceptable conduct of its leader, Mr. Sankoh, who has
acted against peace and has thus barred his own people
from relief from the suffering they have been facing for
so long.

I reiterate my country's full support for the Lorne
Agreement, and for United Nations efforts, regional
efforts by ECOWAS and international efforts aimed at
getting the peace process back on track. In that
connection, my delegation fully endorses the conclusions,
decisions and recommendations of the summit of
ECOWAS heads of State, who met on 9 May at Abuja
concerning the Lome Agreement on Sierra Leone. We
believe that these recommendations are an appropriate
response to the current crisis, which hangs so heavily
over the future of Sierra Leone, and that they merit
Security Council support with a view to responding in a
manner commensurate with the gravity of the crisis,
which could further deteriorate at any moment.

The Security Council must face up to the situation
decisively; it must emerge with its credibility
strengthened. The international community must
demonstrate even greater solidarity with the Government

 

and the people of Sierra Leone to ensure peace, progress
and democracy in that country and to provide the United
Nations with the resources needed to discharge its mandate.
We must, without further delay, strengthen the mandate of
UNAMSIL and reinforce its troops, authorizing the use of
ECOWAS troops as soon as possible; the mandate must
include a peacemaking dimension. For effective
implementation, sufficient equipment and appropriate
financial and logistical support must also be given to the
peacekeeping force, which would of course be under
UNAMSIL command.

Given the urgency of the situation, it remains crucially
important that all detainees be released immediately and
unconditionally and that the additional troops made
available to UNAMSIL by Bangladesh, India and Jordan be
deployed rapidly; Africa thanks those countries most
sincerely.

The crisis in Sierra Leone stirs up sore memories of
United Nations experience elsewhere in Africa. We must
apply the lessons learned from that experience to the
handling of the Sierra Leone crisis. That crisis must also
cause us to reflect in depth on peacekeeping and
international security in general. We must also consider the
human and financial problems raised, along with the
question of the correct approach to each operation, to
ensure the success of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to prevent harmful setbacks.

The present situation has brought far too much
suffering to the people of Sierra Leone; they expect full
support from the international community. The international
community must not abandon them.

