Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Allow me, Mr. President,
to express our warmest welcome to the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, His Excellency Vuk J eremic', and to
the Foreign Minister of Kosovo, His Excellency
Skender Hyseni. I also welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Lamberto
Zannier, to whom goes our deepest appreciation for his
efforts and good offices with all parties and key
stakeholders at this very delicate juncture.

In these four months we have been facing
considerable challenges. A major reconfiguration has
been carried out, in view of the downsizing of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in

Kosovo (UNMIK), while the European Union will be
taking on unprecedented responsibilities through its
largest-ever external Security and Defence Policy
mission. Through the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the European Union will
assist the Kosovo authorities in forming a multi-ethnic
State. At the same time, it will contribute to
guaranteeing European Union standards in the rule of
law for Kosovars and will offer a clear signal of a
European perspective for that young country.

The Secretary-General's report signals the
growing difficulties that the Special Representative is
facing in exercising his mandate after Kosovo's
declaration of independence and the entry into force of
its constitution. The time has come, therefore, for us to
strengthen the European Union presence on the ground.
Significantly, the Secretary-General has stated,

"I expect EULEX to move forward with its
deployment in the coming period and to assume
responsibilities in policing, justice and customs,
under the overall authority of the United Nations,
under a United Nations umbrella headed by my
Special Representative, and in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999)." (S/2008/692, para. 23)

UNMIK and EULEX are already working well and
closely together, so that the European Union mission
may begin deployment, ensuring that the
reconfiguration is carried out effectively and according
to plan.

We are also particularly pleased to note that
dialogue with Belgrade and consultations with Pristina
have brought about a framework agreement on the six
points outlined in the Secretary-General's report of 12
June (S/2008/354, annex I). Through this agreement,
Special Representative Zannier has produced a
blueprint for Serb-majority areas in key sectors, such
as police, justice and customs, in which EULEX will
concentrate its activities. We take note of Pristina's
concerns over the six points, and at the same time we
commend its commitment to favouring the prompt
deployment of EULEX, with which it is willing to
work. We are confident that Belgrade will also
cooperate with EULEX.

We trust that work done in the run-up to this
Security Council meeting will contribute to creating a
constructive climate allowing EULEX to perform its
duties throughout Kosovo, including in the north.
EULEX must be perceived by all local populations as a
fundamental element for building a multi-ethnic
society in which people can live and prosper according
to standards of democracy and the rule of law in line
with those of the European Union.

Italy fully supports the way forward outlined in
the Secretary-General's report, particularly with regard
to EULEX. It believes that carrying out what he has
suggested will be to the benefit of stability in Serbia,
Kosovo and the region as a whole.

Italy is one of the contributors to KFOR, as it will
also be to EULEX. Italy favours an enhanced role for
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. NATO must remain a key player in
contributing to a safe and secure environment and in
performing duties in connection with institution-
building in Kosovo. Its present structure should
therefore not be changed. Italy remains committed to
contributing to the efforts of the international
community in Kosovo, to regional democratic stability
and to the European future of all countries of the
Western Balkans, including Serbia. We look forward to
a prompt entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with Belgrade.

