Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I speak on behalf of the
following participants of the Group of Friends of the
Rule ofLaw: Belgium, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Paraguay, the
Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and my own
country, Austria.

As we reflect on the past 70 years since the
founding of the United Nations, it is timely to reaffirm
our commitment to all the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is also right to
reaffirm our commitment to international law and to
upholding democracy and the rule of law, as the concept
note (S/2017/87, annex) for this debate suggests. But we
will not do so selectively. We reaffirm our commitment
to all the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, which include the core
principles, or three pillars, on which the United Nations
is built: peace and security, development and human
rights. Firmly based on the universal values of equality,
justice, freedom and the dignity and worth of the
human person, the Charter places equal importance on
the universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as it does on such principles of international
law as the prohibition of the threat or use of force, the
territorial integrity of States and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.

We reaffirm that States shall uphold in good
faith the entirety of their obligations arising from the
Charter, including under Chapter VII. We call on States
to abide by all their obligations under international law,
including human rights and international humanitarian
law. We reiterate the call on States to ratify and
implement multilateral treaties, to settle their disputes
peacefully, including through the International Court of
Justice, and to cooperate fully with internationaljustice
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court, in order to end impunity

The Security Council has oftentimes confirmed
that the rule of law and justice are fundamental
building blocks of conflict prevention resolution and of
sustainable peace. The Security Council has also, on
a number of occasions, recognized that grave human
rights violations may constitute a threat to international
peace and security. As we reflect on the lessons from
our past of wars, conflict and human suffering, we
recognize that peace and security and respect for human
rights and the rule of law are intrinsically linked. To
quote the preamble of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,

"it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law".

As we face new and more complex threats and
challenges to international peace and security, and new
levels of atrocities, brutality and suffering, we would do
well to recall the foundations and principles embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations. We emphasize
that our collective response to threats to international
peace and security must be guided by the rule of law
at both the national and international levels. Both are
inherently linked and intertwined, for every nation that
proclaims the rule oflaw at home must respect it abroad
and every nation that insists on it abroad must enforce
it at home.

As participants in the Group of Friends of the
Rule of Law, we reaffirm that the rule of law is the
foundation of the international system and the basis
on which just and fair societies are built, and we will
continue to advocate for strengthening the rule of law,
inter alia, throughout the elaboration and, later, the
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.

