Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative David Shearer for his,
as always, very informative briefing.

Poland welcomes last week's meeting between
President Salva Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar in
Juba, which we see as a step in the right direction. We
would like to encourage the political leaders to continue
to meet regularly so as to take the peace process forward.
We also welcome all confidence-building efforts and
peacebuilding initiatives that have been taking place at
the subnational level.

We continue to believe that the implementation
of the provisions of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan is crucial to the durable peace and long-term
stability of the country. Two months before the end
of the extended pre-transitional period, we see the
urgent need for the parties to accelerate the pace of
implementation of the Agreement, in particular with
regard to security arrangements and the number of
states and their boundaries.

We call on all the signatories to work together in
a spirit of goodwill and compromise and to spare no
efforts in stepping up preparations for the successful
transition and the formation of the transitional
Government in November.

Poland praises the regional efforts to build
durable peace in South Sudan and believes that the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and its
member States, as well as the African Union, continue
to play a critical role in terms of enforcement and
monitoring of the implementation of the Agreement.
We believe that the Security Council should stand
ready to support those efforts. We therefore welcome
the upcoming Security Council visit to Addis Ababa
and Juba, which should also serve that purpose. It is
our strong belief that only the collective and unified
approach of the international community can help to
maintain the positive momentum in the peace process.

Poland welcomes the fact that the permanent
ceasefire continues to be largely respected across South
Sudan. At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
about the persisting humanitarian crisis and the levels
of intercommunal violence, as well as the serious
human rights violations and abuses perpetrated by
Government forces and opposition armed groups. We
call on the authorities of South Sudan to do their utmost
to bring the perpetrators to justice and to fulfil their
obligations with regard to the protection of civilians.

Let me conclude by thanking the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan for its tireless efforts to bring
durable peace and stability to South Sudan.

