Mr. Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President, my
delegation appreciates the opportunity to participate in
this debate and wishes to congratulate your country on
the success with which it has presided over the affairs
of the Council this month. We also congratulate you on
your initiative in ensuring that Africa remains a
priority issue on the Council's agenda.

Over the past two years, the Council's work
programme has covered various issues affecting Africa;
these must continue to engage the Council's attention if
this organ is effectively and efficiently to discharge its
Charter responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Ghana therefore
commends the Council thus far, particularly those
members who have used their presidencies to focus on
African issues. We are heartened by the decision of the
United Kingdom, announced yesterday by Baroness
Amos, to devote its next presidency, in July, to giving a
further African focus to the Council's work.

The continued crises in many parts of Africa
constitute an eloquent pointer to the need for a more
comprehensive and integrated approach in dealing with
the multifaceted problems of the continent. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the comments made
by the Deputy Secretary-General, who highlighted the
challenges confronting the continent and the role the
international community must continue to play to help
in addressing them.

We warmly welcome the presence in the Council
Chamber of the new Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), Mr. Amara
Essy, and of a number of African Foreign Ministers.
We believe that their contributions too have set the
tone for this debate.

N0 region is immune to conflict, and Africa is no
exception. For, so long as societies evolve and
experience changes, tensions in communities and in
States will be a natural consequence. The ability to deal
with such trends promptly and resolutely, in such a
manner that they do not obstruct societal development,
is what is critical. Africa's vulnerability, in our view,
stems primarily from institutional weaknesses in its
economic and political systems that hinder the ability
of many African countries to foresee, forestall or
manage tensions or conflicts when they occur. Nor,
given the same constraints, are the necessary lessons
learned to prevent the re-emergence of such conflicts.

The situation in Africa is not wholly gloomy. Of
late there have been positive developments in conflict
areas such as Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi. African countries have
recognized that Africa ultimately has to pull itself up
by its own bootstraps, and many are the African States
whose leaders, through genuine commitment to the
establishment of democratic pluralism, including good
governance and respect for fundamental human rights
and the rule of law, are gradually putting in place
policies that will bring about stability, transparency,
accountability and ultimately peace and security. Given
the nexus among peace, security and development,
many African countries have also painfully
implemented market-oriented policies, including the
liberalization and privatization of their economies.

My own country, Ghana, has implemented
economic reforms for more than a decade. Recently we
successfully conducted elections at the highest level
and managed a smooth handover of the reins of
government from one party to another in an atmosphere
of peace and calm. Strenuous efforts are still under way
under the new Government's "golden age of business"
policy to ensure the full participation of the private
sector in national economic management, a sine qua
non for rapid development.

However, we should be frank and admit that,
regrettably, many intra-State conflicts are still raging in
Africa. Moreover, after years of painful economic
reforms, only a few African countries have found in the
post-liberalization period the expected sustained
growth path. Consequently, our Governments do not
have at their disposal sufficient resources to fund
crucial social programmes, such as those in the spheres
of health and education, which are deemed
fundamental to any committed effort to tackle the
pervasive problem of poverty, which is one of the many
causes of conflict in the region. Our problems have
been compounded by the scourge of HIV/AIDS and
other endemic diseases such as tuberculosis and
malaria.

But we should also be realistic in recognizing that
programmes for development in Africa are also
affected by a number of external factors. These include
non-remunerative prices for our export products,
unfavourable terms of trade, the debt overhang and
lack of access to the markets of the developed
countries in an era of plummeting official development
assistance.
Of particular concern to the international
community, and indeed to the Council, have been
conflicts fuelled by the easy availability of arms, which
are often procured by non-State actors with the
connivance of some Governments. Such conventional
weapons have tended to exacerbate tensions
unnecessarily and to prolong them, despite efforts to
manage and resolve them. The Council itself held an
open debate on that issue, in the wake of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to consider its
role in the process. We look forward to further action
on the matter, given its importance, particularly to
Africa.

We feel that the international community must
remain engaged in the important process of preventing
and settling conflicts, as well as maintaining peace in
Africa. The Security Council could spearhead such
efforts, demonstrating the same urgency with which it
deals with other priority issues.

In this regard, the Council should be guided by
the Secretary-General's report, issued in 1998, on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. The Open-
ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of
Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and
Sustainable Development in Africa, established to
monitor the implementation of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General's report, has already made some
useful suggestions that, if carefully considered and
implemented, would go a long way towards addressing
the situation in Africa. The Security Council could
complement the efforts of the General Assembly by
galvanizing support for the implementation of the
Secretary-General's recommendations.

The current efforts in Africa to address issues of
governance, conflict prevention, peace and security
through the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) offer a common platform for the Security
Council's actions and approaches. That platform, based
on a comprehensive treatment of the inter-linkages
between peace and development and a recognition of
Africa's primary role in its own development, also
reinforces the coherence in and coordination of the
roles of the organs of the United Nations, including at
the Secretariat level. We urge the Council to cooperate
closely with the relevant bodies of NEPAD and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in order to
increase the effectiveness and impact of United Nations
support and its role in Africa.
On conflict prevention, management and
resolution in general, we wish to state that we have
observed that the Security Council is increasingly
desirous, if not anxious, to pull out of conflict areas,
especially in Africa, before situations actually stabilize,
thereby endangering the whole peace process. There
could hardly be a greater demonstration of the
Council's commitment than remaining fully engaged in
all aspects of the process, especially in the post-
conflict period - albeit on a much reduced scale -
until durable peace is attained.

The international community has long recognized
the cardinal importance of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in conflict resolution
and peace-building. We share the view, however, that
when it comes to the reintegration of ex-combatants,
very often adequate resources are not provided, which
may lead to a slide back into conflict. Here again, the
Council should explore avenues for resource
mobilization beyond voluntary pledges, whose
discharge often lags far behind the needs of the
programme on the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

We further wish to suggest that the Council
continue to explore ways and means of using creative
mechanisms like the appointment of special envoys and
the sending of Security Council missions to conflict
areas. It may be prudent for the Council to consider
using some of these mechanisms in pre-emptive and
proactive ways, before conflicts actually boil over.

A number of African countries have the political
will to participate in peacekeeping operations but lack
the capacity to do so. The Security Council may
therefore wish to consider how to help such countries
to build their capacity in this field so as to enable more
African countries to participate in peacekeeping
activities on the continent and elsewhere.

While we recognize the need for sanctions, and
would like to see the strengthening of arms embargoes
in some cases, the Security Council should ensure that
innocent civilians and third-party States are not unduly
affected. We would therefore urge the Council to
consider the imposition of "smart sanctions", as
recommended by its own Committee on this issue.

We appreciate the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity on regional conflict prevention, since the
latter has in place a Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. We wish to
appeal to the Security Council to continue to assist the
OAU in its capacity-building so as to enable it play the
role envisaged for it.

We would like to see more resolve in cooperation
between the OAU and the United Nations. Now that
the OAU is being transformed into the African Union,
there may be some lessons to be learned from the
institutional reform process of the United Nations itself
and of other similar organizations, so that this
relationship can be enhanced. In this regard, we note
the presence of Mr. Javier Solana, the High
Representative of the European Council, whose
participation symbolizes the European Union's firm
ties with Africa. Given the historical links between
Africa and Europe, we hope that the infant African
Union will also be able to benefit from the experiences
of the European Union.

The relevance of subregional organizations in
dealing with conflicts, both within and among States,
especially in Africa, has been recognized, given their
proximity to conflict areas and their usefulness in
consolidating overall efforts at conflict resolution in a
particular region. The positive roles that have been
played by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Southern African
Development Community, in particular, are well
known. The Council must consider how it can
contribute to strengthening the capacity of these
subregional bodies so as to enable them to discharge
their responsibilities more effectively in conflict areas.

In this connection, we welcome the decision to
establish a United Nations Office for West Africa and
look forward to the early appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to coordinate
United Nations efforts aimed at conflict prevention and
post-conflict peace-building. We recognize that this
step acknowledges the relevance of a comprehensive
approach that addresses the root causes of conflict and
potential conflict, including political, economic and
social factors. Ghana expects the special representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa to work in
close cooperation and harmony with the leaders of the
subregion, particularly the Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS. The success of that subregional office
would have useful lessons for other regions in Africa
and beyond.

Finally, we believe that the time has come for the
Security Council - after devoting about 60 per cent of
its work to African issues over the past two years - to
translate its ideas and decisions into reality and match
its words with deeds. To this end, we urge the Council,
drawing on its own best practices, to consider the
setting up of a mechanism that will help it to
coordinate and assist in the expeditious implementation
of all programmes and decisions relating to Africa.

