Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I should like to thank Colombia for having
convened this debate at a key moment in the history of
Haiti. I should like also to thank President Santos
Calderon and President Preval for participating in this
debate. I should like in addition to welcome the efforts
made by Mr. Mulet as Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Secretary-General, in his most recent report,
detailed the challenges that Haiti continues to face: a
long-standing political crisis, a very slow process of
reconstruction, hundreds of thousands of displaced
persons, an economy that needs to be rebuilt, a weak
rule of law and increased criminality, including sexual
violence against women and girls in camps for
displaced persons.

In this difficult context, the immediate challenge
is restoring political stability. Slow development
undoubtedly has a negative impact on stability, but
there can be no solid development without political
stability. The elections that have just taken place must
allow for the establishment of new institutions with
which the international community will pursue its
efforts for cooperation.

We appeal to the candidates, the politicians and
the people to respect the democratic process and to
build the future of the country on that basis following
Mr. Martelly's victory. Haiti needs a calm political
climate in order to move forward and resolve its
problems. The future of the country will depend most
of all on the key political decisions that will be made
by the newly elected leaders.

Indeed, the international community is at Haiti's
side, but it will not be able to provide anything of a
lasting nature if the country's leadership does not take
a determined role in guiding the political process and
reconstruction. Such national ownership is particularly
important in terms of the rule of law. How can
investments be ensured without public and legal
security or without a judicial system that is up and
running? How can security for the people be ensured
without a police force that is competent and large
enough to deploy throughout the country, and that
respects its own mandate as well as human rights?

We welcome the real progress made in these
areas, but it must encourage Haitian politicians and the
international community alike to tirelessly pursue the
efforts they have undertaken. The future Haitian
authorities can count on France to help them in
rebuilding and developing the country.

With respect to reconstruction, certain obstacles
must be lifted to accelerate the pace of rubble cleanup
and the reconstruction of homes, which will involve
the use of heavy machinery. To that end, France has
just provided 40 trucks, which are adapted to the
terrain, to the Ministry of Public Works, Transport and
Communications.
Above and beyond this, the international
community must continue its efforts and its
mobilization. We must emphasize the scope of the
human, technical and financial efforts made by the
international community in Haiti. These efforts are the
result of the relentless work of thousands of people
working on the ground, in particular for the United
Nations and especially in the context of MINUSTAH,
which will continue to play an essential role in
stabilizing the country.

This involves bringing in technical expertise to
build local capacities, since there will be no recovery
without strengthening the competencies that have been
reclaimed and developed by the Haitians themselves. It
ultimately involves financial assistance, in particular
the financing that has been promised and must be
delivered. That has yet to happen, as President Preval
and President Clinton noted.

France has a presence in all areas. We contribute
to MINUSTAH, including more than 70 gendarmes and
police officers. We provide technical assistance, in
particular through training for police and judges,
amounting to more than €300 million for the 2010-
2011 period, more than half of which has already been
disbursed. Our contribution is also channelled through
the European Union, as will be highlighted later by the
High Representative of the European Union. France
aligns itself in advance with her statement.

France will maintain its commitment to the
people and the Government of Haiti, in close
cooperation with the United Nations. We will do so
within a comprehensive effort involving the State and
bringing in local French communities, in particular the
French Departments of the Americas, non-
governmental organizations, businesses and the Haitian
diaspora living in France.

