Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, Ms. Michele Coninsx, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis, for their briefings. My
delegation also acknowledges the outstanding role being
played by UNAMI in the carrying out of its mandate.
We encourage UNAMI to continue advancing dialogue
and coordination for bolstering the peace process and
reconciliation in Iraq.

We highlight the holding of parliamentary elections
on 12 May, which were conducted in an orderly way
in a violence-free environment. We call on the elected
representatives and the political actors concerned to
dialogue and enter into negotiations that will enable
them to establish continuous governance and develop
solid institutions that will take the necessary measures
for the stabilization and rebuilding of Iraq.

We also note the progress made in the establishment
of a State-owned oil company under the supervision of
the Council of Ministers. We are convinced that the
sovereign administration of those resources will be of
great help for the rebuilding of Iraq and the restoration
of basic services for the people in general.

We also encourage ongoing dialogue between the
federal Government and the regional Government
of Kurdistan in order to peacefully resolve pending
issues, since it was through dialogue that the Erbil and
Sulaymaniyah airports were reopened to international
traffic and federal resources were allocated to pay
public servants in Kurdistan. As such, we call on both
parties to continue to work together on a consensual
basis to address and resolve common issues.

Despite the progress made, we regret the
continuation of asymmetrical attacks that claim the lives
of innocent civilians. During the reporting period, at
least 170 people were killed and 300 injured, including
women and children. It is important to highlight that a
significant number ofthose victims occurred as a result
of the detonation of improvised explosive devices and
explosive remnants of war.

In that regard, we highlight the work carried out
by the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS),
which, during the reporting period, identified and
removed almost 500 explosive devices deployed in
different parts of Iraq's territory. The clearing and
removal of explosive remnants of war is essential, as
the security of the population is essential to beginning
the process of reconstruction in Iraq. We therefore call
upon the international community to support the work
of UNMAS and unite efforts to effectively implement
resolution 2365 (2017).

Noting the efforts spearheaded by Iraq to identify
mass graves and patrimonial goods, such as those
belonging to Kuwait, my delegation commends the
convening ofthe meeting of the tripartite mechanism in
April in Iraq. To that end, we call upon the international
community to lend its support for the capacity-building
that the Iraqi Government requires to move forward in
the search and identification of possible areas where
mass graves might be located.

The declaration of victory made as a result of
Prime Minister Al Abadi's campaign to free Iraq
from the control of Da'esh 9 December last year is
an important achievement not only for Iraq but for
the entire international community. However, the
presence of that terrorist group - which still has the
capacity to coordinate and perpetrate attacks against
the civilian population and law enforcement agencies,
such as those carried out earlier this month in Baghdad
and Kirkuk - continues to pose a major threat to
the security of the population and to the process of
reconstruction and reconciliation in Iraq. Also, the
plight of more than 1,500 Yazidi women and girls still
under the control of Da'esh remains a concern that must
be resolved as soon as possible.

In that regard, we welcome the visit made by
the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism to Iraq in March and
reiterate the need to develop the capacities of Iraqi
institutions to eliminate that threat once and for all
by, inter alia, strengthening the fight against terrorism
financing, countering terrorist narratives and focusing
on educating young people to prevent extremism. The
effective implementation of resolution 2354 (2017)
on narratives and arguments for the fight against
terrorism is a useful tool in the areas of prevention and
combating extremist rhetoric. In that understanding,
the commencement of the tasks entrusted by resolution
2379 (2017) to the investigative team to identify those
responsible for the atrocities committed by Da'esh is of
vital importance in bringing those persons before Iraqi
courts to account for their criminal acts, as an essential
element to fight impunity and indemnify the victims.

We reiterate our sincere appreciation for the
courageous, self-sacrificing and determined fight
against terrorism that the Iraqi security forces, and the
Iraqi people as a whole, have waged on behalf of all
of us. That significant achievement must be reinforced
by all sectors of society coming together in unity. To
that end, the role of political actors and the Government
must focus on eliminating sectarian or divisive rhetoric
and calling for unity and reconciliation in order to pave
the way for the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq.

Finally, we cannot but recall that one of the root
causes of the long-lasting conflict that affected Iraq
is the consequence of implementing regime-change
policies and carrying out interventionist practices
in the internal affairs of States, bringing with it the
emergence of chaos, terrorism and militarization, the
regrettable results of which continue to be replicated
to date.

