The President: I would now like to make a brief
statement in my national capacity.

I wish again to welcome Mr. Holkeri here in his
first appearance before the Council as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo. I
would also like to thank him for his briefing.

In particular, we welcome the start of the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue on practical matters, which
opened on 14 October in Vienna. The beginning of that
dialogue is a significant step towards improving
regional relations and fulfilling one of the eight
internationally endorsed standards. We commend the
parties on both sides that participated in the opening of
the direct dialogue in Vienna. We were disappointed,
however, that some of the parties in Kosovo chose not
to participate in the opening of the dialogue. We call
upon all parties to fully participate in the follow-on
working groups that will address practical issues.
Making progress in the areas of transportation, energy,
missing persons and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees will not only help Kosovo meet
the standards; it will also provide tangible benefits for
citizens in both Kosovo and Serbia.

To facilitate further dialogue, the United States
reiterates its support for resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework for Kosovo. We will support
efforts by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to transfer all non-
reserved authorities to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in a timely manner.

It is also vital that the work plan to further
operationalize the eight standards be completed in the
near term. We hope the work plan will provide
direction for Kosovo as it seeks to meet the standards.
The Government of the United States will continue to
offer technical expertise to UNMIK in developing the
work plan, as needed.

The Council's last meeting on Kosovo, on 12
September, followed a series of violent attacks,
including shootings that primarily targeted members of
the minority Serb community and UNMIK law-
enforcement authorities. We call upon all citizens of
Kosovo to cooperate with UNMIK and the Kosovo
Police Service in their investigation of those terrible
crimes. Violence of any type will not be tolerated, and
the rule of law must be respected.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro.

