Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First of all, let me avail
myself of this opportunity to join the previous speakers
in expressing our deepest condolences to the victims of
the cyclone in Myanmar and the earthquake in China.

Allow me also to express my delegation's
appreciation to the presidency of the United Kingdom
for organizing today's important and timely open
debate of the Security Council to consider the
challenges facing the international community in
stabilizing countries recovering from conflict and
delivering sustainable peace. We are also thankful for
the concept paper (S/2008/29l, annex), which is
certainly a comprehensive document that articulates
the realities of dealing with situations in countries
emerging from conflict. I am certain that the outcome
of this debate will greatly benefit nations going
through post-conflict stabilization and the
peacebuilding process, as well as the United Nations.

Emerging from more than two decades of armed
conflict, Afghanistan is well aware of the challenges
associated with post-conflict stabilization efforts.
Almost seven years ago, following the defeat of the
Taliban in December 2001, the Bonn Agreement laid
out the path to political transition in Afghanistan. It
was clear from the outset that the stabilization of
Afghanistan in the post-Taliban period would not be an
easy task nor a smooth transition. As a result of long
wars and foreign occupations, Afghanistan had become
a failed State and a broken society. The reality of the
situation was painted very tellingly today by
Mr. Brahimi.

In fact, about seven years ago, Afghanistan was a
geographical location without a State, a stage for
factional wars imposed by invaders and outsiders, a
safe haven for international terrorism and extremism, a
land where the people lived in constant fear of bandits
and thugs, and a country whose citizens were deprived
of all their rights. In addition, more than half of its
population, being female, could not go to school, work
or even obtain simple medical care.

The collapse of the State led to nation-wide
insecurity. Millions left the country or became
internally displaced, and the social trust had been
eroded. People reverted to traditional forms of mutual
support, such as tribal and ethnic alliances, which led
to increasing societal fragmentation. In a country
where agriculture was the chief engine of the economy,
illicit drugs became the main source of income. The
land began to fuel the war rather than to feed the
people.

Since the Bonn Agreement we have come a long
way, in cooperation with the international community,
in overcoming the enormous challenges of building the
foundation of a new political system aimed at
promoting long-term stability. We have adopted a new
constitution, and, in 2004 and 2005, we held
democratic presidential and parliamentary elections,
which were overwhelmingly supported by all the
people of Afghanistan.

To ensure security, recovery and development, we
embarked on security sector reform, which serves as
the lynchpin of the entire State-building process in the
country. Thanks to the support of our international
partners, our security forces have become stronger and
effective. Our national army has now reached the level
of 76,000 soldiers and has assumed a greater role in the
fight against terrorists seeking to destabilize
Afghanistan and the region.

In February 2006, five years after the Bonn
Agreement, the Afghan Government and the
international community came together in London to
design a new roadmap in order to solidify our
achievements and further empower Afghanistan to
attain sustainable peace and development.

Despite all these remarkable gains, we still face
challenges that pose a threat to our long-term stability.
There are at least four major challenges to peace and
stability in Afghanistan - terrorism, narcotics,
weakness of governance, and poverty. Those
challenges are interlinked, and they are an integral part
of the same threat. In dealing with them, we realize
that effective stabilization efforts in post-conflict
situations require a comprehensive and multifaceted
strategy, encompassing the essential components of
social and economic development, good governance,
human rights and the rule of law, and national
reconciliation. Such an approach demands a proactive
and sustained engagement of the international
community in the process.

From the beginning of the Bonn process in
Afghanistan, the United Nations has played a central
role in bringing the international community together
in order to help Afghanistan's transition from conflict
to peace, stability and democracy. During the last year,
a new momentum was built to reinvigorate the role of
the United Nations in Afghanistan. The appointment of
Mr. Kai Eide, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, was an important and welcome
step.

Today, we have a broad consensus that the United
Nations should focus on its role as lead coordinator,
essential for re-energizing efforts to bring about
stabilization. The success of the United Nations in
delivering its mandate depends on uniting the efforts of
all international actors, including the donor
community, NATO, the European Union, countries of
the region, international financial institutions and
non-governmental organizations, in support of the
Government and the people of Afghanistan in their
struggle for peace, stability and progress. The key
elements for success of the United Nations in its role
entail the full cooperation of all parties in being
coordinated, as well as the mandate, resources and
adequate staff on the ground. That was something
Mr. Brahimi also emphasized today.

The role of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
similar to that in other post-conflict situations, is to
facilitate the stabilization efforts, including supporting
institution-building and acting as a bridge between the
international community and the Government and the
people.

While State-building is a collective effort in post-
conflict countries, national ownership of the process is
the core principle. Given the enabling role of the
international community, it is essential to invest more
in establishing capable and functioning national
institutions. To achieve that, we need to build national
capacity to deal successfully with challenges that arise
during the post-conflict stabilization. As experience
shows, effective State-building is like a spider web, in
that it works best when the web is built by the spiders
themselves.

As we have learned from our experiences, the
success of the international community and a national
Government in the process of recovery from conflict is
closely linked with the effective use of resources and
aid. It is paramount that the aid be need-driven, not
supply-driven. A coordinating strategy should reflect
the principles of aid effectiveness and the successful
delivery of aid aimed at improving the situation of the
country and the people.

In Afghanistan, the enemies of peace and stability
will continue their attempts to disrupt the efforts of the
Government and the people as well as those of our
international partners, efforts that are undertaken to
establish a stable, prosperous and democratic
Afghanistan. We are confident, however, that those
actions will not succeed in interfering with our long-
term goal of building a new Afghanistan. In this fight,
what we need is the continuing commitment of the
international community, time and resources.

I am confident that this debate will help the
international community to join its efforts more than

ever to deal with and address the challenges of post-
conflict stabilization as well as to enhance the
coordinating role of the United Nations.

