Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like first of all to
thank Special Representative Haq for her very
comprehensive and encouraging briefing today. I
would also like to thank the representative of the
Government of Timor-Leste, Ambassador Borges, for
her statement.

Over the past year, we have seen positive
developments in Timor-Leste. The resumption of
policing responsibility has been successfully concluded
in 10 of 13 districts. In the districts where the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) has assumed policing
duties, the situation remains calm and stable.

In this regard, allow me to recall the dedicated
work of the late Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, former
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Security Sector Support and Rule of Law
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT). We are determined to extend the same
level of support to his successor, Mr. Shigeru Mochida,
in carrying out his duties in Timor-Leste at this critical
juncture.

It should be noted that the most difficult phase
still awaits us in completing the resumption process. It
is quite regrettable that there remain many uncertified
police officers in Dili district, which stands as one of
the biggest obstacles to the efforts of the PNTL to
assume primary policing responsibility in Dili. While
reaffirming the importance of the mutually agreed
criteria-based approach to the resumption process,
Japan encourages the Government of Timor-Leste to
address this issue as early as possible.

At the same time, Japan would like to reiterate
the importance of community policing, as referred to in
Council resolution 1912 (2010). Based on our own
experience, we believe that local security is best
sustained through cooperation and trust between the
local populace and police. Adequate logistics and
management capability are indispensable for the police
to work efficiently and effectively. Attention should
also be paid to current gaps in the Mission's activities.
In that regard, Japan plans to take up this issue in its
capacity as chair of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations at its meeting on
22 October, with the participation of various troop-
contributing countries, police-contributing countries
and other stakeholders, such as major financial
contributors and members of the international core
group for Timor-Leste.

It is very gratifying to see that UNMIT enjoys a
reputation as one of the most successful United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Japan is honoured to
have dispatched two officials to Timor-Leste as
military liaison officers in support of UNMIT. Japan
commends the variety of services that UNMIT and the
International Stabilisation Force now provide, which
range from security responsibilities to emergency
helicopter transportation. At the same time, such
services will not be extended indefinitely. It is not too
early to discuss who will provide such services after
UNMIT's scheduled withdrawal in 2012.

In this connection it is encouraging that Ms. Haq
has agreed with the President of Timor-Leste to
establish a high-level forum involving the United
Nations and the Government of Timor-Leste to discuss
at regular intervals plans for the Mission's withdrawal.
Japan will support this forum and is ready to contribute
to the process at any time.

In that respect, Japan considers that discussion of
the next extension of UNMIT's mandate in February
will be of utmost importance. In that connection, we
believe that the Security Council mission to Timor-
Leste planned for the end of November will provide a
good basis, not only for the members of the Council,
but also for UNMIT and the Timor-Leste Government
as well, to consider the Mission's exit strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan's
continued commitment to support post-conflict efforts
in Timor-Leste. Japan has continued to stand by the
Timorese people since the outset of their nation-
building endeavour, and I promise that we will
continue to do so.

