Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): 1 would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Simonovic' for his
extensive briefing. The presence of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in eastern Ukraine and their reporting
from there remain essential. Such missions register and
report facts on the ground, identify the existing gaps in
Government policies and, in the case of the report ofthe
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, offer important recommendations to the
Ukrainian Government. Such recommendations need to
be followed up as the country's leadership undertakes
the comprehensive constitutional and administrative
reforms necessary for the country to recover after years
of corruption and neglect, as well as the impact of the
current crisis.

Those missions register the countless and ongoing
human rights violations by the Russia-supported armed
separatists, who, under the false pretexts of self-
determination and violations of minority rights, have
dealt a blow to the rule of law and human rights in the
region as they persist in their efforts to erode Ukraine's
sovereignty and to destroy its territorial integrity.

As the Assistant Secretary-General has just
mentioned, a reign of fear and terror in the rebel-held
areas prevails. The most recent report also points out
that law and order in the rebel-held areas has collapsed.
The rule of law has in fact been substituted by the rule
of the gun. The details provided by the report reveal
the true nature of the militant separatists and their
imported leaders, whom their main sponsor, Russia,
has sought time and again in the Chamber to portray as
mere peaceful protesters.

The trademark activities ofthose so-called peaceful

protesters, as the report points out, include intimidation,
abductions, illegal detention, torture and ill-treatment,
as well as the deliberate targeting of critical public
utilities, the illegal occupation and seizing of public
and private property, bank robberies and attacks on coal
mines. To date, 104 buildings remain under the control
of those illegal armed groups. Such illegally occupied
public buildings are often used to detain and torture
civil activists, journalists and political opponents.

Armed separatists have seized warehouses and
factories, using the premises as training camps or
military repair shops. Such actions, as well as their
threats and intimidation, have led to the shutdown of
many factories, causing unemployment in the region
to soar. As the Assistant Secretary-General has just
said, the separatists have abducted some 925 people,
the whereabouts of 465 of whom remain unknown.
Just this week, three Red Cross employees were
reportedly kidnapped and are being held in detention
by the armed militants. None of those actions, all of
which are clear and criminal violations of human rights
law, have ever been condemned by Russia, which has
instead repeatedly sought the Council's condemnation
of Ukraine for its legitimate efforts to restore law and
order in the east of the country.

In the past two weeks, there have been new
reports - the Assistant Secretary-General has spoken
extensively in that regard - about the situation of
journalists and the media. More journalists have
gone missing or were harassed in eastern Ukraine.
Journalists attempting to report on the crash of Flight
MH-17, including representatives of Dagens Nyheter,
the BBC, the Daily Beast, Nieuwsuur, Time and Russia
Today, were detained and harassed by armed gangs.

As of 15 July, 13,381 people have moved from
Crimea and a new wave of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) is expected during the year, in addition to the
already large numbers of IDPs. The harassment and
discrimination against ethnic Ukrainians, Crimean
Tatars and representatives of religious and other
minorities continue. Restrictions on movement and
the right to peaceful assembly continue. The Crimean
Tatar leaders Mustafa Dzhemilev and Refat Chubarov
have been barred from entering their homeland by the
Russian occupying authorities.

The written records of execution orders,
authorized and signed personally by the so-called
commander-in-chief of the illegal Donetsk People's
Republic, Igor Girkin, also known as Strelkov, and
of the hearings of self-proclaimed military tribunals
convicting people to death have been found in
Slovyansk. An illegal militant group, representing no
one but itself and headed by foreign passport holders,
whose sole authority on the ground stems from the guns
that they carry, grants itself the authority to assign and
execute extrajudiciary death sentences on an illegally
occupied territory. The mass graves discovered recently
in areas liberated by the Ukrainian forces are a tragic
testimony to the degree of lawlessness that marks the
insurgent actions.

As the Assistant Secretary-General has just
testified, the armed insurgents are increasingly better
armed and use heavy weaponry, including mortars,
anti-aircraft guns, tanks and armoured vehicles. They
continue to shoot down helicopters and planes, even at
high altitudes, including the downing this week of a
Ukrainian military plane and transport helicopter.

Sources on the ground indicate the tendency of
the past days that whenever Ukrainian troops deploy
sufficient power to pose a threat to the militants and are
in a position to launch strikes against their positions,
the illegal armed groups redeploy to a nearby town,
exposing civilian populations to the threat of combat
and forcing them to flee, as they install their armed
vehicles, artillery and Grad rocket launchers in
residential areas.

The Government's efforts to establish a ceasefire
or humanitarian corridors have been repeatedly
violated by the insurgents. While Russia is quick to
blame the Ukrainian authorities, we are yet to hear a
single condemnation by Russia of the reckless acts by
the insurgents, including around the crash site of the
Malaysian civilian airliner. We fully agree with the
Assistant Secretary-General about the importance of a
thorough and independent investigation into the crash
and the need to bring those responsible to account.

The reports of the OSCE monitoring mission
have affirmed the facts with regard to the movement
of armed individuals across the Russian border into
Ukraine and back. Instead of closing its borders to
such illegal movements of mercenaries and weapons,
Russia continues to carry out war games at Ukraine's
eastern border. Alarmingly large numbers of combat-
ready troops and armaments are once again amassed
on Ukraine's borders. Defence Minister Shoigu's latest
statements on the combat readiness of so-called Russian
peacekeepers are also highly alarming and once again
raise serious questions about Russia's true intentions in
the region.

No less troubling is Russia's ongoing escalation
of Cold War rhetoric against Europe and the West,
now extended into sanctioning food imports, which
will undoubtedly affect the Russian population
itself. All those actions are the exact opposite to the
confidence-building and de-escalation that are so badly
needed, for which the international community has
called repeatedly. While we are seriously concerned
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
east of Ukraine and the civilian suffering - again, the
Assistant Secretary-General has spoken extensively
about that - we must be very clear. The key to ending
the suffering is in the hands of Russia and hinges on its
continued support to illegal separatist groups.

