At the outset, I would like to thank France for convening today's meeting on refugees, which is timely, as we will be observing World Refugee Day this coming Saturday, 20 June. This year's World Refugee Day comes at a time when the number of displaced people around the world is considered to be at its highest ever and against the backdrop of negative socioeconomic changes. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has underscored the need for a more inclusive and equitable world. I would also like to thank Mr. Filippo Grandi for his enlightening briefing. South Africa commends the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in pursuing its mandate of refugee protection and promoting refugee inclusion amid difficult conditions. The drivers that result in forced displacement include violent conflicts, human rights violations and persecution, natural disasters, humanitarian risks and climate change. These drivers have been compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. Indeed, we are deeply concerned about the additional risks imposed by COVID-19 on refugees, internally displaced persons and migrants, all of whom are already living in difficult conditions and are often lacking access to essential facilities and services. Addressing the structural drivers of conflict requires long-term strategies, joint partnerships and ownership. The role of States in pursuing political solutions and preventive diplomacy remains paramount. We concur with the observation that the magnitude of the current figures presented by UNHCR indicates that the world needs a concrete solution if this high number of refugees and displaced persons, which we are witnessing for the first time in history, is to be addressed. In this regard, I wish to highlight the following. First, the African continent is one of the regions affected by massive forced displacements and hosts more than a third of the world's displaced population. The African Union has redoubled its efforts to address this phenomenon. The Global Compact on Refugees and the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration underscore the recent global shift towards putting topics relating to refugees, asylum seekers, internally displaced persons and migration at the centre of the global policy discourse. In order to fulfil the aspirations of Agenda 2063, the African Union Assembly adopted the Common African Position on Humanitarian Effectiveness, which articulates Africa's new humanitarian architecture, with a view to addressing the root causes of the problems and achieving durable solutions. Secondly, on global action to address the needs of refugees, we agree with the sentiments expressed in the Global Compact on Refugees insofar as they relate to averting and resolving large refugee situations. This requires early efforts aimed at addressing the drivers and triggers of refugee crises, as well as improved cooperation among human rights, political, humanitarian and development actors, as well as measures that promote conflict prevention and peacebuilding through mediation. We welcome the first Global Refugee Forum (GRF), which took place in December 2019, enhanced international cooperation and solidarity and galvanized support for equitable and predictable burden- and responsibility-sharing in refugee situations. South Africa made concrete pledges at the Forum that will ensure enhanced protection for refugees in our country. Thirdly, we believe that the achievement of peace on the African continent is a prerequisite for sustainable solutions on forced displacement. In this regard, South Africa has dedicated itself to making progress on this crucial aspiration. In collaboration with the African Union, we have made strides towards preventing and ending conflicts through our involvement in high-level political mediation and reconciliation efforts, as well as contributing to peacekeeping and peacemaking missions on the African continent. The fact that 75 per cent of the new African Union Peace Fund will be used to support mediation and preventive diplomacy is indicative of the growing recognition by the African Union of the importance of political solutions to Africa's conflicts. Fourthly, it is important that host countries, with the collaboration of UNHCR, promote, facilitate and coordinate the voluntary repatriation of the displaced to their homes or places of habitual residence in safety and dignity. Repatriation must take into consideration specific contexts and cultural dimensions, and it must not be the result of a false choice between undignified displacement and undignified return. Furthermore, it is important that repatriation must not lead to further internal displacement once people return. We would like to emphasize that displaced persons must be involved in every stage of the repatriation process. In conclusion, South Africa specifically commends those African countries that opened their borders to accommodate refugees regardless of their resource constraints, and calls on the international community to deliver on its commitment to burden- and responsibility-sharing. We further commend those countries across the globe that continue to accept refugees in need of resettlement. In this context, I wish to underscore that regional and international collaboration and partnership are vital.
