Mr. Mendonea e Moura (Portugal): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this very timely and relevant open
debate. It is with great satisfaction that I note the
increasing number of Security Council meetings and
respective outcomes on the important topic of peace
and security in Africa, which is of concern to us all.

My statement is aligned with the one delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU),
but I would like to add some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

The growing number of challenges that the African
continentfaces-fromsecuritytodevelopment-should
be addressed through international cooperation, while
respecting both national and regional ownership. In
addition to a number of demographic challenges - such
as the large and increasing number of young people,
who are often unemployed, and a staggering number
of internally displaced people and refugees - the fact
is that the instability in Africa is being fuelled by a
variety of complex factors, such as terrorism and the
proliferation of violent extremism, piracy, economic
hardship, social and food insecurity and political
unpredictabability. Those are threats to international
peace and security, thereby requiring a strong and
coordinated response at all levels whereby the intrinsic
and mutually reinforcing relationship between peace
and security and sustainable development must be
borne in mind. Tackling those issues is as important for
Africa's prosperity as it is for the its security.

In that regard, we believe that it is crucial to
effectively support the work of the African Union and
the regional economic communities alongside efforts
at the national and the community levels. Moreover, it
is necessary to contemplate new cooperation dynamics
between the African Union and the United Nations, as
well as with other relevant partners. We welcome the
steps already taken in that direction, as exemplified
most recently by resolution 2320 (2016) and the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in
April. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the personal engagement of Secretary-General Guterres
in that pursuit.

Portugal is deeply committed to the promotion
of peace and security in Africa and, in that regard,
to working closely with the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional organizations. We are
currently participating in the peacekeeping operations
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. At the EU level, we
are also engaged in the important areas of training
and capacitating, namely, in the European Union
training missions in Somalia, Mali and the Central
African Republic, and in the European Union capacity-
building missions in Mali and the Niger. We are firmly
committed to continuing to do so.

While it is paramount that the African Union
carries on with its efforts in capacity-building in the
areas of peace and security, we must acknowledge that
the current level of international support for African-
led multinational peace and security programmes is
not enough. The way forward will have to involve the
diversification of funding. We believe that positive
steps in that direction include the establishment of the
African Peace Fund and Mr. Kaberuka's report, as well
as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/454) on
options for authorizing and supporting African Union
peace and support operations. Any new financing
models should be predictable and sustainable, thereby
ensuring lasting funds for the foreseeable future. At the
same time, we need to ensure that any such financing
solutions do not have a negative impact on any other
key areas, such as financing African development.

Conflict prevention and sustaining peace must
remain the key priorities. While sparing no effort in
addressing the multidimensional challenges with
regard to peace and security that the African continent
faces, there should be a determined commitment to an
integrated and systemic approach to long-lasting peace.
The international community should focus on helping
develop strong and sustainable national and local
institutions, and cementing democracy, the rule of law,
respect for human rights and security for its citizens. It
is therefore essential that Africa remains a top priority
at the United Nations, namely, here in the Security
Council. African security and prosperity is essential
both for Africans and the whole world.

Lastly, I should like to add a personal note by
saying that I am very happy to be able to mark my final
intervention in the Security Council with a statement on
Africa, as it is very close to my country and own heart.

