Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
convening this open debate on a very important issue
for Colombia as a member of the Group of Friends
of Mediation. I take this opportunity to thank the
Ambassador of Turkey, who spoke on behalf of
the Group.

The contributions of your country, Mr. President,
and of the Security Council to the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which ended a five decade-long conflict in
Colombia, as well as to its implementation through the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, is a
clear demonstration of the value of multilateralism in
conflict resolution. This is a topic of utmost importance
this morning.

I thank the Archbishop of Canterbury for his
comments, as well as Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for hers.
The examples cited have been most valuable in taking
us straight to the heart of the debate.

As several members of the Council and Member
States alike have reiterated, over the past decade
the notion of mediation has been strengthened as a
indispensable mechanism in conflict resolution. That
is certainly reflected in the leadership of the Secretary-
General, which has overseen the implementation of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
establishment of the High-Level Advisory Board on
Mediation. It has been very important for us to witness
the collective vision embraced by the integration of the
Board on Mediation and the approval by the General
Assembly and Member States of the reform of the
Organization. All these efforts have made it possible to
promote the prevention of conflict as part of diplomacy
for peace.

In the concept note presented (S/2018/586, annex),
the importance of improving mediation capacities is
highlighted not only at the local and national levels, but
of course at the regional level. Here, I would like to
focus on how essential role of regional organizations,
especially in the case of the Colombian conflict. As in
the case ofour own agreement, this critical connection to
regional organizations allowed us to retain our national
ownership and inclusive approacht. We underscore the
contributions of neighbouring States, observers and
the Organization of American States, in highlighting
the value of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations to mediation efforts and to strengthening
coordinated work between the United Nations and
regional organizations. Such efforts certainly extended
the possibilities for the success we have enjoyed to
date and which will surely continue to be crucial in the
long journey ahead towards the implementation of the
peace agreement.

AsmanyCouncilmembershavealreadyhighlighted,
we reiterate that the participation of women must be
central to and are key in the resolution of conflicts.
It is not an option; it is a decision. As Ms. Qadeem
mentioned, conflicts are hugely diverse, from Nepal
to Colombia. Regardless of the type of conflict,
women must be present prior to, during and - above
all - after the negotiations in the implementation
phase of an agreement.

No matter the type of conflict, be it in Africa
or America, it has been proven that when women
participate, the likelihood ofpeace being lasting, stable
and sustainable automatically increases. We are on
the right path, even if it is not an entirely satisfactory
one, and the Council should apply the notion of
mediation in the quest for more holistic approaches to
conflict resolution.

