Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On Sunday
15 January, more than 70 countries and international
organizations met in Paris to speak as one for the
revival of the Middle East peace process. On behalf of
the President of the Republic, Mr. Francois Hollande,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc
Ayrault, I would like to reiterate France's gratitude
to all partners who participated in that meeting and
contributed their ideas to and encouraged a process that
was initiated by French officials nearly a year ago. That
same process, which was marked by the international
conferences held on 3 June and 15 January, had three
main goals that are reflected in the joint communique
adopted in Paris this past Sunday.

The first goal was to urgently reinsert the Arab-
Israeli conflict into the list of the international
community's top priorities. Failure to settle the Arab-
Israeli conflict poses a permanent threat to international
security. It is true that the Arab-Israeli conflict has
not been the most deadly conflict in the Middle East
in recent years, but the elements that have already led
to three wars over the course six years continue to be
present today and could, at any moment, lead once
again to a flare up either in Jerusalem, Gaza or the
West Bank. Owing to its highly symbolic importance,
the conflict, which has remained unresolved for more
than 70 years, amply extends beyond Israeli borders
and Palestinian territories, and every escalation carries
a risk ofuncontrollable regional destabilization. That is
why we cannot accept the status quo - a euphemism
that, in reality, underlies the daily deterioration of the
situation on the ground and in attitudes.

The second goal of the French-led process was
aimed at reaffirming a common understanding of the key
component, namely the commitment to the two-State
solution that is inextricably linked to the condemnation
of settlement policy and the unequivocal condemnation
of terrorism and Violence. The reaffirmation of the
preeminence of the two-State solution is at the heart
of the joint statement made on 15 January and is
more than ever our unique common goal. It is all the
more important and urgent to reaffirm that common
priority as the realization of the two-State solution is
increasingly faced with the threat of disappearing like
a mirage in the desert, while no credible alternative
exists that can satisfy the aspirations of the two parties.
Let us not forget that the best guarantee for Israel's
security - to which, as everyone knows, France is
committed - is a just peace with the Palestinians
through the establishment of a Viable and independent
Palestinian State and, therefore, the two-State solution.

In that context, the Paris joint declaration recalls the
fundamental principles to which we are all beholden:
an international framework for all future agreements,
the pre-1967 borders and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The preservation of the two-State solution
is also the goal of resolution 2334 (2016), which is
an important resolution that the ongoing advances in
settlement policy have made urgent and necessary.

The third objective of our initiative was to take
a positive and encouraging approach towards the
resumption of talks. To that end, we have engaged with
all the concerned steak holders to work meaningfully
together towards defining positive incentives with all
our voluntary partners. I thank in particular Sweden,
Germany, Norway and the European Commission
for their tireless commitment in that regard. Those
incentives are based on three main aspects: first, an
economic component, including a special privileged
partnership with the European Union and the enhanced
participation of the private sector, which is absolutely
key; secondly, building the institutional and State
capacities of the Palestinian side; and thirdly the
rapprochement ofIsraeli and Palestinian civil societies,
in order to improve necessary dialogue between the
parties, to revive the public debate and to bring together
two societies that are destined to coexist. The goal of
those incentives is to remind the parties the extent of
their interest in obtaining peace and to what degree the
international community can and wants to help them to
that end.

The joint declaration of the Conference of
15 January is the result of long-term effort and great
collective mobilization. It has benefited from the
efforts of all parties, including the Quartet, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the initiatives of Russia and Egypt
and the essential role of the United States. There has
been complete transparency towards all of the parties.
Therefore, the parties must show their commitment to
the two-State solution through specific action on the
ground.

As has been stated time and again by the French
authorities, it has never been a question of dictating
the terms of the peace agreement. Only direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine can lead to
peace. Nonetheless, the international community has
an irreplaceable role to play in creating, by means
of guarantees and encouragement, an appropriate
framework and favourable conditions for negotiations to
start once again. That is the thinking behind the French
initiative and the Paris conference, which is a friendly
hand held out to the parties. In that context, the joint
declaration of 15 January is not the end of the road. It
is a necessary and important step towards relaunching
the peace process. The situation on the ground demands
that we remain more than ever active in helping the
parties move quickly towards a settlement.

The heinous attack on Jerusalem on 8 January,
which cost the lives of four young Israeli soldiers
and which France strongly condemned, shows us the
extent to which the situation on the ground remains
precarious. As the joint communique of Paris states,
we must demonstrate a spirit of responsibility and
vigilance, and must avoid any unilateral act because
that would only further exacerbate the situation on the
ground in Jerusalem and elsewhere.

We must remain active with a View to resuming
negotiations and that is why the participants in the Paris
conference have committed to meet again during the year
to review the progress being made and to move forward.
The objective is to re-establish a positive political
dynamic founded on the two-State solution, which is

the only way to respond to the legitimate aspirations of
both parties and to ensure that Palestinians and Israelis
are able to live side by side in peace and security. We
call for the unswerving commitment of all our partners,
in particular the members of the Security Council, in
order to press on together along this rocky road.

Let us take on together the historic responsibility
that falls to us in the service of peace in the Middle
East.

