President Silajdzic': I would like to thank you,
President Gfil, and the delegation of the Republic of
Turkey for convening this high-level meeting in order
to make a strategic review of the Security Council's
growing role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his excellent presentation. I sincerely hope that the
outcome of our meeting today will serve as a useful
tool for future Security Council deliberations.

The primary role of the Security Council under
the United Nations Charter is to maintain international
peace and security. We should live up to expectations
and send a unanimous message today that we commit
ourselves to developing the means to fulfil this
responsibility.

Coming from the perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I cannot stress enough how crucial it is
that the lessons learned in the past are applied
appropriately. The Security Council has erred in the
past, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is the most
illustrative example of that in modern history. By
imposing and maintaining the arms embargo on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Security Council added to the
overwhelming military advantage of Milosevie's
regime, which intended to expand his country's
territories, at the expense of the surrounding States,
through genocide and ethnic cleansing, regardless of
human cost.

As a result, according to the data from the
International Committee of the Red Cross, 200,000
people were killed, 12,000 of them children, up to
50,000 women were raped, and 2.2 million were forced
to flee their homes. May I also remind the Council that
1,350,000 citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina still live
outside the country as a consequence.

At the time, some powerful members of this
Council justified that course by arguing that the lifting
of the embargo would add oil to the fire. The result was
that the fire was essentially quelled with the blood of
the innocent.

And then the horrors culminated in the genocide
that was committed in Srebrenica in July 1995. In fact,
the Secretary-General's report on Srebrenica from 1999
unequivocally admitted:

"Through error, misjudgement and an inability to
recognize the scope of the evil confronting us, we

failed to do our part to help save the people of
Srebrenica from the Serb campaign of mass
murder Srebrenica crystallised a truth
understood only too late by the United Nations
and the world at large: that Bosnia was as much a
moral cause as a military conflict. The tragedy of
Srebrenica will haunt our history forever."
(A/54/549, para. 503)

We cannot bring back the dead, but we can give
dignity and justice to the survivors. What we say today
is not aimed at the past, but at the future. We owe it not
only to the Victims and survivors, but to our own
common humanity. The message that the Security
Council sends to the would-be perpetrators of crimes in
the name of twisted ideologies must be crystal clear:
"your crimes will not pay off".

The errors that were made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have hardly been corrected. To the
contrary, the peace and security established by the
Dayton Agreement and the progress made in many
fields are now destabilized by open calls for secession
of one part of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
destabilizing rhetoric was preceded by the testing of
the international community's patience for the last
15 years. Inadequate responses to the constant blocking
of State institutions, return of refugees and provocative
rhetoric have been tolerated long enough for the
perpetrators to believe that the time has come to turn
the territories where they committed atrocities, ethnic
cleansing and genocide into their own fiefdom. That is
a threat not only to the peace, security and stability in
which the international community invested so much,
but also a test of the international community's resolve
to prevent the escalation and the opening of fresh
wounds in my country.

It would be a repetition of the mistake to dismiss
open calls for changing international borders as
election campaign rhetoric. Our ability to prevent is
tested once more. As President John F. Kennedy once
rightly said, "an error does not become a mistake until
you refuse to correct it".

I would also like to say a few words about post-
conflict peacebuilding operations. Although all
relevant national and international actors should be
involved in the process, we consider the political will
of the host country and national ownership to be sine
qua non conditions for the success of peacebuilding
operations. The peacebuilding process is primarily the
national responsibility of post-conflict countries.

Promotion of dialogue between the parties to a
conflict, particularly between decision makers and civil
society, is critical for national institutions' capacity-
and confidence-building and for the reconciliation
process. Holding all those who committed crimes
accountable and bringing them to justice is of crucial
importance to the reconciliation process.

Another unpleasant reminder is in order here:
Ratko Mladic', the chief executioner of the genocide in
Srebrenica, is still at large. That does not bode well for
prevention and our credibility.

Peacebuilding operations should be based on an
integrated approach that includes establishment of
good governance, rule of law, promotion of human
rights, institution-building, security sector reform,
economic reconstruction and development, and full
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons. Furthermore, the role of women and their
involvement in peacebuilding efforts should be
strengthened in post-conflict societies.

In our increasingly interconnected world, the
issues of peace and security are inseparable. New
threats and challenges emerge on a daily basis. N0
country can isolate itself from them or tackle them
individually. The Security Council therefore must be
prepared to deal with challenges in a coherent,
comprehensive and just way. The Security Council
must meet the expectations and fulfil the hopes of
millions of those in need throughout the world. They
expect nothing less from us.

