Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your decision to convene a discussion
on this subject. The subject is timely. We are once again
on the verge of significantly increasing the deployment of
United Nations and associated personnel, and once again

 

in more difficult situations. All these decisions to deploy
will be made by the United Nations Security Council and
not by any other body. Hence, the Council has to bear
primary responsibility for the safety and well-being -
indeed, the lives - of the United Nations personnel that it
will be deploying in the field.

The Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel was adopted in 1994 by the General
Assembly. By then, more than 1,000 United Nations
peacekeepers had already been killed in the line of duty
since 1948. Despite the entry into force of the Convention,
the attacks on United Nations and associated personnel have
continued unabated, resulting in the loss of many more
lives. United Nations and associated personnel have also
frequently been the targets of kidnappings, detentions,
assaults and harassment.

Some familiar examples of late include the downing
of two United Nations-chartered aircraft over Angola in
December 1998 and January 1999, in which 23 people
working for or with the United Nations lost their lives; the
brutal killing of Luis Zfifiiga and Saskia von Meijenfeldt in
a road ambush in Burundi in October last year; and the
detention of an official of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for about 11 months in
1998 by armed elements in a republic of the Russian
Federation. In August 1999, a group of United Nations
military observers, civilian personnel and peacekeepers of
the Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) were held hostage by rebels
for about a week in Sierra Leone. Last year, United Nations
personnel in East Timor were threatened and harassed. We
should also not forget the dramatic scenes of Dutch
peacekeepers being captured, handcuffed and held hostage
by Serbian units. Even as we speak today, we have also
been told that the whereabouts of some 50 United Nations
staffers around the world are still unknown.

This is totally unacceptable. United Nations and
associated personnel who serve as peacekeepers and who
render humanitarian assistance in dangerous missions in
various conflict zones fulfil a crucial duty on behalf of the
international community. They put their lives at risk in
order that others may live and that peace may be
maintained. In return, the international community, acting
as a whole, has a Vital obligation to ensure that these
people be adequately protected. The Security Council bears
the main burden of this obligation.

Slowly but steadily, we are moving towards a more
civilized world order. Various conventions, formal and
informal, have been created to protect innocent persons in
conflicts. As we do this, the international norms for the
protection of United Nations and associated personnel, as
well as humanitarian personnel, should move in tandem.
We should insist on the full and effective implementation
of the relevant principles and rules of international
humanitarian law related to the safety and security of
such personnel. We should also make every effort to
continually strengthen the international rule of law for the
protection of United Nations and associated personnel in
conflict zones. We must bear in mind - as you have
mentioned, Sir - that some of those lives being put at
risk are volunteers, such as the White Helmets.

To achieve such security for United Nations and
associated personnel, all those responsible for harming
them should be fully punished. In a statement made on
14 October 1999, the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations, Ms. Louise Frechette, told United Nations
Member States to bear primary responsibility for ensuring
the security of United Nations staff and mentioned some
concrete measures that Member States can take:

"First, they can conduct vigorous investigations
into all such killings and incidents, prosecuting
those responsible to the full extent of the law. To
our knowledge, only one person has ever been
found guilty and has been imprisoned for killing or
causing the death of a United Nations staff
member. This impunity cannot be allowed to
stand." (A/54/PV.34, p. 3)

To protect United Nations, associated and
humanitarian personnel, it is clear that each of us - the
Security Council, the Secretariat and its agencies and we,
the States Members of the United Nations - will have to
bear some responsibility. Unless we all work together, we
will not solve the problem.

Primary responsibility, as we said earlier, lies with
the Security Council. Before launching any operation, it
must factor in the safety and security of the personnel
involved. Some risks are inevitable, but the risks should
be carefully weighed and assessed. It is also the
responsibility of the Security Council to ensure that there
be a match between the mandate and the resources
approved for each and every mission. From the beginning
to the end of each operation, the Security Council must
monitor the safety of the operation.

Equally important, the Security Council must be
accountable if any operation goes wrong. Symbolically, it

 

was only appropriate that the Security Council despatched
a mission, comprising five permanent representatives and
ably led by Ambassador Martin Andjaba, when the situation
in East Timor deteriorated. At that stage, the staff and
occupants of the United Nations compound in Dili were
also being threatened by rogue militia. The Security
Council should analyse what went wrong and why.
Accountability is an essential aspect of leadership. The
Security Council should accept this.

Similarly, the Secretariat should ensure that safety
and security are fully taken into account when United
Nations operations are planned and launched. The
development of a comprehensive security plan for a
peacekeeping and/or humanitarian operation is essential
before any such operation commences. The plan should also
cover contingencies. Without a comprehensive security
plan, we may see a repeat of the unfortunate episodes we
have witnessed.

Finally, the Member States have an equally important
role to play. Our words and deeds create the overall
political climate in which United Nations missions operate.
All those who withhold their regular funding to the United
Nations should realize that their actions have real
consequences - they endanger the lives of men and
women in the field. At the same time, to prove their
commitment to ensuring the safety of United Nations and
associated personnel, all United Nations States should
accede to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel. Singapore was the fifth country
to accede to the Convention in 1996. So far, only 29 States
have ratified or acceded to it. Clearly, more need to do so.
We hope that this discussion today will trigger more into
action.

