Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for having convened this debate
and for the able manner in which you have been
guiding the Council during this month of May. As you
have only recently come to the United Nations and to
the Council, assuming the presidency of the latter, your
task is not an easy one. However, given your
background and experience, we are certain that you
will be successful in your task, both for the United
States and for the strengthening of multilateralism,
which is of such importance to our Organization.

Secondly, I should like to congratulate
Ambassador Javier Ruperez, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), who
is leaving us. We wish to commend him and to tell him
how much - as Argentines and personally in our
Mission - we appreciate the work he has done in
recent years.

Finally, we should like also to thank Ambassadors
Arias and Burian and my predecessor, Ambassador
Verbeke, for their respective briefings today in their
capacity as Chairpersons of the counter-terrorism
committees. We deem such briefings to be very helpful
not only to the members of the Council but also to the
members of the General Assembly, as it enables them
to express their opinions and interact with the Council.

On the subject of terrorism, it is regrettable to see
that, in recent months, the situation at the international
level has not improved. There has been a notable
increase in terrorist attacks and activities. Beyond the
Committees' meetings and documents, every day we
see horrors reported by the media: suicide attacks,
indiscriminate attacks on civilians, kidnappings and
murders, which continue to occur and indeed are
increasing in number and spreading. Now they not only
occur in Palestine, in Israel or in the Middle East, but
are spreading to Africa and Afghanistan. We wish to
state here that terrorist attacks have recently reached
the capital of my country, Buenos Aires. Unfortunately,
it has not yet been possible to arrest the terrorists who
perpetrated the AMIA attacks in Buenos Aires. This is
a daily tragedy which, unfortunately, no longer moves
us, and that is truly regrettable.
There is a need to adopt measures and policies to
address the conditions leading to the spread of
terrorism, as was stated last year by the General
Assembly when it adopted the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in particular in cases of
prolonged and unresolved conflict. A peaceful solution
to the Middle East conflict is, as we all know, a key
priority for reducing the number of terrorist acts that
occur daily in that region and which, regrettably, are
spilling over to other areas.

Day by day it becomes ever more apparent that
military means cannot be the only response to
terrorism. States must have at their disposal the
necessary and effective security and intelligence
structures to prevent attacks before they take place.
Terrorism is a crime, or a group of crimes, that must be
dealt with in the context of criminal law, with effective
judicial systems, with the necessary resources and with
guarantees of due process. We believe that the current
trial in Spain of those responsible for the tragic attacks
of 11 March 2005 is a clear example of a best practice
that should be followed.

Daily we witness human rights violations that are
painful to see: prolonged detention without charges,
allegations of torture, clandestine transfers of
individuals without trial. Not only are all of these
actions morally reprehensible; they also generate
greater hate and intolerance, increasing the likelihood
of terrorist recruitment.

These requirements must be taken into
consideration in the daily activities of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED). The effective
strengthening of security and judicial systems is
essential. Moreover, in most developing countries there
is a need for close cooperation, technical assistance
and financial resources, such as what was agreed on at
the symposium held recently in Vienna, which was
organized by the Government of Austria and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-
Qaida and the Taliban, we believe that it is still too
early to comment on its current functioning so soon
after the Council's adoption, last December, of
resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006). As Chairman
of the Committee at that time and as a participant, I
witnessed first-hand the difficulties of negotiating both

resolutions and the revised guidelines. Nevertheless,
we join those Governments that are calling upon the
Committee to launch new negotiations on a review
mechanism in accordance with the principle of due
process, as proposed by a number of countries and as
set forth by the Secretary-General and the
Organization's Legal Counsel.

The characterization of a sanctions committee
and the criteria for decision-making as "political" must
not absolve the Security Council of having to comply
with the law when making decisions concerning the
freedom or property of individuals. We wish to
reiterate once again that the fight against terrorism
must be carried out with legal mechanisms based on
international criminal law and its basic principles. Let
us recall that these are ius cogens norms of
international law, and thus we cannot set them aside.

In our View, adequate financial resources must be
provided to the secretariat and the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team. In particular, regional
and subregional meetings among heads of intelligence
and security must continue. The relations between the
Committee and Member States should also be
enhanced, particularly with regard to providing
identifying information concerning individuals and
entities on the list, when required. Resolution 1735
(2006) has been a step forward in that regard, and we
hope that the Committee will address the unfinished
tasks set out in resolution 1452 (2002).

I should now like to refer briefly to the difficult
situation in Afghanistan. The Committee and States
must heed the call to include on the list the names of
persons involved in drug trafficking activities that
finance Taliban terrorism. Likewise, the Committee
should decide, on the basis of political criteria, whether
to exclude Taliban officials of regional governments
that should be delisted. We consider untenable the
paradox whereby persons who should be on the list are
not included, whereas persons who should not be on it
are included. We call on States to submit new names
for the consolidated list, both Taliban and Al-Qaida
members.

Let us recall that the objective of the sanctions
Committee is to prevent terrorist attacks. This year,
during which terrorism has increased, there have been
no new additions. That is truly striking. In that
connection, during our chairmanship of the 1267
Committee, we stated that it would be a good idea to
separate the list into two: one for Al-Qaida members
and the other for Taliban. That would result in greater
effectiveness for the Committee and would be
politically helpful in resolving the problem in
Afghanistan.

Furthermore, we call on the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the 1267 Committee to address,
through concrete measures, the use of the Internet by
terrorist groups. We also call for greater cooperation
with banks and the financial sector. That appeal is
aimed particularly at those countries that benefit from
the money deposited in banks and the financial sector.
The work of the committees must produce concrete
results that have real impact on the ground.

My delegation wishes to refer briefly to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its efforts within the framework of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006). Argentina
emphasizes once again that international cooperation
regarding the non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons, their means of delivery and
related material is key to the attainment of the Security
Council's objectives and to the fight against the threats
to international peace and security posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
international terrorism. We also believe that specific
non-proliferation activities must be accompanied by
concrete and truly feasible disarmament commitments
on the part of all members of the international
community.

Argentina wishes to reaffirm its support for the
work of the 1540 Committee, recalling that
resolution 1673 (2006) decided that the Committee
should intensify its efforts through a work programme
which should include the compilation of information,
outreach, dialogue, assistance and cooperation. In that
context, it is particularly appropriate to adopt measures
in the areas of accountability, physical protection,
border control and law enforcement, as well as national
export and trans-shipment controls, including controls
on providing funds and services.

In reaffirming my country's commitment to the
fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
material, as well as to the fight against international
terrorism, I wish to welcome the contribution being
made in that regard by the expert Gunterio Heineken
and to highlight the appointment of Ana Maria Cerini
to the group of experts assisting the 1540 Committee.

Finally, we urge the Council to increase its
cooperation with the General Assembly in the fight
against terrorism. We are convinced that it is only
through a joint multilateral - I repeat, multilateral -
effort that we will be able to defeat the enemies of
civilization in a spirit of unity and collective
commitment.

