The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

We would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed;
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. O'Brien; and
the Regional Director of the World Food Programme,
Mr. Hadi, for their briefings.
We are surprised that what is taking place in Yemen
has not resulted in a frenzy in the mass media, or indeed
in the Security Council. Oddly, it is not being covered
at the same level as the Syrian problem. We must stress
that the scale of the humanitarian situation in that
country on a number of parameters is even worse than
that in Syria and can only be qualified as catastrophic.
Fully four fifths of the 26 million people in Yemen
require urgent humanitarian assistance. The country
has more than 3 million internally displaced people.
Approximately 14 million people are experiencing food
shortages, and the infrastructure essential for daily
life - medical, educational and other needs - are in
ruins. Under the pretext of preventing violations of an
arms embargo, there has been a ground, air and sea
blockade of Yemen, which impacts first and foremost
the peaceful population. There is now an acute lack of
food, medicine and other basic necessities.

We would not want to exploit the issue of civilian
losses, including from air strikes; however, it is
impossible not to mention the cynical double standards
that we are encountering. It is known, for example,
that the United Kingdom has been one of the major
suppliers of various kinds of weaponry in the region,
which are then used against the Yemenis. Since March
2015, according The Guardian and The Independent,
London has sold more than £3 billion, or $5 billion, in
weapons into the region. That is not a small amount of
money to be made from war. Those weapons also result
in the loss of civilian lives.

The question then arises: How can a country with
a clear material interest in extending the military
conflict be a penholder for the Yemen file in the
Security Council? Let us take the most recent draft
press statement prepared by the so-called penholder.
It was not simply broadly general, but it was openly
weak in its discussion of an air strike, which, according
to the information cited, was made against a funeral
procession in Sana'a on 8 October. It was not stated who
made the strike, even though the coalition has already
accepted the responsibility. There was not a call for
an investigation to punish those responsible. We were
not in a position to support that draft, considering that,
given the atrocities committed, the toothless text would
have been an insult for the Yemenis.

After that, the delegation of the United Kingdom
announced they were preparing a draft resolution
on Yemen, which has not yet seen the light of day. It
would be interesting to know whether such a draft
resolution will contain a provision establishing a no-fly
zone over Sana'a, which, even before the tragedy at
the funeral, was subjected to random strikes on more
than one occasion. I think the time has come to review
the penholdership on Yemen. We have new members
preparing to become members of the Council in 2017,
and we think that they could take upon themselves the
responsible and objective penholding of the Yemen file
in the Security Council.

Let me return to the situation in the country.
Despite the ceasefire announced by the Special
Envoy, it is being violated on both sides. The first
violations came just several hours after the statement
made by Ismail Ahmed. We hope to see the road map
on settling the Yemen crisis prepared by the Special
Envoy. We have heard a lot about that, but given that
we understand that it does not exist on paper, it is not
yet possible to evaluate it adequately. We think that it
should concern moving simultaneously on political and
military tracks, including a Government of national
unity with the Houthis. What is important is to ensure
that the parties return to the negotiating table to discuss
the details. That is because the devil is in the details.
That is, if both countries agree on the principles of an
approach - although now there is information that one
of the parties, namely, President Hadi Mansour, has
already rejected the plan - then we will have a number
of accompanying issues that will need to be worked
through and agreed upon.

In particular, the road map, as far as we understand,
does not talk about the withdrawal of coalition troops
from Yemen or stopping air strikes against the territory
of the country. Without that assurance, implementing
any kind of agreement would be more than problematic.
In turn, we would like to say that we support any and
all agreements that are consensual in nature and with
which all political forces in Yemen can agree. We will
work actively with all parties to the conflict. The main
goal is to ensure that there is a sustainable ceasefire.
That is a must, both from the humanitarian and the
anti-terrorist viewpoints, as well as to strengthen the
parties' confidence in order to ensure that there can be a
comprehensive agreement on how to settle the conflict.

Unfortunately, the clear winner in the Yemeni
conflict is still the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and other terrorist
and extremist groups that control whole regions in the
south and east of the country. From experience in Syria,
we know that we need to combat the fighters now,
without putting it off for later. The earlier all political
forces in Yemen pool their efforts to counter the threat
of terrorists, the fewer the chances for radical Islamists
to keep their positions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

