I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and Under-Secretaries-General Lacroix and DiCarlo for their respective but joint briefings. The United States stands in solidarity with the Sudanese Government as it continues to engage in the Juba peace process, especially in the face of economic challenges and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We condemn, as others have today, the assassination attempt last month against Prime Minister Hamdok, and we remain concerned about the continued insecurity, including the ongoing and widespread sexual and gender-based violence, in addition to the recent violence in Darfur, including the late December attack in El] Geneina, which displaced more than 30,000 civilians, as well as the looting of the former African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) team site in Nyala, which occurred soon after. Next month the Security Council is expected to create a new mission in the Sudan - one that supports Prime Minister Hamdok and the transitional Government and that fosters political stability and peace for all Sudanese, especially those in Darfur and other conflict-affected areas. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Prime Minister Hamdok for his outreach to the United Nations regarding the establishment of a follow-on presence to UNAMID. In addition, we wish to welcome the joint African Union-United Nations report on UNAMID's activities and the recommendations therein for the follow-on mission (S/2020/202). However, it would be helpful for the Security Council to have a more informed understanding of the risks related to the protection of civilians, especially in Darfur, and how the United Nations could assist the Sudanese with this challenge. Specifically, what is the Secretariat's risk assessment of the security situation in Darfur? Looking to the future, the United States has several priorities for the follow-on mission to UNAMID that we would like to share with the Council. First, a seamless transition must occur between UNAMID and the follow- on mission. Given COVID-19 developments and constraints on troop rotations, we recognize, however, that the 31 October deadline to end UNAMID may not be met. The drawdown should happen as quickly and as responsibly as possible to allow the new mission to establish itself. The drawdown should also include assurances that returned team sites will be protected from looting. Secondly, the follow-on mission must support the civilian-led transitional Government to undertake national-level tasks, including support for the peace process, constitutional reform, elections and the conduct of a census. Lastly, we are greatly concerned about the continued insecurity in Darfur. We see the need for a robust police mission in Darfur with a mandate that supports the Sudan's efforts to address the remaining security challenges in that volatile region. We all have an opportunity to help move the Sudan forward towards stability. The United States is ready to seize this opportunity, and we look forward to working with the Council to design a follow-on mission to UNAMID that addresses the Sudan's security and political needs.
