Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Today's meeting of the Security Council
on the report (S/2012/374) of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the Central African Republic and
on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country provides the
delegation of the Central African Republic, which I lead,
with an opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I also wish you every success in your work in the
month of June. I would also like to take this opportunity
to commend the leadership of your predecessor in the
month of May, His Excellency the Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Azerbaij an.

The Central African Republic very much
appreciates the work carried out by His Excellency the
Secretary-General and thanks him for the fact that peace
has returned to our country. I would also like to extend
similar gratitude to my colleague, His Excellency
Mr. Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative of Belgium
to the United Nations and outgoing Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his tireless efforts for the cause of the
Central African Republic.

With regard to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, Ms. Margaret Vogt, and her team, who, at
times in difficult conditions, work each day alongside
the population of the Central African Republic, we have
only two words to say to her i words that she is used to
hearing every day when she meets Central Africans. To
Margaret we say, from the bottom of our hearts, thank
you.
The report that has just been introduced provides
an update on the Central African Republic since the
last assessment report (S/2011/739), published on
28 November 2011. It reflects the fear, the anguish, the
uncertainty, the joy, but above all the hope of a country
that wants to close a chapter in its history and begin a
different one. We take note of the report and share the
majority of its contents. However, that assessment does
give rise to some observations and hopes that we would
like to share with the Council, following the structure of
the text, namely, with regard to the political, security,
economic and humanitarian situations. First of all,
however, we would like to reiterate the readiness of the
Government to take into account the recommendations
formulated by the Secretary-General, which chart the
course to be followed in order to bring about peace. That
is an outcome that everyone has awaited for quite a long
time, and especially, of course, the benefits that it can
produce.

At the political level, the general elections of 2011
redefined a new political and institutional order. At the
same time, they also created some frustration at the
absence of an opposition in parliament - which, at a
certain point, unsettled national cohesiveness. Having
realized the situation, on 15 May His Excellency
President Francois Bozize began discussions with the
entire national political class and civil society on future
of the country, with everyone sharing their ideas. The
Government hopes that everyone will reach out for the
hand that has been extended to every son and daughter
of the Central African Republic so that we can finally
work together in the service of our country, which today
is beset by so many challenges, the most important of
which pertains to security.

The draft electoral code that was presented by
the Government to the parliament was returned.
Discussions on that important document should resume
shortly with all the parties involved, for we agree with
the international community that peace and stability
following the elections depends on the consensual
adoption of such a text. Those are conditions that are
necessary for development, something which is desired
and sought by all the people of the Central African
Republic.

With regard to security, it remains the fundamental
concern of the Government. We hardly need to point out
that without security, any effort at development would
remain in vain and destined to fail. As indicated in
the report, recent developments on the ground show a
glimmer of hope. Today, with the self-disbandment of the
Armee populaire pour la restauration de la democratie,
the disarmament and demobilization of former rebels
of the Front democratique du people centrafricain,
accompanied by the willingness to demobilize clearly
demonstrated by other movements - the Convention
des patriotes pour la justice et la paix and the Union
des forces democratiques pour le rassemblement - the
State is gradually regaining control over a large part of
its national territory. That will also enable a progressive
return of internally displaced persons and refugees.

However, two foreign armed groups continue to
sow terror throughout the country. Despite the fact that
the Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA), with the
help of the Chadian forces, were able to destroy the
command centres and operational bases of the Front
populaire pour le redressement (FPR) of Baba Ladde, a
Chadian national, the fact that he remains at large, with
his forces scattered, is a source of concern. The defence
and security forces are continuing to pursue them.

The Lord's Resistance Army of Joseph Kony, a
Ugandan citizen, is terrorizing the east and part of
the north-east of the country. Working together in an
integrated framework, the United Nations, the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), with the support of some
100 American military advisers, have obtained fairly
satisfactory results that, we hope, will make it possible
in the near future to put a definitive end to one of the
most cruel atrocities of our time. Here I wish to express
my Government's gratitude to all actors involved in its
quest for peace.

On the economic and humanitarian front, the lack of
security in former and current conflict areas has put an
end to all development efforts, further impoverishing the
population, particularly its most vulnerable elements:
women and children.

The Government, some of its bilateral and multilateral
partners and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
are pooling their resources and efforts in order to assist
the people, who, fortunately, have not yet lost hope.

For two years now, the Central African Republic has
been in negotiations with the Bretton Woods institutions,
particularly the International Monetary Fund, with a
view to the signing of a programme that would allow
it to finance its development. It would be unrealistic to
believe that we can achieve the Millennium Development
Goals by 2015 in certain areas, particularly that of
health, without such support. That does not, however,
mean that there is a lack of political will to achieve that
goal.

With respect to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR), the recent meeting of the
friends of the Central African Republic, held jointly
by the Government and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) on 5 April in New York, provided an
overview of the process and made clear the challenges
still to be met. Once again, we would like to thank the
Secretary-General and all partners that have supported
us in this respect. I should like in particular to mention
the assistance of Australia and, more recently, of
Luxembourg, as well as the very important contribution
of the Peacebuilding Fund.

Using domestic resources, the Government is
continuing, and will continue, to implement that policy
so as to bring about a definitive peace and enable the
people, who have been awaiting it, to enjoy its benefits.
But the DDR process cannot be achieved without genuine
reform of the security sector, and that is why my country
has set itself the objective of ensuring that its defence
and security forces are respectful of human rights.
Despite a difficult beginning, security sector reform has
been under way since February, with the assistance of
BINUCA, the United Nations Development Programme
and a number of bilateral partners, including France.

We recognize that the area of human rights and
the rule of law represents an Achilles heel not only
for the Central African Republic but for many other
countries are well, because post-conflict countries
cannot simply wave a magic wand and change mindsets.
The Government will continue with the reforms under
way in order to establish a State that genuinely protects
and defends human rights. The Government remains
aware of the behaviour of certain rogue agents of the
forces of law and order, who sometimes, especiallyin
conflict areas, violate the fundamental rights of local
populations.

The justice system - a bulwark against
arbitrariness * is carrying out, and will continue to carry
out, its work of protecting those under its jurisdiction,
including women and children. Every day in the Central
African Republic, we are slowly but surely, in concert
with the United Nations and other partners, building a
State that truly respects the rule of law. Together we will
be able to iron out the imperfections and make up for
the shortcomings that have been noted, including those
relating to persons awaiting trial and other convicted
prisoners, who should benefit from all legal guarantees
pertaining to their situation.

Finally, the Government of the Central African
Republic would like to take this opportunity to express
its deep gratitude for the work of the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Commission, two major
instruments that are assisting it in the establishment
of the rule of law and good governance; security; the
creation of employment zones; and the post-conflict
rehabilitation of communities.

The Government and the people of the Central
African Republic and the international community all
desire and are seeking peace, which is indispensable and
remains a precondition for development. That is why the
highest authorities of my country are sparing no effort
in that quest. Along with Chad and the Sudan, they have
established, and are acting together in the framework
of, the tripartite force to secure the three-border area,
near Darfur.

Along with the Central African subregion, we are
cooperating with the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic in securing the
country. In the fight against the LRA, we have joined
the multinational force established to that end by
the African Union, ECCAS and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, with the support of
United States military advisers.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/374)
contains recommendations that represent ways forward
to achieve peace. There may sometimes be difficulties,
but what alternatives do we have? None, clearly. The
Government of the Central African Republic will
endeavour to implement those recommendations.
The Central African Republic has only one objective:
to build a democratic State that respects the rights of its
citizens, who are deeply peace-loving, and devote itself
to the well-being of its people and those who choose
to live in the country. That is what it is doing, alone
and together with friendly countries, the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations, and national and
international NGOs, to which we are very grateful.

In concluding, let me say that we should never
lose sight of the fact that in today's very unstable
world, the geographical and geostrategic position of
the Central African Republic merits its being given
some consideration. We are convinced that to support
the Central African Republic in its quest for peace is
to contribute to the stability and development of the
African continent as a whole.

