Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany very much
appreciates the fact that this item is on the agenda
today. With respect to what my Russian colleague said
at the beginning of this meeting - that this item was
put on the agenda by the United States - I want to
remind him that this item was put on the agenda by the
South American countries in the Council - Peru and
the Dominican Republic - and the United States. It
is therefore not only the concern of the United States.
Rather, it is clearly also the concern of the countries in
the region.

Moreover, with regard to the question of whether
this issue is a threat to international peace and security,
the Russian representative probably heard the statement
by the Ambassador of Kuwait. Although far from the
region, he clearly said that preventive diplomacy is
something that we have to put on the agenda of the
Security Council. That was also said by our colleagues
from Peru and France. There is a potential threat to
international peace and security, and it is right, with
regard to conflict prevention, that the Security Council
deal with this issue.

In the statement made by the representative of
Russia, I did not hear anything about the South American
countries that are suffering right now. We have heard
the figures, and I would like also to thank Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing. We have heard the figures
about the impact of the crisis on the region. More than
3 million Venezuelans have fled their country. Peru is
taking care of 700,000 refugees. We have the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia here, who will say later
on what the situation means for his country. The same
holds true for Brazil. I think we should really commend
those countries for what they are doing: hosting the
people who have fled their country because the living
circumstances are what they are in Venezuela.

Germany stands in solidarity with Venezuela's
neighbours. They bear the burden of receiving the
displaced population in dire need of shelter and
humanitarian assistance. Germany commends their
tireless efforts and commitment to providing a safe
haven for those who seek refuge from the catastrophic
humanitarian conditions and the lack of food and health
services in Venezuela.

Let me recall what led to this massive movement
of refugees: it is the severe violation of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Democratic principles, human rights
and fundamental freedoms continue to be violated. This
is a situation where women and children in particular
are most affected.

The Russian representative mentioned Roosevelt.
Let me come back to Eleanor Roosevelt. She inspired
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article 25,
paragraph 1, of the Declaration states:

"Everyone has the right to a standard of living
adequate for the health and well-being of himself
and of his family, including food, clothing, housing
and medical care and necessary social services."

Sadly, at this moment we have to say that does not hold
true for the people of Venezuela, where a box of pills
costs more than the monthly minimum wage, and baby
formula costs more than two months' salary. Protesting
against such an impossible situation can land a person
in jail in Venezuela.

We also heard the reports coming out of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights about the detentions that have taken place
during the past few days, as well as about the deaths
of more than 20 people. Let me repeat what the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and former President
of Chile, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, said yesterday. She
urged the Venezuelan authorities to exercise restraint
and respect everyone's fundamental rights to peaceful
assembly and the freedom of expression, issuing
a reminder that excessive and disproportionate or
indiscriminate use of force is clearly and unequivocally
prohibited under international law. I would also like
to support what Ms. Bachelet demanded, and what
Ms. DiCarlo said at the beginning of this meeting,
which is that the violent deaths that have occurred over
the past days must be the subject of independent and
impartial investigations. Given the massive violations
of human rights and the threats to international peace
and security, it is right that the Council discusses this.

What needs to be done? We call on all stakeholders
to respect the Venezuelan Constitution and the National
Assembly. That is the only democratically elected
institution, the constitutional powers of which must
be respected. On President Maduro and his election:
he was not freely elected. To quote the Organization
of American States (OAS), "we do not recognize
Mr. Maduro as the legitimate President of Venezuela."
The OAS also called the Maduro election day an
"infamous day for democracy in the Americas". A
further quotation from the OAS stated that "there can
be no democracy without elections, but Maduro showed
that elections can be held without democracy."

In conclusion, we urge all parties to refrain from
the use of force. We call for the organization of free
and fair elections, with international observers and all
candidates allowed to run for office. Until then, there is
only one credible and legitimate institution, that is, the
National Assembly, which was democratically elected.
That is why Germany supports the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaido', as the representative
of that institution, and his call for new elections in
order to re-establish constitutional order in Venezuela.

Germany, along with the United Kingdom and
France, expects the holding of free, transparent and
credible elections. If such a step is not announced
within eight days, then we are ready to recognize Juan
Guaido as interim President. Germany will not leave
the Venezuelan people alone.

