Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for providing us with an
update on the current status of the ongoing investigation
into the incident that took place in Salisbury. We would
also like to share the following observations.

Kazakhstan closely follows the developments of the
case, which is undoubtedly a blatant and unacceptable
criminal use of chemical weapons. At the same time,
it is clear that there are no conclusive findings on
those responsible. The case definitely requires further
objective and transparent investigation to determine
the circumstances surrounding the crime.

Regrettably, the subject of the use of chemical
weapons has become a regular item on the agenda of
the Security Council. As it happens, the same subject is
also the Achilles heel of the Council, as it is becoming
increasingly difficult for us to pass judgment since we
are not experts on the chemical substances used in this
particular incident. It is also difficult to maintain the
constructive dialogue and goodwill required to reach
balanced and consensus-based decisions because of
increased politicization surrounding the issue.

The confrontational spirit and rhetoric in the
Council are being transferred to other forums and
platforms, including The Hague discourse, where States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention are also
becoming divided. It is now a challenge for them to hold
professional and exclusively technical discussions on
highly important issues. Leading countries are unable
to reach a compromise and find common ground for
negotiations that will build mechanisms for countering
the threat of chemical weapons. It is regrettable that
such weapons of mass destruction, which had been
relegated to the past, are being used again.

As a country affected by the consequences of
weapons of mass destruction, we remain firmly
committed to the fight against the use of chemical
weapons and are ready to take constructive part in the
development of an investigative tool. Kazakhstan counts
on and looks forward to an ongoing, comprehensive,
objective and transparent investigation into the incident,
in accordance with existing norms of international law.
We call on parties concerned to exercise restraint and
refrain from hasty actions, without providing full and
irrefutable evidence of the involvement or culpability
of one side or the other.

The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons now has a even more complicated but
very crucial task - to render all possible assistance
to resolve the tense relations between the States
members of the Convention. The organization must
realize its important role as an objective and impartial
mediator. It is the best and most qualified advocate
for the non-proliferation agenda. Patient dialogue and
constructive cooperation from all sides are the main
factors for achieving best results.

As the main body for ensuring international peace
and security, the Council should not allow divergent
positions on the threat of weapons of mass destruction.
It could lead to escalating conflict and high tensions
that could derail its work.

