Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to thank Nigeria for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and insightful briefing this morning.

We meet at a time of unprecedented and complex
global and regional challenges. Large parts ofthe Middle
East are in flames, afflicted by multiple inter- and
intra-State conflicts, the spread of terrorism, external
intervention and power struggles and massive human
dislocation and suffering. Confrontation between the
major Powers has returned to Europe and threatens to
encompass Asia. Poverty stalks Africa and persists in
South Asia. Global threats to peace and world order
from diverse sources are also multiplying - climate
change, poverty, unemployment, especially among
youth, water scarcity, a record number of refugees and
forced migrants, and gross violations of human rights.

Yet this is also a time of opportunity. Today, an
interconnected and interdependent world possesses
the financial, scientific and organizational capabilities
to address those imposing and myriad challenges.
What is needed is political will, especially among key
global and regional Powers, to utilize those capabilities
effectively and cooperatively, and to rise above their
narrow interests and competing agendas.

Regional organizations can contribute to addressing
many of those challenges, especially their economic
and social dimensions. They can also promote the
greater and closer political consultations that are
essential to addressing the security dimensions of those
challenges. In the realm of security, the role of regional
organizations and mechanisms has been recognized as
well as circumscribed in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Regional organizations and
groupings can serve effectively to promote mediation,
arbitration and other peaceful means of conflict
resolution. But in this sphere the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council, has absolute primacy.
Any enforcement action and any use of coercive means
to implement international decisions can be authorized
only by the Security Council.

Each regional organization is unique and different
in its historical origins, mandate, membership, evolution
and capabilities. Some have proved their worth and
made valuable contributions, among them the European
Union, the African Union, the League of Arab States
and the Gulf Cooperation Council. Others, such as the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), have much potential but have yet to fulfil
their promise. SAARC has been constrained because
of the deep differences among its members and efforts
to utilize it for regional domination. Some regional
organizations have great and untapped potential. The
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is one of
them. That relatively newer grouping can advance the
goals of economic development, stability and security
across the broad swath of Euro-Asia.

Among those organizations, the Organization of
Islamic Conference (OIC) is in a unique position. It
includes 57 United Nations States Members - almost
a third of the membership. It spans four continents.
Its members are directly or indirectly involved in
the numerous security challenges that bedevil the
Middle East, Africa and beyond. Collectively and in
cooperation with the United Nations, the OIC has the
capabilities to address and overcome those challenges,
including Palestine and other Middle East conflicts,
as well as the Jammu and Kashmir dispute. The OIC
can also contribute to the promotion of global peace
and prosperity. The United Nations should actively
promote cooperation with the OIC in areas such as
mediation and conciliation in disputes, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance, especially
to refugees and displaced people, and in addressing the
root causes of conflicts and extremism.

Cooperation between regional organizations can
also be very useful. For instance, in the context of
the current challenges in West Asia, cooperation and
consultation could be most valuable between the SCO
and the Gulf Cooperation Council. Equally, regular
consultations between the Gulf Cooperation Council
and key countries of West Asia can be timely, among
other things, to deal with the shared threat from violent
extremism and to devise common strategies on related
issues.

Finally, the Pakistan delegation looks forward to
the concrete follow-up that we hope will emerge from
this important deliberation of the Security Council.

