Mr. Moriko (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Permanent Representative
of Switzerland to the United Nations and Chair of
the Burundi Configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for their briefings, which
have provided the Council with an update on the
sociopolitical and humanitarian situations in Burundi.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the improvement in the
humanitarian situation in Burundi. However, it notes
with regret the persistence ofa deadlock in the political
process in that country.

My country takes note of the resignation of
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian
political dialogue, after completing three years of
work. We would like to acknowledge his commitment
and express our appreciation for his efforts to promote
peace and stability in that country. Cote d'Ivoire also
welcomes the decision taken at the 20th Ordinary
Summit of Heads of State of the East African
Community, held in Arusha on 1 February, to maintain
direct consultations between the Community and the
protagonists of the Burundi crisis.

The humanitarian situation is marked by the
ongoing voluntary return of Burundian refugees.
Indeed, according to the Regional Coordinator of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, based in Nairobi, 100,000 people could be
affected by the voluntary return in 2019. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the efforts made, in the context
of assistance and support for the voluntary refugee
return programme, by the Burundian authorities,
host countries, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the donor community.
We encourage the donor community to increase its
contributions to the financing of the humanitarian
response plan in Burundi.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the
international community to support the actions and
initiatives of the East African Community to revitalize
the inter-Burundian dialogue for national reconciliation
and stability in the country. My country expresses its
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and reiterates its readiness to support all his efforts in
the context of the inter-Burundian political dialogue.

