I would like to begin by expressing our condemnation of the 10 May attack against a convoy belonging to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and express our deepest condolences to the victims' families in Chad. We underscore the importance of ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers, and we call on the Government of Mali to swiftly investigate the attack and bring the perpetrators to justice. It was my distinct pleasure to have had a conversation this morning with Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert. I agree with her that the challenges are many. I can tell the Council that she is certainly up to the challenge. After speaking with her, I echo her statement and feel more confident than ever that Iraqi elections will be by and for the Iraqi people. I thank her so much for her time with me this morning, because it has given me the confidence to go back to the Trump Administration, which, as the Council knows, spoke with Iraq's Prime Minister yesterday. I feel very confident in our conversation. Last week's confirmation of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi by Iraq's Council of Representatives marks a tremendous achievement. In the face of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), low oil prices and long-standing economic and security challenges, including State control of armed groups, Iraq could not have asked for a more capable leader. With Al-Kadhimi as Prime Minister and Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert leading the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Iraq is well-positioned to navigate its many challenges. The Trump Administration looks forward to helping Iraq's new Government realize its bold agenda and deliver a life of dignity, security and prosperity to all Iraqis. The COVID-19 pandemic is a global threat, the likes of which we have not seen in 100 years. As we know all too well, this virus knows no borders and does not discriminate based on communal or sectarian identities. Iraq's new Government will have to be vigilant and proactive to ensure that COVID-19 does not reverse our hard-fought progress in restoring Iraqi stability. To help prevent any such reversal, the United States has provided nearly $30 million in COVID-19 assistance for Iraq. That funding is helping to implement a public-health emergency plan, prepare laboratories for medical work and much more. It also builds upon my country's long- term investment in Iraq - more than $70 billion of assistance over the past 20 years, including nearly $4 billion for the health sector. But funding alone will not be enough. And on that note, we must recognize that many relief actors, including United States partners, continue to report access constraints for the provision of humanitarian assistance on the ground. We commend UNAMTD's advocacy to resolve that issue, and we urge the Iraqi authorities to find a permanent solution to ensure the delivery of vital assistance. We cannot and will not forget the Iraqi protesters from all walks of life expressing their legitimate economic and governance grievances. We will also not forget the human rights abuses perpetrated against them in recent months. UNAMI's work is invaluable in monitoring and documenting such human rights violations and abuses. Iraq's new Government must follow the paper trail and bring to justice those responsible for human rights abuses. The Special Representative highlighted UNAMI's continued engagement on the Kuwaiti missing persons and archives file. We once again welcome those efforts. Finally, I would like to reiterate our strong belief that credible elections represent Iraq's best opportunity to usher in structural change, genuine reforms and a better life for all Iraqi citizens. We urge UNAMI to heed the call of Iraqis across the political and social spectrum - a call demanding United Nations-supported, Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned elections that, as the Special Representative said, must be free and fair. With UNAMI's help, the Iraqi Government can restore public faith in elections and can provide a credible vehicle for carrying out the people's will.
