Ms. DiCarlo: On 21 April, millions of Ukrainians
exercised their democratic right to choose their next
President. We commend the Ukrainian people on the
peaceful conduct of the election and take note of the
assessment of the electoral process by the international
and domestic observer groups, including the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The United Nations, including through its
presence in Ukraine, is committed to continuing to work
with the Ukrainian authorities and the people of Ukraine,
in particular to support the provision of humanitarian
assistance, the promotion and safeguarding of human
rights and the country's critical reform process.

The recent election took place in the shadow of the
ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine, many of whose
residents were unable to exercise their democratic
rights and continue to face the daily challenges
associated with an active conflict. A lasting and durable
ceasefire remains an urgent priority. In that regard, we
regret the inconclusive discussions on a new ceasefire
recommitment on the occasion of Orthodox Easter
during yesterday's meeting of the Trilateral Contact
Group in Minsk. We commend the efforts of the OSCE
representatives and join their calls for agreement
without delay on this important issue. We also want to
point out that the implementation of a lasting ceasefire
should be accompanied by the Withdrawal of heavy
weapons from populated areas, the disengagement
of forces and the protection of civilians and critical
civilian infrastructure.

Assistant Secretary-General Mueller will brief the
Council in detail on the current humanitarian needs
and the ongoing United Nations efforts on the ground.
As a matter of principle, I want to reiterate that it is
essential that the United Nations humanitarian work not
be politicized or instrumentalized by any party.

Today's Council meeting is also taking place in the
context of a Russian presidential decree of 24 April that
reportedly makes it possible for the residents of certain
regions of eastern Ukraine to obtain Russian citizenship
under a simplified procedure. According to the decree,
the decision has been made

"with a View to protecting human and citizens'
rights and freedoms, and guided by the
universally recognized principles and norms of
international law".

It was welcomed by the entities in control in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
Reacting to this latest development, the Ukrainian
authorities strongly protested the decree as an
unprecedented interference by the Russian Federation
in the country's internal affairs and a violation of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Ukraine contrary to the Minsk agreements.

In its resolution 2202 (2015), unanimously adopted
on 17 February 2015, the Security Council endorsed
the package of measures for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, calling on all parties to fully
implement the measures. In its presidential statement
of 6 June 2018 (S/PRST/2018/12), the Council again
unanimously reaffirmed the centrality of the Minsk
agreements. The United Nations expects that the
spirit and the letter of the Minsk agreements will be
respected by all concerned. To that end, we urge all the
parties to avoid any unilateral steps that may potentially
undermine the implementation of the agreements and to
address concerns through constructive dialogue in the
existing negotiation formats.

Most recently, on 12 February, the Council had
a special meeting focusing on the implementation
of the Minsk agreements and on the ongoing conflict
(see S/PV.8461). As was noted during that meeting,
the United Nations continues to fully support the lead
efforts of the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact
Group and the OSCE to reach a peaceful solution to
this five-year conflict.

Since their signing, the Normandy Four and
participants in the Trilateral Contact Group, as well
as the Council, have devoted considerable attention
to promoting the need for full implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Regrettably, progress has stalled.
Following the recent election in Ukraine, those efforts
need to continue with greater resolve and urgency.
We expect all concerned to act in accordance with the
Minsk agreements and once again reiterate the need to
revitalize diplomatic efforts. It remains incumbent on
all parties to demonstrate the necessary political will
and to undertake steps that would decrease the current
tensions and allow the resumption of constructive
dialogue using existing mechanisms and at all levels.

The United Nations underlines its commitment to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, within its internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. Against the
prevailing dangerous trajectory over the past five years,
it is our sincere hope that, at long last, a new positive
dynamic can emerge to enable an end to the conflict and
prevent it from becoming protracted. That is essential
for fostering national cohesion and lasting stability in
Ukraine, and critical to the maintenance of peace and
security in Europe.

