Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
advocated in favour of strict compliance with the
Dayton Peace Agreement, with its State structure for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its plan for the country's
unity and territorial integrity. We wish to see the
establishment and the normal functioning of a central
Bosnia-wide authority while preserving aspects of the
status and mandate of its entities as well as the equality
of all three constituent peoples. We are carefully
following the internal political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We see no reason for its being dramatized;
whatever fundamental threat may exist, we see none to
its stability.

Unfortunately, the report (S/2013/646, annex) of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Inzko, to the Security Council on the situation in
the country is once again not objective. First of all,
we would like to point out the biased criticism of the
leaders of the Bosnian Serbs, alleging that they are the
source of all Bosnian ills and that they are undermining
the fundamental bases of the Peace Agreement. In
order to ensure a more objective representation of the
events unfolding in Bosnia, we would recommend that
the members ofthe Security Council also read the latest
report of the Republika Srpska to the Security Council,
in which the commitment of the Bosnian Serbs to
international law and the letter and spirit of Dayton is
made clear.

The Russian Federation calls upon all parties to the
settlement process to refrain from counterproductive
emotions and controversy in order to foster inter-Bosnian
dialogue. We are particularly concerned by the calls to
arms sounded by the Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Zeljko Komsie. The High
Representative must establish constructive dialogue
between the constituent peoples and not provoke enmity
between them.

We are not just talking about rhetoric, however; we
continue to hope for an improved political situation for
Bosnia and Herzegovina at the Federation level. The
Bosnian-Croat problems run quite deep. The ongoing
conflicts between the Bosnian parties have led not only
to paralysis in the Government of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina but also to a hampering of the
activities of the central Bosnian institutions.

In his report, the High Representative notes that
the demonstrations that took place in Sarajevo in
June confirmed that Bosnians are tired of the political
crisis. In that context, we would like to underscore the
unacceptability of external interference in such actions.

With respect to the reform of the Constitution of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the time has
come to address the matter. However, we need to work
strictly on the basis of the consensus of the entities.

We are seriously concerned by the radicalization
of Muslim circles within Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the recruitment of fighters into the ranks of
anti-Government groups in Syria. It is strange that the
High Representative did not talk at all about that in his
report.

Of particular relevance recently has been the
ongoing work of the Bosnians, with the support of the
international community, in the disposal of military
equipment and munitions left over from the Yugoslav
conflict.
It is clear that the institutions of the Serbian entity
are working effectively. The economy is also showing
hopeful signs, with growth in industry and exports.

At this stage of the settlement in Bosnia, we
believe that the international community's main task
is transferring responsibility for the fate of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the Bosnians themselves. In that
regard, we support the abolition of the Office of the
High Representative and a reversion to implementing
the "5-1-2" programme agreed on by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board. In particular,
the issue of State property should be comprehensively
addressed, encouraging an entire package of the
parties' agreements rather than isolating its individual
components. In our view, the situation in Brcko District
is developing pretty well along Dayton lines, thus
confirming the validity of the 2012 suspension of the
Supervisor's mission as a step towards abolishing the
protectorate in Bosnia-Herzegovina.

We welcome the separation ofthe posts of the High
Representative and the Special Representative of the
European Union (EU). One of the absolute conditions
for the work of these two international presences in
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be strict adherence
to their mandates. They should not interfere with
each other's responsibilities, let alone duplicate their
functions. This has particular relevance with respect
to issues connected to the further promotion of a
structured dialogue between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the EU on justice, where they will work together to
build independent and impartial courts and prosecutors
at every level in Bosnia, in order to rectify the serious
anti-Serb distortions in investigating war crimes during
the conflict in the former Yugoslavia between 1992 and
1995.

At the current stage of the Bosnian settlement
process, the most important thing is to encourage
a full-on intra-Bosnian dialogue and a search by the
parties themselves, without outside interference, for
generally acceptable options for socioeconomic and
structural reform that comply strictly with the Dayton
mechanisms. At the same time, we must work on drawing
down the Office of the High Representative, which
includes continuing the practice of annual budget and
staff cuts, based firmly on the 5+2 plan and admitting
no new criteria for ending the protectorate regime. We
believe that decisions on key issues of the settlement
should be made in agreed-on international forums such
as the Security Council and the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board, whose consensus-based work
is crucial.

While not a participant in the EU-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Russia supports some of the aims of its mandate for
ensuring security in Bosnia and Herzegovina andhelping
to train and instruct staff for the country's Ministry of
Defence and the Armed Forces. In that regard, we once
again supported the resolution extending the mission's
mandate this year (resolution 2123 (2013)).

