The Secretary-General: Last year, in resolution
1422 (2002), the Security Council requested that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) should, for a 12-
month period starting 1 July 2002, not commence or
proceed with investigation or prosecution of any case
involving current or former officials or personnel from
a contributing State not a party to the Rome Statute
over acts or omissions relating to a United Nations
established or authorized operation, unless the Council
decided otherwise. The Council also expressed the
intention to renew that request each 1 July for further
12-month periods, for as long as might be necessary.
This is what the Council is now about to do.

In taking that decision the Council will again rely
on article 16 of the Rome Statute. I believe that that
article was not intended to cover such a sweeping
request, but only a more specific request relating to a
particular situation. But I accept that the Council is
acting in good faith, and that its purpose is to make it
possible for peace operations to continue, whether
established or only authorized by the Council, and for
all Member States to take part in them, whether or not
they are parties to the Rome Statute. Indeed, I fervently
share that hope, and I am grateful to the Council for
giving priority to the continuation of the Organization's
vital peacekeeping work.

I wish to place on record, however, that, in
addition to my concern about its conformity with
article 16 of the Rome Statute, I do not believe that
request is necessary.

In the first place, I believe I can state confidently
that in the history of the United Nations, and certainly
during the period that I have worked for the
Organization, no peacekeeper or any other mission
personnel have been anywhere near committing the
kind of crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the
ICC. The Council's request therefore deals not only
with a hypothetical case but with a highly improbably
one.

Secondly, people serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions remain under the jurisdiction of
their home States. Whenever one of them is accused of
committing a crime during a mission, that person is
immediately repatriated and is dealt with by the
national courts of his or her own country.

Thirdly, under article 17 of the Rome Statute, no
case is admissible in the ICC if it has already been or is
being investigated or prosecuted by a State that has
jurisdiction over it, unless that State is unwilling or
unable genuinely to investigate or prosecute.

I assume that, in the case of a person serving in
an operation established or authorized by the Security
Council being accused of the kind of crime that falls
under the jurisdiction of the ICC - a case that we must
all hope and expect would never occur - the home
State of that person would be most anxious to
investigate that accusation and, if the investigation
showed that there was a prima facie case, to prosecute
that person. The case would then not be admissible in
the ICC.

We must all hope, therefore, that this resolution
will be without effect, since the situation it is designed
to guard against will never arise.

I felt it was reasonable last year to adopt this
resolution for 12 months, to give Member States more
time to study the Rome Statute, which was only then
entering into force, and to digest its implications. And I
can accept that the Council feels it is necessary to
renew the request now for a further 12 months, since
the Court is still in its infancy and no case has yet been
brought before it.

But allow me to express the hope that this does
not become an annual routine. If it did, I fear the world
would interpret it as meaning that the Council wished
to claim absolute and permanent immunity for people
serving in the operations it establishes or authorizes. If
that were to happen, it would undermine not only the
authority of the ICC but also the authority of the
Council and the legitimacy of United Nations
peacekeeping.

I am sure you understand, Mr. President, that
such an outcome would cause me grave concern, and I
would hope that this concern would be shared by all
members of the Council.

