Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): First of all, Mr. President, we wish to express
appreciation for your initiative to hold a debate on the
protection of civilians in situations of conflict. This topic
undoubtedly represents the fundamental challenge facing the
international community and in particular the Security
Council.

May I also express our gratitude to the previous
President of the Council, Ambassador Celso Amorim of
Brazil, whose skills and talents contributed to resolving
the problems before the Council during the month of January.

We also express our appreciation to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund,
Ms. Carol Bellamy, and to the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Cornelio
Sommaruga, for their thorough briefings, and to
Ambassador Olara Otunnu for his contribution to this
meeting. All of these statements will undoubtedly have an
impact on and be followed up by the Council.

The presence here of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Canada is yet another example of his country's
steadfast and selfless contribution to the United Nations,
above all in the area of international peace and security.

Unfortunately, it is clear that in present conflicts,
civilian populations are being deliberately and
indiscriminately targeted. With growing frequency, the
enemy is identified with a different ethnic or religious
minority or simply with the members of a different group.
There has been an increase in conflicts between
autonomous armed elements that neither answer to a
unified command or respect international humanitarian
law or human rights.

We have been given today alarming statistics
showing that a high percentage of current victims are
civilians. The situation of children is particularly
sensitive, not only because they are particularly vulnerable
during conflicts but because their post-conflict
rehabilitation is complex, difficult and extensive.

The demobilization and social rehabilitation of child
soldiers is the most difficult of processes. The magnitude
and complexity of the problem make clear once again that
the concept of international peace and security as seen in
1945 has evolved considerably. It now encompasses
broader qualitative aspects that involve not only factors
related to military activity but also to governability,
democracy, development and justice.

This does not mean that the Security Council should
deal with all of these problems, but it does imply that the
Council can act, in certain circumstances, within the
framework of this broader concept. That is the sense of
the debate that we are holding today.

The protection of the civilian population in conflicts,
particularly in internal conflicts, is a relatively recent
concern of the Security Council. That concern has

 

evolved, though slowly, along with the changes that have
occurred in the law governing customs and practices during
armed conflicts.

International humanitarian law has also increasingly
taken into account the need to emphasize the protection of
civilians and has recently stressed the protection of those
who by definition have never been combatants - the
civilian population. This development has provided us with
a whole range of standards to set limits on the conduct of
hostilities and to protect innocent persons. Many of these
have already been enshrined in universally recognized
principles and norms. We must not underestimate their
importance, although we should recognize a basic structural
flaw: the great majority of these norms apply only to
conventional international armed conflicts - in other
words, to a tiny percentage of current conflicts.

This situation does not appear easy to resolve in the
short term. Nonetheless, the growing acceptance of the fact
that the protection of individuals transcends the domestic
sphere of States gives rise to hope that gradually the
differences in the way the two categories of conflict are
handled will be reduced.

In this respect, special mention should be made of the
Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
which for the first time criminalized violations of
international humanitarian law committed in an internal
conflict, and, more recently, the Rome Statute for the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, which
made headway in the application of norms to this type of
conflict. In addition, both instruments should be a valuable
deterrent force.

In spite of the limitations, we have at our disposal an
adequate body of norms. For this reason, it is a priority
issue to focus our efforts on the implementation of these
norms to make them better known and more practical in
terms of their application. The punishment of the guilty is
not only essential to combat impunity; it is also
indispensable in order to build a stable peace following the
end of a conflict. In this context, the creation of the
Tribunals and the Statute of the International Criminal
Court are of historic relevance.

But the importance of emphasizing individual
responsibility should not make us forget the responsibility
of States themselves. Article 1 of the Geneva Conventions
clearly establishes that it is the States that are responsible
for respecting and ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances.

We appreciate the tireless efforts of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for the dissemination and
teaching of humanitarian law and to help meet the
demand for protection generated by present conflicts.
States must also make every effort to promote an
understanding of the norms that are applicable to
situations of conflict, not only on the part of our soldiers
but also on the part of the population at large.

One way of protecting civilians is through vigorous
action to prevent conflict. That requires the adoption of
urgent and decisive measures in the early stages. Many of
those measures form part of the exclusive competence of
this Council. Others require joint action of the Council
and other organs within and outside of the system, such
as those that involve aid for development and
humanitarian assistance. But for all those measures the
visible and dynamic action of the Council is necessary.
Otherwise it will be extremely difficult to adequately
prevent and punish those who violate humanitarian law.
In the preventive stage we must focus efforts on the
creation of adequate mechanisms or on strengthening
existing mechanisms, first to stop the flow of arms to
conflict zones and secondly to actively destroy arsenals,
particularly of small arms and conventional weapons, as
they are the most widely used.
Adequate measures must also be assured to consider
the security of humanitarian field workers. The recent
attacks on United Nations or associated personnel violate
the conscience of this Council and should be investigated
dynamically in order to allow for the severe punishment
of those responsible.

Those attacks renew the concern which only a few
years ago led us, under the presidency of Canada, to the
negotiation and speedy adoption of the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. We
must urgently promote the signing and ratification of this
Convention.

However, it should be emphasized that that
Convention, while very important, is not applicable to all
persons and organizations in conflict zones. For that
reason Argentina is studying the possibility of presenting
an initiative that will broaden, perhaps through a protocol,
the scope of personal application of that instrument.

