Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting to give Member States an opportunity to
express their opinions on the important subject on the
Council's agenda today. My delegation associates itself
with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement.

The international community has agreed that the
best way to eliminate the danger posed by weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) lies in their total elimination,
whatever form they may take and wherever they are
found.

Syria supports that approach. There is no doubt
that the possibility of weapons of mass destruction
falling into the hands of terrorists, in particular, and the
issue of international terrorism in general are matters
of grave concern. This should compel us all to
consolidate international cooperation in stemming the
danger

Syria is eager to protect our region and the world
from the danger posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Syria's commitment to shielding
the world from that threat prompted us to take an
important step in the 1960s by acceding to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We later concluded a comprehensive safeguards
agreement with the International Atomic Energy
Agency. It is worth noting that virtually all Member
States are now party to the NPT. Israel, however, is the
only Member that has not yet acceded to the Treaty,
thus preventing the declaration of the Middle East as a
zone free of all weapons of mass destruction and, most
importantly, of nuclear weapons.

The Security Council still has before it a draft
resolution that was submitted twice by the Syrian Arab
Republic last year on behalf of all Arab Member States
and issued in blue as document S/2003/1208 of 29
December 2003 (see document S/2003/1219, annex). In
its operative and preambular paragraphs, the draft
resolution stresses the need to address the danger posed
by the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorist groups and seeks to prevent such weapons
from falling into the hands such groups.

It is truly regrettable, however, that the Council
has not yet adopted that extremely important draft
resolution. Instead, some have tried to exert misplaced
pressure, wilfully forgetting the fact that Israel
possesses all types of weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear, biological and chemical. That fact
has been confirmed by employees of the Israeli
industrial complex. This issue raises many questions
about the credibility of the approach taken towards the
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction, nuclear
weapons foremost among them.

The draft resolution before the Council today
contains references confirming that the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons poses a
threat to international peace and security. It also
stresses support for multilateral agreements aimed at
curbing proliferation. While we approve those
references, we share the questions and doubts raised by
the States members of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM) at their meeting with the sponsors concerning
other aspects of the draft resolution.

We would welcome the convening of more such
consultations prior to the Council's adoption of its final
draft. In particular, we would stress the need to refer to
the establishment of zones free of weapons of mass
destruction, including and particularly in the Middle
East, and to clarify certain terms used in the draft
resolution, such as "means of delivery" and "relevant
material". We also stress the special importance of the
statement issued by NAM. concerning the need for the
draft resolution to be fully in line with Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Finally, the follow-up
mechanism for the implementation of the draft
resolution must have a clear mandate and terms of
reference, including the time frame.

Allow me in conclusion to stress once again the
importance that my country attaches to countering,
through cooperation with the countries of the world
within the United Nations and other forums, the
challenge posed by the acquisition by terrorist groups
of weapons of mass destruction. Such mutual
cooperation represents the sound approach to pursue in
order to avert the danger posed by those weapons and
to spare humankind the scourge that has emerged over
the past century.

The meeting was suspended at 1.05 pm.
