Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Mr. President, to thank you for the opportunity to
speak.

(spoke in English)

Canada commends the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on this important topic (S/2012/376).
The report highlights for us all that respect for the
protection of civilians is non-existent in far too many
contexts.
In Syria, civilians are massacred by their
Government. Around the world, women and girls
continue to be victims of sexual violence, including
through rape as a weapon of war. Hospitals and
health-care workers are subject to attacks, and people
in desperate need are denied lifesaving humanitarian
assistance. In such circumstances, Member States,
and particularly the Security Council, must redouble
their efforts to protect the world's most vulnerable and
ensure that those responsible for violations are brought
to justice.

More than a year ago, the Council made clear
its concrete support for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict by adopting resolution 1973 (2011),
which authorized decisive action to protect civilians
and civilian populated areas in Libya. Canada took
critical political and military actions in support of that
Council-endorsed effort to protect civilians against a
cruel and oppressive regime. Through its firm response
to the threat in Libya, the Council demonstrated its
commitment to protecting civilians both in principle
and in practice.

Yet for every success there are many examples
where more could be done. In Syria, hundreds of men,
women and children have been massacred in Houla and
Hama. The use of heavy weapons in population centres,
the excessive use of force, including firing from
helicopters, the lack of respect for medical services
and the denial of humanitarian access are of grave
concern. While we hope that agreement to the Syria
response plan will bring improvements in the ability
of humanitarian actors to assist those in need, the plan
cannot resolve the crisis in Syria. The Security Council
must act swiftly and decisively to ensure compliance
with Joint Special Envoy Annan's six-point plan, or
move to implement other diplomatic solutions to the
crisis. We urge the adoption of tough and targeted
sanctions against Al-Assad and his regime.
(spoke in French)

While the crisis in Syria is perhaps the most prominent
example of current challenges to the protection of
civilians, it is far from unique. The Secretary-General's
report also highlights the deplorable effects of violence
and conflict on women and children, including the
prevalence of sexual violence in many emergency
situations. Canada is, for example, deeply concerned
by the deteriorating security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the abuses faced
by vulnerable populations there, including killings of
civilians and sexual violence. We must be persistent
in denouncing violence directed against women and
girls and in promoting their empowerment. While all
civilians deserve equal protection, it is important that
efforts toward international protection take into account
the particular vulnerabilities and capacities of targeted
individuals and groups. What is more, as recognized in
resolution 1325 (2000), ensuring that women are full,
active and constructive participants in peace processes
can significantly contribute to the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.

Furthermore, we must take action to defend the
rights of vulnerable religious minorities who are
persecuted for their beliefs in situations of armed
conflict. Canada is in the process of establishing an
office within Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Canada that will promote the protection of freedom of
religion worldwide. In that regard, we encourage key
United Nations stakeholders to develop strategies that
allow them to better take into account the persecution
of religious minorities with a View to preventing their
displacement.

(spoke in English)

In far too many contexts, humanitarian access
is politicized and constrained. Civilians in need of
assistance are held hostage to the whims of Governments
and non-State armed groups.

The Secretary-General and the International
Committee of the Red Cross have highlighted the fact
that health-care providers and facilities continue to
come under attack in situations of conflict and violence.
In too many contexts, hospitals are routinely targeted,
and the wounded choose not to seek treatment for fear
of detention, torture or death. Humanitarian workers,
including medical volunteers, have lost their lives in the
performance of their duties.

The Council must continue to exercise the full
range of options at its disposal to prevent and put an
end to violence against civilians in armed conflict.
