Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow me
to express my delegation's gratitude to Mr. Roed-
Larsen for his edifying and very moving briefing on the
tragedy and the very disturbing developments currently
taking place in the Middle East, and most particularly
in occupied Palestine.

During our recent consultations, in light of the
situation prevailing on the ground, my delegation has
already expressed its deep concern about the future of
the political process in the region, given the challenges
to the parties and the international community by the
resumption of the cycle of violence, suicide bombings
and reprisals in both Palestine and Israel.

In this context, the decision in principle on
11 September by the Israeli Cabinet to expel the
President of the Palestinian Authority from Ramallah
aggravates the crisis and jeopardizes the prospects for
peace that had been opened by the road map. It is a
major political error with unpredictable consequences,
which cannot be tolerated.

My country, Guinea, concerned about respect for
international law, would like to recall that President
Yasir Arafat, democratically elected by his people and
an historic figure in the struggle for Palestinian
liberation, is and remains a key actor in the peace
process. Therefore, far from being an obstacle, he is the
very symbol of the identity and the march of the
Palestinians on the route of self-determination of
freedom and progress.

The Israeli decision has no legal justification and
is in fact counterproductive. It only strengthens the
disappointment of the Palestinians and leads to a
programmed death of the Quartet's road map. In our
opinion, that is a result of the policy of weakening and
destroying Palestinian institutions that the current
Israeli Government regrettably persists in carrying out.
Such an attitude can never serve the interests of Israel.
Rather, it will have the opposite effect.

After a short period of calm during which a ray of
hope glimmered on the horizon, the level of violence
and political frustration has abruptly risen again,
accompanied by misfortune and desperation. Once
again, the logic of mutual defiance, marked by the
increase in suicide bombings and unjustifiable extra-
judicial killings, has taken over.

My delegation regrets that the security and
institutional reforms implemented by the Palestinian
Authority have not been accompanied by Israeli respect
for those commitments. The continuation of the
occupation of the Palestinian territories and the extra-
judicial killings are reprehensible acts in flagrant
violation of international law. They must be banned.

Moreover, the building of the wall of separation,
which is the prelude to a veritable bantustan policy,
violates the fundamental principles of international
law. The wall can in no way meet Israel's security
needs. On the contrary, it further fans the flames of the
frustrations of the Palestinian population, which finds
itself totally isolated and despoiled and which has no
choice but to defy this colonialist undertaking.

As well, the suicide attacks that indiscriminately
strike Israeli citizens, including women and children,
are to be condemned and must not be encouraged.

Those acts, committed by both sides, serve to
heighten tensions and to deepen further the chasm
separating Palestinians and Israelis, whose futures
nevertheless remain inextricably linked. There is no
doubt that in such conditions, prospects look bleak and
the future of peace in the Middle East is put at risk.

Before this terrible situation, fraught with threats
and harmful to peace and security, the Security Council
cannot stand by idly or fail to assume its
responsibilities. The Council must contribute to the full
and complete implementation of the Quartet's road
map.

My delegation is convinced that the peace plan,
which is full of ambitions and is the fruit of long and
courageous negotiations, represents the only real
chance for putting an end to a conflict that has been
devastating the Middle East region for a long time and
which requires action from the international
community as a whole.

It is a difficult task for this time and will be
achieved through a policy of tolerance and
compromise. To achieve that, the two parties involved
must employ the same standards, admit their
responsibilities and negotiate transparently.

In this critical context, the international
community must send a strong signal to both parties,
especially to the Israeli authorities to dissuade them
from carrying out their decision in principle to expel
the President of the Palestinian Authority or to
continue to envisage the chaos-creating alternative of
physically destroying him. That is why my delegation
is in favour of adopting in the near future the resolution
presented by the Arab Group during their consultations
with the Security Council last Friday.

Guinea reaffirms its conviction that the States of
the region, including the State of Israel and a State for
Palestine, have the right to live in peace within secure
and internationally recognized borders. That is why my
delegation urges the parties to respect the commitments
they undertook within the framework of the Quartet's
road map and, with the assistance of the international
community under the impetus of the United States and
the European Union, to ensure the effective and rapid
resumption of the peace process in order to reach a
definitive peaceful political settlement.

The challenge is immense. But, if we are united
and determined to implement the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, we
will be able to reverse the current trend and recover the
road to peace.

