Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, at
the outset, to express my satisfaction at seeing you, Sir,
preside over the Security Council during the month of
March. You represent a country, the Russian Federation,
with which the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
excellent relations of respect and mutual esteem.

Let me also take this opportunity to commend
your predecessor, the representative of the Republic of
Korea, and to express our appreciation for the mastery
with which he led the work of the Security Council last
month, as well as for the zeal, expertise and competence
with which he discharged his task.

I also wish to pay fitting tribute to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, whose briefing today, in my
delegation's view, conveyed his ongoing concern for the
restoration and consolidation of peace in my country.
We can never thank him enough for having been so
personally invested in the search for a lasting solution
to the instability prevailing in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are convinced
that, thanks to his personal involvement, the world
Organization will help the Congolese people and its
young democracy to flourish in the full realization of
its political and socioeconomic aspirations.

I shall never cease to remind the Council that,
following the democratic elections of 2006 and 2011,
the populations ofNorth Kivu and South Kivu had good
reason to hope for the advent of a lasting peace in that
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those
hopes were amply justified by the success of the joint
military operations of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo. Progress has been
made in reducing threats against the safety of people
and improved security management by the Government.

The language of arms and violence has prevailed
once more in North Kivu, ever since the terrorists of
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), who had deserted
the ranks of the Congolese army, turned their weapons
against the regular army with immeasurable external
support. The situation has again disrupted the efforts
of the Government and its partners to stabilize and
consolidate peace in that part of the country. It is in that
context that the Congolese people welcomes the signing
in Addis Ababa on 24 February of the Framework for
Peace, Security and Cooperation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region.

After decades of tumultuous relations with certain
neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the international community - through
the United Nations, the African Union and its
regional groupings the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region - is sponsoring a process that
establishes and defines overall conditions for lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region. That ideal is the focus
of the the Secretary-General's new strategy, which
should help to address the causes of recurrent crises
and to find a sound political solution. He has just
announced the road map for that strategy.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General on behalf ofthe Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and to commend his efforts to
unite the leaders of the region around the Framework.
That agreement is a catalyst for the management of
the current crisis. In the words of the leader of the
Congolese diplomatic corps, Raymond Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and Francophonie of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is
"a trigger that will create a rapid intervention
brigade integrated within MONUSCO, with a
mandate of peace enforcement and sophisticated
equipment".

The Congolese people and Government place great
hopes in the two initiatives arising from the agreement.
They will have a significant impact on the activities
of the refurbished MONUSCO, including through the
addition of unmanned aerial systems to its monitoring
capabilities and an intervention brigade whose mandate
would be much more robust than traditional United
Nations peacekeeping mandates. Such a component is
essential to creating the conditions necessary to obtain
the commitment of all the parties to achieving lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region.

That is why I would like to reassure the Council
most of the commitments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are already under way, pursuant to the
programme of the Congolese Government and in the
spirit of the Constitution of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

In the agreement, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has renewed its commitment to continuing
and deepening the reform of the security sector,
particularly with regard to the army and the police;
strengthening State authority, especially in the eastern
part of the country, including by preventing armed
groups from destabilizing neighbouring countries;
promoting economic development, including through
the expansion of infrastructure and the provision of
basic social services; and promoting the structural
reform of State institutions, including finance reform,
and the objectives of national reconciliation, tolerance
and democracy.

The Special Report of the Secretary-General on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
Region (S/2013/119), which is now before the Council,
proposes a host of measures to be taken at the national
and regional levels. It also sets out recommendations
that my country supports, in particular with regard to
the support of the international community, the call for
stepped-up political efforts by the United Nations, and
strengthening MONUSCO.

As recently as on Friday, 22 February, Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head
of MONUSCO, expressed his concern at the ongoing
deterioration of security conditions in the eastern part of
the country (see S/PV.6925). Mr. Meece called openly,
and rightly, for strengthening the military means at the
disposal of the Blue Helmets.

I should like to say to the Council that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and all our people consider the reconfigureation of
MONUSCO's mandate and the swift deployment of
the intervention brigade as major concerns. As we all
know, that undertaking aims at responding to a genuine
and urgent security need in the eastern part of my
country. My country, the Secretary-General and many
bilateral and multilateral partners have long called
for strengthening MONUSCO's mandate. We believe
that that issue is now sufficiently pressing and that it
requires speedy action by the Security Council. To that
end, my Government should like to make some requests
of the Secretary-General and the Council.

Following the conclusion of the Framework
Agreement, we ask that the Secretary-General finalize
the list of prerequisites for the deployment of the
brigade. In particular, we ask that he quickly appoint
a special envoy tasked with supporting the countries of
the region and helping them to follow up the progress
made in connection with the goals that have been set to
help implement the Framework. We also call on him to
promote the speedy implemenation of all aspects of the
Framework Agreement.

Given the urgency of the matter and the fragility
of the situation on the ground, we call on the Security
Council to quickly adopt a resolution authorizing a
change in MONUSCO'S mandate to make it much more
robust. We also ask that the Council quickly authorize
the speedy deployment of the intervention brigade in
order to eradicate the negative forces, including the
M-23, as well as to help to ensure closer monitoring of
the country's eastern border in order to prevent foreign
incursions, as well as to prevent all support to armed
groups operating in that part of the country, including
M-23 terrorists.

Moreover, my Government calls on the States of
the region to implement in goodwill the commitments
into which they freely entered. Among other things,
we call on them to change their policies, behaviour
and attitudes. Under the Framework Agreement, the
countries of the region committed themselves not to
interfere in the internal affairs of neighbouring States or
to tolerate or provide assistance or any type of support
to armed groups, as well as to respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of neighbouring States.

Lastly, as the Council will shortly move to informal
consultations to continue its discussion of the subject,
I should like to conclude by asking that members take
to heart the suffering of the Congolese people, of
the children separated from their families and of the
women who are raped every day. Above all, members
should not forget that in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, more than in other zones of conflict throughout
the world, thousands of people continue to be the
victims of war on a daily basis. With approximately
8 million killed in the course of 15 years of successive
wars, the slaughter of civilians in my country presents
one of the darkest pictures that humankind has seen
since the Second World War.

