Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning, and the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
important statements.

The Middle East peace process remains central to
events in the wider region. As President Obama said
in Jerusalem last month, peace is necessary, just and
possible. We welcome the efforts already undertaken
by Secretary Kerry and the good will with which they
have been received by the parties themselves. The
United Kingdom stands ready to mobilize the European
Union behind any decisive moves for peace. We share
the vision of a world where the Israeli people live in
safety and security alongside the Palestinian people,
who have a sovereign, viable State of their own.

But if that vision is to be realized, both parties must
urgently take steps to rebuild confidence and faith.
Events this month present a mixed picture. We welcome
reports of an agreement to end the hunger strike by
Palestinian prisoner Samer Issawi. However, the
United Kingdom remains concerned at the continued
widespread use of administrative detention by Israel,
particularly given Israel's agreement in May 2012 to
limit its use.

The continued use of live fire by the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) resulted in the deaths of two Palestinian
teenagers. On the other side, Molotov cocktails were
reportedly used against the IDF during clashes in
Tulkarem earlier this month. My Government has called
for an investigation into these clashes. There has also
been a worrying number of rockets fired from Gaza into
Israel over the past month. We condemn such actions.
The period of calm since November has been welcome,
and we call on all those responsible to respect in full the
ceasefire. Lastly, the disturbing trend of settler violence
continues. We welcome the investigations launched so
far by the Government of Israel, and look forward to all
perpetrators of such acts being held to account.

Economic and political stability is key to creating
the conditions for peace. As my Foreign Secretary
said on 14 April, we regret the news of Mr. Salam
Fayyad's resignation as Palestinian Prime Minister.
His dedication and energy allowed the Palestinian
Authority to take great strides forward in building the
institutions necessary for a future Palestinian State.
We must continue to support these institutions. In this
context, we welcome Israel's decision of 25 March to
resume the transfer of tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority, in line with its international obligations,
and we expect this to continue. The United Kingdom
remains a strong supporter of and a major financial
donor to the Palestinian Authority.

As I said in January's debate (see S/PV.6906),
we want 2013 to be a year of peace for the Israelis
and Palestinians. This will require Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas to show the bold and
decisive leadership needed to achieve the lasting peace
that the people of the region deserve. We hope that they
wil live up to our expectations.

Turning now to Syria, I would like to start by
expressing outrage at this week's reports of the killings
by Syrian Government forces of hundreds of people,
including numerous women and children, in the suburbs
of Damascus. As my Foreign Secretary said on Monday,
this was yet another reminder of the callous brutality
of the Al-Assad regime and the terrible climate of
impunity inside Syria.

Our primary and urgent goal remains a political
settlement to the conflict. We remain steadfast in our
support for the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Brahimi, but his room for manoeuvre is shrinking
rapidly. The Al-Assad's regime's violence, fueled by
the few countries that still support it, is becoming
increasingly extreme, from the use of Scud missiles
against civilians to the regime's alleged use of chemical
weapons. We strongly support the Secretary-General's
investigation into all allegations of chemical weapons
usage, and urge the Syrian authorities to provide full,
unfettered and immediate access to the investigation
team.

The catastrophe caused by Al-Assad's brutal
regime is rapidly becoming the biggest humanitarian
disaster of the twenty-first century. Ten million
people - half of Syria's population - are likely to be
in need of humanitarian assistance by the end of this
year. This includes up to 4 million refugees, whom the
United Nations assesses will have fled Syria by the end
of 2013. More than 50,000 more people have died since
the last draft resolution on Syria was vetoed in July
2012, yet action by the Council remains conspicuous
in its absence.

With our partners, the United Kingdom will do
everything we can to support the moderate opposition
in order to build pressure for a political settlement for
a free and democratic Syria. Last weekend in Istanbul,
Foreign Ministers from the Friends of Syria core group
met with the National Coalition. In their declaration,
the Coalition underlined its commitment to a political
solution and transition, to guaranteeing the rights and
participation of minorities in shaping Syria's future, to
rejecting terrorism and to guaranteeing the safety of

chemical weapons, and reiterated its commitment to
human rights and international humanitarian law.

In return, the core group of 11 countries reiterated
their support for a political solution, agreed to increase
significantly their support to the Coalition, and to
channel all practical assistance through the Supreme
Military Council. They urged the international
community to provide more support to countries
hosting Syrian refugees.

The United Kingdom commends Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey and Iraq for their generosity in offering vital
sanctuary to those fleeing Syria. Despite the strain
on their resources, we urge them to continue to keep
their borders open. The devastating impact of the
crisis on regional stability underlines the urgent need
for a political solution. There can be no doubt that
the situation poses a clear and immediate threat to
international peace and security.

But neighbouring countries cannot shoulder
the refugee burden alone. The United Kingdom has
provided $260 million in humanitarian funding, and
has delivered fully on the pledges we made at the
Kuwait donor conference. We call on all States to do
likewise, and immediately translate pledges into actual
financial contributions. Doing so will enable the United
Nations to scale up its response. We hope that those
countries that have yet to make financial commitments
will reconsider their position.

The Syrian Government and other parties to the
conflict must immediately remove all impediments to
the delivery of aid. The situation outlined by Under-
Secretary-General Valerie Amos to the Council last
week (see S/PV.6949) is totally unacceptable. Every
truck needing a permit has to be signed off on by
two ministers. As many as 10 notes verbales are
needed for one aid convoy. The number of approved
non-governmental organizations has been reduced
from 110 to 29.

All parties in Syria must ensure that humanitarian
agencies can deliver life-saving aid effectively, safely,
fully and without impediments, in line with their
obligations under international humanitarian law. We
call on the Syrian Government to urgently facilitate free
and unfettered access to all areas of Syria, including to
agencies delivering assistance across lines and across
borders from neighbouring countries. The Security
Council must address this issue urgently.

Finally, those who commit human rights abuses
must be held to account. We call on the Syrian authorities
to grant the commission of inquiry immediate, full
and unfettered access throughout Syria. We strongly
support calls for the Security Council to refer Syrian to
the International Criminal Court. The United Kingdom
remains at the forefront of international efforts to
ensure that those who commit war crimes and crimes
against humanity feel the full weight of international

justice.

