Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): I wish to thank the
presidency for organizing this open debate on the
subject of post-conflict peacebuilding and the
opportunity for the Nigerian delegation to participate
therein. This is most timely, considering the attention
that the subject has received in recent discussions
among member States on how best our Organization
can address the challenges that flow from conflict
situations once the United Nations peacekeeping
missions have fulfilled their mandates in the specific
countries concerned.

It is not my intention to re-state the Secretary-
General's well-grounded concerns on this subject,
which have led to his recommendation for the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission for the
Organization. Suffice it to say that, through its long
involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Nigeria, as an important troop-contributing
country, has come to the conclusion that post-conflict
peacebuilding constitutes an integral, though not fully
addressed, phase of peace management efforts of the
international community. Statistics of relapse abound
in countries emerging from conflict. The potential of
such relapses has grown in the proportion that conflicts
have multiplied. It has brought to the fore commitment
to peace agreements by parties to the conflicts, a
number of whom have found it convenient to take up
their arms again to fight for causes that they believe
could only be won on the battlefield. Such situations, if
allowed to go unchecked, would set at naught the
heroic efforts of our valiant United Nations
peacekeepers. Besides the loss of vital and scarce
resources, both for our Organization and the countries
concerned, neighbouring countries have almost
invariably been sucked into such renewed hostilities
with far-reaching consequences for peace, security and
stability in the subregion.

In Africa, which has a disproportionately large
share of conflict situations in the world, the challenges
of post-conflict peacebuilding are particularly
daunting. The porous nature of our borders, the
advances and ease in communication, and the mobility
of populations have challenged traditional notions of
conflict, in which attempts at resolution have focused
on peace agreements between belligerents in the
national territories. Considerable resources have also
been devoted to immediate problems of disarmament
and demobilization of erstwhile combatants.

However, it is evident that the reintegration or
rehabilitation components of conflict resolution have to
be given more attention than has hitherto been the case. It
is our assessment that the efforts of the international
community in this area perhaps hold the key to lasting
peace. For populations, especially women and vulnerable
groups brutalized by conflicts, an effective and well-
funded reintegration and rehabilitation programme would
constitute an assurance that conflicts are indeed over and
that people can resume their normal lives. Current steps
that have been taken to reintegrate ex-combatants in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process, for example, through the creation of job
opportunities for the large population of restive youths, as
part of strategies to wean them from conflicts, should be
consolidated.

Nigeria believes that, for post-conflict
peacebuilding to be effective, it must focus on some
key groups and areas in conflict environments. The key
groups would include professional soldiers who have
fought on the side of non-State actors; rebel or
mercenary soldiers; and child soldiers. Account must
also be taken of vulnerable groups - namely, women
and children. The key areas deserving the international
community's attention in all peacebuilding efforts
include the provision of employment opportunities,
training of ex-combatants, in particular to give them
skills enabling them to live normal lives, resuscitation
and strengthening of the judicial system, protection and
promotion of human rights, including measures to
punish human rights offenders, and reconciliation and
the healing process.

In all that, it is essential that we resist the
temptation to apply one solution designed to fit all
situations. Rather, our efforts should take full account
of the specific local situation by ensuring national
ownership. Close collaboration with local and national
entities, including civil society groups, would also be
invaluable. That would ensure that long after the
peacekeepers depart, the process of rebuilding
shattered societies and lives continues. Thus, the fruits
of the investments in peace are reaped.

Nigeria believes that subregional and regional
organizations should have a complementary role to
play in post-conflict peacebuilding. Some of those
organizations, including in particular the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union, have proved that they can be relied on as
effective partners in both conflict resolution and the
peacebuilding process. Thus, enhancing the capacity of
those organizations would enable them to perform even
better. In that regard, it is desirable for the Council to
address the special needs of Africa.

Finally, one cannot overemphasize the need to
mobilize the support of the international financial
institutions to make a worthwhile investment in peace.
That calls for a genuine partnership and understanding
between the United Nations and those institutions.

In conclusion, I wish to state that it is the
expectation of the Nigerian delegation that our debate
today will enable the Council to devote greater
attention to post-conflict peacebuilding and thereby
reinforce the confidence of affected populations -
and, indeed, the international community - in the
Council's primary role of maintaining international
peace and security.

