Mr. Sharma: I wish to thank you, Sir, for your
very kind words. I appreciate them very much. It is a
pleasure for me that our consideration of this item is
taking place under your presidency.

I have the honour, as you have said, Sir, to
present my final statement as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste before the
Security Council. I would like at the outset to thank
members of the Council, who have been throughout
appreciative and encouraging of our efforts towards
assisting in the stability and self-reliance of Timor-
Leste. This has been a great support for the entire team
of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), whose contribution and
commitment in implementing the Council's mandate I
would also like to acknowledge here with deep
appreciation. The contribution of some of them will
carry on in the additional year of the consolidation
phase, which proposal is before the Council, before the
exceptional association of the United Nations with the
newly independent State of Timor-Leste in the form of
peacekeeping missions draws to a close. I am confident
that, should the Council endorse the proposal, the team
will show the necessary dedication during that phase
and will give to my successor the support I have
received.

It is the plain truth that a United Nations mission
cannot show consistently positive results unless there
is close, constructive and continuous consultation and
exchange based on trust with the leadership of the
country. My experience has been notable and
heartening in this respect, and I would like to place on
record my grateful appreciation to the Government of
Timor-Leste for the cooperative and forward-looking
orientation and the spirit of joint striving which
characterized our efforts. They constitute, I believe, a
model of collaboration. Most importantly, of course,
my gratitude goes to President Xanana Gusmao, Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri, and President of the National
Parliament Francisco Guterres "Lu-Olo" and Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta. Over two years, I maintained a
pattern of weekly meetings with the Prime Minister
and had very frequent meetings with the other leaders.
They were at all times ready to receive me and offer
their full cooperation and advice in furthering the
mandate charged to us by the Council. In a complex
and ambitious mandate, it is inevitable that there would
be rough passages as well as smooth ones. We brought
understanding to each other's tasks in negotiating the
way ahead.

It is particularly appropriate that, as an
exceptional gesture, we have Senior Minister Ana
Pessoa participating in this meeting of the Council,
which will be the last one under the current mandate. I
have no doubt that the Council will profit greatly from
the personal presence of Minister Ana Pessoa, and I
would also like to thank her for the effort she has
undertaken to participate in the meeting today.

I would like to acknowledge with satisfaction the
fact that the engagement of peacekeeping missions in
Timor-Leste is widely described as having been a
successful one. I myself characterize the outcomes and
result as encouraging. That is not because I have any
reservations on the success of our engagement, but
because we know from the experience of the last half
century that for success to be embedded and durable,
unremitting effort and belief in the highest values of
democratic and participative governance have to be
demonstrated over a long period. All too often, what
had appeared a success story has turned sour. Success
is a retrospective judgement that - when we look back
after decades and take satisfaction at the fact of a
foundation so solidly laid, and a positive and
enlightened direction of policy based on the rule of law
and principles of transparency and accountability so
firmly adhered to - the national accomplishment can
be regarded as irreversible and as a lasting
achievement by the political class and the people.

To ensure that outcome, which can be obtained
only after much tenacity and effort, the primary
imperative in a new nation is the dedication of the
leadership to building and respecting institutions that
reflect those values. In the formative years of an
independent nation, it is essential that the leadership
pursue a vision - and advocate and advance principles
in its political and administrative conduct and
practices - which will bear the judgement of history
and succeeding generations. The scrutiny and
evaluation of the direction and example given by the
first leaders of any nation never slackens, as their
example has to stand the test of time.

The quality of governance and of the institutions
of the State can be progressively built upon only if the
foundations are strong. That is a responsibility of truly
historic proportions which the first leaders carry on
their shoulders, and it is appropriate that they should
already see their actions and contributions in that
historical perspective and not be guided only by
fleeting or convenient considerations of the moment.
That entails care to safeguard the means of policy and
not only the ends. I believe this is a test which the first
leadership of Timor-Leste is equipped to discharge to
the lasting benefit of present and succeeding
generations.
While enlightened leadership is the leading
ingredient in the social and political success of a State,
it is equally true that - particularly in the context of a
progressively interdependent world and the explosive
rise in the expectations of all peoples - the quality as
well as the empathy of the engagement of the outside
world, as development partners, particularly by
countries of the neighbourhood and the economically
better-endowed partners, are equally crucial. We have
to ensure the strength of supportive partnerships. It is
hoped that the nascent State of Timor-Leste, burdened
by the trauma of history and among the States with the
highest levels of poverty and the most depressed social
indicators in the world, will benefit from the
understanding and supportiveness of the outside world,
which will assist it on the path to stability, increasing
prosperity and the enhancement of the quality of life
and choices for its people. This is a challenge which
we cannot fail to meet. No lasting political or social
gain can accrue without economic growth and social
development.

The main developments of interest in the
preceding half year have been reflected in report before
the Council (S/2004/333), and I can therefore - no
doubt to everyone's relief - compress what I have to
say on the various elements of the mandate pertaining
to external and internal security and support for public
administration.

The national police - the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) - now bears responsibility for
policing in all 13 districts and for a vast majority of
headquarter functions. As stated in the report, we are
confident about transferring executive responsibility
for policing to Timor-Leste at a minute past midnight
on 19 May. The contribution of Police Commissioner
Sandra Peisley has been my strength in the
performance of the mandated task of maintaining law
and order and developing the PNTL as an effective
force. While the Council should be reasonably satisfied
with the development of PNTL capacities so far, the
creation of a professional, apolitical, accountable and
responsive police service, with well-established
traditions of integrity and a mindset of service to the
community, will take longer. The recent approval by
the Council of Ministers of an Organic Law on the
PNTL, the Organic Law on the Ministry of Interior and
a disciplinary code for the PNTL are the essential first
steps in that direction. I remain convinced that the
Government of Timor-Leste will ensure effective
utilization of the mentoring capacities to be provided
by the 157 police officers proposed during the
consolidation phase of UNMISET, in conjunction with
other long-term bilateral and multilateral programmes
for police development.

The military component of UNMISET has
continued to be downsized according to the revised
schedule that was approved in Security Council
resolution 1473 (2003). Its presence over the past two
years of UNMISET has been a factor promoting
stability and the consolidation of a still fragile peace.
On this occasion, I would like to place on record my
appreciation of the three Force Commanders, General
Winai Phattiyakul, General Tan Huck Gim and General
Khairuddin Mat Yusof. Their dedication to their task,
their ability to motivate the UNMISET military
component and their advice and support to me have
also been a great strength.

At this time, I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the very useful and necessary work that the
engineers in UNMISET'S military component have
been doing in maintaining the major arteries of the
road system in Timor-Leste, which I have previously
acknowledged. Without continued international support
for that task, the capacity for rapid response to post-
UNMISET security challenges would be rapidly
degraded all over the country. It would also pose a host
of challenges for continued economic development and
would threaten fragmentation of essential social
functions. Bilateral and multilateral assistance will
play a crucial role in meeting that challenge.

The efforts of both Indonesia and Timor-Leste to
find a solution to the transitional issues, particularly
those related to refugees and the demarcation of the
land border, have been detailed in the report before the
Council. I would like to place on record my deep
appreciation of the accessibility and the encouragement
from the leadership of Indonesia which I have enjoyed
in the pursuit of the task of assisting on those
transitional issues, which are part of UNMISET's
mandate. It is to be expected that not all aspects of a
developing bilateral relationship would be amenable to
speedy resolution within a couple of years of the
emergence of Timor-Leste as an independent State.
However, I believe that considerable advances have
been made in many directions, that structures of
constructive cooperation have been created and
employed and that the political signals at the highest
levels from both States have been conducive to
constructing a relationship of friendship, goodwill and
cooperation, unburdened by history. We can look
forward with high expectations to the future course of
the relationship.
Reports - though unconfirmed - of criminal
elements, many of them armed, both inside and outside
Timor-Leste, continue to be received. However,
Indonesia's commitment to controlling such elements
is encouraging, as are the continuing efforts of Timor-
Leste to develop the capabilities of its security
agencies to deal with such criminal elements, including
through the establishment of a Rapid Deployment
Service of the PNTL, which will operate in rural
border areas. UNMISET would continue to cooperate
with the Government of Timor-Leste in building the
capacities of the specialized units of the PNTL,
including the training of the rapid deployment service
during the consolidation phase.

Through its institution- and capacity-building
activities, UNMISET has contributed significantly to
the viability and political stability of the State
institutions of Timor-Leste, including through
mentoring and coaching Timorese counterparts,
assistance in the preparation of legal frameworks,
formalizing related rules and regulations and
institutionalization of operational procedures.

The innovative and pioneering experiment
sanctioned by Security Council resolution 1410 (2002)
revealed that the requirements for human and
institutional capacity development were far more
demanding than originally envisaged, requiring the
presence of most critically important advisor positions
beyond May 2004. A robust exit strategy to ensure
sustainability will be the major challenge during the
consolidation phase of the mission. Likewise, the
assistance provided through the serious crimes
programme of UNMISET offers crucial reinforcement
to the Council's commitment that perpetrators of such
crimes shall be brought to justice. It also helps to
strengthen Timorese capacities in the justice sector.

A healthy and functioning justice sector in Timor-
Leste is crucial for the overall functioning of the
democratic institutions and thus is fundamental in
ensuring good governance. The recruitment of
international judges to fill the current gaps would
therefore be accorded priority attention. However, the
sustainability of the justice sector can be achieved only
through the direct support of bilateral and multilateral
development partners. This must be not only an
immediate priority, but also a much needed long-term
strategy.

Social peace, security and stability are, of course,
a prerequisite for sustainable gains in areas of
governance and economic development. Enhanced
transparency and accountability in governance provide
a healthy tone to the political culture and also
contribute to better and more effective utilization of
external assistance. Through the Provedor, or
ombudsman, Act and workshops in this area, in
addition to the office of the Inspector General, the
Government has signalled its commitment to these
principles. Similarly, enhanced cooperation between
the wider United Nations system of agencies, funds
and programmes and international financial
institutions, as well as bilateral actors and civil society,
in support of national programmes would contribute
towards a holistic approach. In that regard, I would like
once again to acknowledge the sterling support given
to me by Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Resident Coordinator Sukehiro
Hasegawa.

Being acutely conscious of the need for a smooth
downsizing of the Mission, we had established a
committee in good time to ensure that all elements for
a proper handover to the Government, or other
applicable means of disposal of assets, were in place.
Since I last addressed the Council in October 2003,
considerable progress has been made in the orderly
downsizing of the Mission. Planning for what would
have been the final repatriation of the peacekeeping
force (PKF), the United Nations police and the
substantive elements of the civilian staff had reached
an advanced stage before it was overtaken by the
planning for the much smaller follow-on mission now
proposed. Much of the earlier work, however, remains
relevant. The permanent PKF presences in Suai and
Oecussi were withdrawn, and United Nations and
contingent-owned equipment assets in those locations
were largely recovered or donated to the Government
of Timor-Leste.

In keeping with our policy of handing back to the
Government fully functional facilities where this is
possible, two United Nations-owned facilities in
Suai - the former Sector West Headquarters and the
PKF Forward Surgical Team hospital, complete with
medical equipment - were donated to the Government
in December 2003. The Government has to meet the
challenge of meeting the operational requirements.
During liquidation, environmental considerations have
been respected.

The drawdown of United Nations police and the
progressive handover of policing responsibility to the
PNTL have been accompanied by the donation of
United Nations-owned equipment in police stations.
UNMISET continues to provide essential telephone
services down to substation level, where Timor
Telecom cannot provide this service, and provisionally
full operation of the police VHF radio network. It
appears that without some significant development in
local capability, UNMISET will have little choice but
to continue this support well into the period of the
proposed follow-on mission.

I am pleased to report that the downsizing of the
national staff has not caused us any appreciable
difficulty, largely due to the efforts of the Division of
Administration, particularly its Director, Philip Cooper,
to improve their job skills and to accord recognition
through certificates of the experience gained by them
while employed by the United Nations. Training
courses have been run in software programmes -
Word, Excel, Access, Power Point - computer
hardware, web design, language training in English and
Portuguese, office administration, small business
development, proposal writing, formal documentation
and the establishment of cooperatives and
microfinance.

These initiatives have been appreciated by the
national staff. The return of the national staff's pension
contributions within one month of the end of their
contracts by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund has also contributed positively to the morale of
those staff. Expanding and new missions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations have absorbed
most of the international staff who have sought
continued employment with the United Nations.

Before I conclude, let me express my deep thanks
to the Secretariat, particularly Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Hedi Annabi, Julian Harston and the efficient desk
officers assisting us in our work in the field, as well as
their colleagues in other specialized units of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
departments of the Secretariat. Their availability,
guidance and unfailing support have left an indelible
impression on me.

