Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the delegation of Senegal for
convening today's very important meeting. Russia
strongly advocates building and deepening cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on the basis of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.

OIC members are countries whose people profess
common spiritual and moral values. Such a uniting factor
should play a fundamentally important role in resolving
the many complex tasks the international community
faces. First and foremost are conflict prevention,
mediation and political diplomatic settlement, where the
Organization's potential is absolutely needed. Today,
the Islamic and Arab worlds are traversing a period of
major upheaval, often accompanied by bloody conflict.
Helping the people of the region emerge from this dark
period is not only the responsibility of the Security
Council but a general duty in which OIC, along with
other regional and subregional organizations, is called
upon to play a unique role. Our common goal, both in
the Council and in OIC, should be to pool our efforts to
counteract terrorism. In his statement at the seventieth
anniversary session of the General Assembly, the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Putin, called
for establishing a broad counter-terrorism coalition (see A/70/PV.13). It is an urgent task to be addressed.

We are convinced that violence cannot be justified
by any religious pretext and that the actions of terrorists,
wherever or by whomever, should be condemned. Any
form of support for terrorist activity should be strongly
counteracted. We should not try to distinguish between
good terrorists and bad terrorists - between one
country's terrorists and another country's terrorists.
The growing threat from extremist and terrorist groups
like the Islamic State poses a direct challenge to the
entire international community, above all our partners
in OIC.

Recently, the counter-terrorism context has changed
considerably. On one hand, there is continued growth
in the global terrorist threat. Therefore, now more than
ever, we need to clearly and unambiguously define this
threat in important United Nations documents, such as
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. On
the other hand, the term "violent extremism" - which
we see as an integral focus of international counter-
terrorist cooperation - has been introduced. It is part
of the counter-terrorism prevention efforts - that
is, the prevention radical and terrorist phenomena.
Misconception is unacceptable, as we could end up
disorienting the international community and steering
it away from its main task of eliminating terrorism.

It is now important to recognize the vital role of
States and their competent authorities in countering
terrorism in their own territories and as part of
international cooperation efforts. In that regard, I
should remind the Council that we have made important
comments regarding the Secretary-General's Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Removing
international terrorism from the international legal
framework is unacceptable. That undermines the global
counter-terrorism architecture and sometimes leads
to interference in States' internal affairs. Russia has
submitted a draft resolution to the Security Council on
countering terrorist ideology, with the goal of achieving
real and effective opposition to the promotion of
terrorist ideas, including through the Internet.

The pseudo-ideological content under the cover
of Islam spread by terrorists is dangerous for Muslim
countries first and foremost. We hope that the Islamic
world shares the View of Russia on the urgent need
to implement and strengthen the approach of the
Security Council, and the United Nations as a whole,
to curbing terrorism, the spread of its ideologies and its
radicalization of populations, especially young people.
We hope that our partners will ponder our proposed
draft resolution and adopt Russia's initiative.

Russia supports consolidating international efforts
to combat the threat that is common to all of us. We
firmly believe that the fight against terrorism and the
violent extremism that leads to it should be built on
a solid foundation of international law under United
Nations auspices. We have been providing constant
support to the Governments of Iraq, Syria, Egypt,
Jordan, Lebanon and other countries of the region in
their opposition to terrorists. In order to succeed in the
fight against terrorism, it is essential that we prioritize
attention not only to the military threat posed byjihadist
groups, but also to the root causes that have given rise
to it. The only way we can deal with the accumulated
contradictions is through the united efforts of the entire
international community, by deepening our dialogue
and our partnerships, while respecting people's right
to preserve their cultural, religious and civilizational
identity. That requires comprehensive analysis, in
which it is essential to consider the interrelationships
between all the most acute problems, old and new,
afflicting the region. We would like to recall that
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, speaking in a Security Council
meeting on the Middle East (see S/PV.7774), called
for the convening of a comprehensive review of the
situation in the Middle East.

We proceed from the assumption that no conflict,
whether in Syria, Libya, Iraq, Yemen, the Sahara and
Sahel regions or other long-suffering parts of the world,
can be resolved through a military solution. Only a
broad national dialogue with the participation of every
ethnic, religious and political group and their unity
in combating terrorism can produce the agreement,
stability and conditions that are critical to the successful
socioeconomic development of the countries in areas
of conflict. We should particularly emphasize that the
crises that have flared more recently should not push
the task of settling the Palestinian-Israeli conflict into
the background. That should be based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and, of course, the concept of two States, Palestine and
Israel, living side by side in peace.

The relationship between Russia and the
Organization ofIslamic Cooperation is built on dialogue
and mutual respect. Our country, which is home to more
than 20 million Muslim citizens, is an observer in the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and committed
to the progressive development of cooperation with

the Organization's member States with the goal of
achieving security and stability in the world.

