Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to associate myself with the statement to be
delivered later by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the
European Union. Specifically, Foreign Ministers of the
European Union yesterday condemned the extrajudicial
killing of Hamas leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin. They
also stated

"the European Union has repeatedly condemned
the terrorist atrocities committed by Hamas,
which have resulted in the deaths of hundreds of
Israelis. The European Union recognizes Israel's
right to protect its citizens against terrorist
attacks. Israel is entitled to do this under
international law. Israel is not, however, entitled
to carry out extrajudicial killings."

The United Kingdom condemns yesterday's
killings, as the Prime Minister and the Foreign
Secretary made clear. Mr. Straw said yesterday,

"All of us understand Israel's need to defend
itself, and it is fully entitled to do that against the
terrorism which affects it within international
law, but it is not entitled to go in for this kind of
unlawful killing, and we therefore condemn it. It
is unacceptable, it is unjustified and it is very
unlikely to achieve its objectives."

The United Kingdom has repeatedly and
consistently condemned the many terrorist attacks
against Israeli citizens, including those perpetrated by
Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Al-Aqsa Martyrs
Brigade. Terrorists inflict huge suffering and loss.
Their actions undermine the Palestinian cause. Let me
make clear that no cause justifies resorting to terrorism,
nor can it exonerate the terrorist.

Events every day underline that there is no
military solution to the situation in the Middle East.
Neither party will achieve its aims through the use of
violence. We urge them both to exercise restraint and
stop this escalating violence. The road map remains the
right route to a just and lasting peace settlement. Both
sides have so far failed to implement their obligations
under the road map. Our focus should be getting this
process back on track. A virtuous path of cooperation
must replace the present vicious cycle of retaliatory
violence. That is the message of hope addressed
equally to both parties.

