Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to welcome Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
congratulate him on his recent appointment. We thank
him for his briefing on the situation in Kosovo and for
the accompanying report (S/2011/675), which provides
a detailed description of recent events, the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which he leads, and efforts to find
lasting peace in the region.

We regret the various incidents that have
occurred in border areas, the most recent being
yesterday, when several NATO soldiers were injured
and two were shot as they attempted to dismantle
roadblocks that had been set up in some areas. We also
regret the death of a Serbian civilian and two other
individuals who were injured at the beginning of this
month.

Colombia urges the parties to adopt measures that
will help to reduce tensions and prevent the emergence
of new crises. At the same time, we encourage the
parties to renew their efforts to achieve peaceful
coexistence and deepen their commitment to dialogue
in order to resolve the issues under dispute.

We thank Foreign Ministers Vuk Jeremie and
Enver Hoxhaj for their statements, which show that
there is clear intent to engage in dialogue and that
progress has been made in that regard. However, their
remarks also reveal a degree of harshness. I believe
that it is crucial to find some terms for coming
together. In that spirit, we call on local authorities to
improve their mechanisms for cooperation, good-
neighbourliness and the early settlement of disputes.
We are convinced that the resulting arrangements will
always play a role in creating unity and harmony, and
will surely set the best example on both sides of the
border.

We note with optimism tomorrow's meeting
between the parties, to be held in Brussels, and hope
that steps will be taken there to consolidate the process
on the basis of agreements reached in previous rounds
of talks, including those held in that city on 21 and
22 November. The meeting will provide an opportunity
for convergence and, in turn, make it possible for the
parties to resolve their problems. We hope that
progress is made on practical matters and in areas of
cooperation, such as the energy and
telecommunications sectors, as has been done with
regard to the recognition of university degrees.

My country takes an optimistic view of the area's
economic outlook. Its proximity to the European Union
makes it a valid trading partner, which augurs well for
further physical, customs and transport integration. The
parties can take the first step in that direction by
avoiding confrontational language, which will facilitate
efforts to reach agreements that will benefit all parties.
With regard to allegations involving the crimes of
murder, inhuman treatment of people, illegal
trafficking in human organs and violations of human
dignity, which we have addressed here on several
occasions, we note with interest the efforts being made
to pursue the ongoing investigations and trials as
described in the most recent report. We hope that in the
future, it will be possible to identify those responsible
for those crimes and bring them to justice.

We would underscore what was said in the report
with regard to the problem of missing persons, which
remains a major obstacle to community reconciliation
and continues to undermine the returns process.
Colombia believes that those investigations must be
fully completed so as to lay the groundwork for social
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.

Finally, according to the latest report, the process
of returns has been slow. We therefore call for
extraordinary efforts to establish the conditions
necessary to allow speedy returns to communities in a
climate of safety and confidence.

