Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen for his
excellent presentation to the Security Council and
commend him for the work he has accomplished on the
ground since his appointment to head the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. I
would also like to thank Mr. Nebojsa Covic' for his
statement.

The briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General enables the Council to assess
progress made towards stabilization and normalization
of the situation in Kosovo as well as towards
confidence-building and the reconstruction of property
damaged or destroyed during the deplorable events of
last March.

I would recall that the international community's
prompt reaction to those tragic events and the
combined efforts of the various parties involved made
it possible to prevent setbacks that could have
jeopardized the peace process in the region. The
commitment of Kosovar leaders to speedily completing
reconstruction of damaged property and social and
educational infrastructure and to relaunching the
process of the return of displaced persons, in addition
to the progress made in the reform of local
administration, are signs of the positive developments
in Kosovo and mark the beginning of a process of
detente that heralds an improvement in the situation in
the interest of all. Such measures are conducive to
consolidating the society of Kosovo and preventing
deplorable clashes between ethnic groups from
occurring again. They will also surely create conditions
of security and will have a positive impact on the
process of the sustainable return of displaced persons
and on freedom of movement.

In that context, my delegation welcomes the calm
and peaceful holding of the legislative elections of
23 October and the creation of the coalition
government. Those two major events mark a turning
point in the consolidation and stabilization of local
provisional institutions. However, we regret that the
Serb population did not participate in the electoral
process. Once again, we reiterate our appeal to all
parties to participate fully in the efforts to build
confidence, strengthen ties and promote reconciliation
among all Kosovars.

That progress is, of course, significant, but in no
way should it obscure the local day-to-day situation,
which remains difficult because of the lack of notable
change or visible signs of the various parties'
implementation of their commitments, especially in the
eyes of the local population.

An economically viable, democratic, tolerant and
multi-ethnic Kosovo remains our primary objective.
That inevitably requires sustained efforts, the
participation of all and the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

The international community must also create all
the conditions for the comprehensive, speedy and
successful implementation of the standards in order to
proceed as quickly as possible to the consideration and
realization of the fundamental question of the final
status of Kosovo.

In that context, I commend Ambassador Kai Eide
for his outstanding work in assessing the situation in
Kosovo and for his relevant recommendations. My
delegation supports all shared, comprehensive and
integrated strategies based on dialogue and the
establishment of conditions necessary for security and
the improvement of the economic and social conditions
of the entire population of Kosovo. As well, we
support the idea of a subregional approach to the final
settlement of the question of Kosovo.

