Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): On behalfofthe Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
I thank the Security Council for inviting me to brief
it as well as for the excellent cooperation between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

In line with established practice, the following
statement has been approved by the members of the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, including the country
concerned, Burundi. I had the opportunity to provide
an overview of the configuration's engagement with
Burundi to the Council during the informal interactive
dialogue held on 28 August. On that occasion. I
highlighted that the discussions in the configuration
reflect the shared commitment to continue supporting
Burundi leading up to 2020 elections and beyond with
a view to the consolidation of peace and promoting
inclusive socioeconomic development.

On 27 September, on the margins of the opening
of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly,
I was received by His Excellency Eze'chiel Nibigira,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, for a bilateral
meeting. Our discussions centred on the next steps in
terms of peacebuilding activities in Burundi, including
my next visit to the country as Chair of the PBC
Burundi configuration. I said that the configuration
will continue serving as a platform for dialogue on
cooperation between Burundi and its international
partners in support of the implementation of Burundi's
national development plan. I also highlighted the
importance ofpreventing a slowdown in socioeconomic
programmes as the 2020 elections draw closer.
Furthermore, I underscored the need for peaceful, free,
fair and inclusive elections and suggested that the PBC
can serve as a platform for identifying activities that
support an environment conducive to such a process.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs indicated that the
Ministry of the Interior of Burundi recently convened
meetings between the ruling party and the opposition
parties, including the Congres national pour la liberte,
and that the Government issued a call for tolerance to
all political actors.

On previous occasions I have underlined the
importance of ensuring that the PBC's engagement
complements and is coherent with that of other actors,
including the Security Council, member States of the
region and the United Nations system as a whole. In
line with this approach, I continue engaging with key
interlocutors on developments in Burundi. I recently had
the privilege of exchanging thoughts with the Secretary
General of the East African Community, Ambassador
Liberat Mfumukeko; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa, Ms. Bintou Keita; and the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel
Kafando, who is also in the Chamber today. I would like
to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to
the Special Envoy for our excellent working relationship
and for his support, advice and commitment.

Let me now turn to the developments in Burundi
that are relevant from a peacebuilding perspective, and
to what they mean for the configuration's engagement.
First, the preparations for the 2020 general elections
continue to shape the political context in the country.
Burundian Government representatives have underlined
on several occasions that President Nkurunziza will
not stand as a candidate in the upcoming elections. The
ruling party, the Conseil national pour la defense de la
democratie-Forces pour la defense de la democratie, is
expected to choose its presidential candidate in early
2020. According to media reports, several politicians
belonging to opposition parties have recently returned
to Burundi for discussions on their repatriation and the
current electoral process. At the same time, reports
of alleged human rights violations and incidents of
damage to infrastructure belonging to political parties
have raised concerns over the democratic space ahead
of the elections.

During the configuration's previous meeting, on
12 June, the Permanent Representative of Burundi,
Ambassador Albert Shingiro, informed PBC member
States about the advanced state of preparations for the
elections, including the Government's adoption of the
Kayanza road map, the establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission, the adoption of
the electoral code in April and the publication of the
electoral calendar in June. The Burundi configuration
has further been informed of the passing of the 2019-
2020 budget law, which provides for the financing of
the 2020 elections with domestic resources. In parallel,
the configuration can serve as a platform for identifying
assistance for activities falling outside the operational
budget for the elections that might contribute to
fostering an environment conducive to peaceful, free,
fair and inclusive elections.

Secondly, the voluntary return of Burundian
refugees from neighbouring countries is critical to
peacebuilding, particularly at the community level. At
the configuration's most recent meeting, the Permanent
Representative of Burundi informed members of the
return of large numbers of Burundians to the country
from neighbouring Tanzania. Member States have
consistently called for these returns to be organized in
full respect of international law and underscored the
principles of voluntary, dignified and safe return. The
PBC has also served as a platform for highlighting the
persistent funding needs for supporting the voluntary
and dignified return of Burundians from neighbouring
countries, with the assistance ofthe Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
multi-agency efforts aimed at enabling the sustainable
integration of returnees.

Thirdly, socioeconomic cooperation remains key
to reducing vulnerabilities, strengthening resilience
and improving disaster preparedness and response
in Burundi. Cooperation in relation to implementing
the Ebola response plan has brought together the
Government of Burundi and technical and financial
partners, including international non-governmental
organizations, in a multi-sectoral, multi-partner
approach centred around a key concern for the
Burundian population. PBC member States have
indicated their wish for an intensification of dialogue
with the Government of Burundi at the strategic and
sector-specific levels in support of the implementation
of Burundi's development priorities. The configuration
also continues to serve as a platform for bringing
partners, including the World Bank, together in pursuit
of common objectives spelled out in the relevant
strategic frameworks and in line with the national
development plan.

Finally, the effective and meaningful inclusion
of women and youth in public life and their full
participation in decision-making on the future of
their country is a crucial factor for sustaining peace.
The second iteration of the International Conference
of Women Leaders, convened by the First Lady
of Burundi, Mrs. Denise Nkurunziza, from 24 to
26 October, called on women to follow their destiny,
take courage and act, as the consolidation of peace is
their business. In line with the PBC's gender strategy,
member States have also expressed their support for
the empowerment of women in Burundi. The PBC can
play a further role - and should in fact intensify its
efforts - in support of initiatives aimed at preventing
conflict and mitigating tensions at the community
level. The importance of such initiatives in promoting
dialogue and reconciliation extends beyond the
electoral period, as it serves to strengthen resilience
and preserve the gains achieved through the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
The Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) supports projects
that strengthen local dialogue, social cohesion,
reconciliation, conflict resolution and prevention, the
empowerment of women and youth and the voluntary
reintegration of refugees. The total budget for
operational projects approved under the PBF is slightly
over $14 million. As the testimonies ofBurundian women
mediators have made clear, support for the participation
ofwomen in peace processes must take a broad approach
that includes the strengthening of women's economic
autonomy through revenue-generating activities.

I intend to pursue my mandate for the PBC
Burundi configuration in line with the priorities and
recommendations that have received the support of
the member States of the configuration, including
possibilities for the PBC to accompany Burundi along
the path towards free, fair, inclusive and peaceful
elections in 2020, as well as the continuation of the
socioeconomic dialogue with the Government and its
international partners. In close cooperation with my
Burundian counterpart, I will continue to promote the
PBC as a platform for dialogue and exchange between
Burundi and a broad range of member States and
partners within the United Nations system and beyond.
In close cooperation with the Burundian authorities, I
am also preparing a visit to Burundi. As usual, I will
seek to engage with a broad range of interlocutors,
from Government representatives and political parties
to civil society, women and youth, economic actors and
international and regional partners.

Allow me to conclude with the following
observations and recommendations. First, I encourage
the United Nations to remain engaged in Burundi
through an integrated approach, drawing on the
strengths of each entity and striving towards policy
coherence in order to consolidate peacebuilding gains
and stay alert to the risks thatjeopardize these gains.
Secondly, the Government of Burundi, political
parties and other stakeholders, with the support of the
member States of the subregion, the African Union
and the United Nations, should work together in order
to create an environment conducive to the holding of
peaceful, free, fair and inclusive elections, including
efforts aimed at ensuring the full realization of all
human rights.

Thirdly, I call on all Member States to increase
their support for projects and initiatives aimed at
reducing violence and mitigating tension, including at
the community level, throughout the election cycle. I
will continue to encourage the configuration to serve as
a platform for identifying further possibilities to scale
up this support.

Fourthly, funding is urgently needed for the
2019 joint refugee return and reintegration plan. This
inter-agency response plan is designed to offer safe and
dignified repatriation to Burundian refugees returning
from the subregion and to promote their resilience
and sustainable reintegration. I call on Member States
to give maximum support to this comprehensive
plan, which is exemplary in leveraging synergies
among existing humanitarian and development plans,
including Burundi's national development plan, with a
view to ensuring sustainable reintegration. Continued
assistance is equally needed to maintain humanitarian
standards in refugee camps in order to guarantee that
return remains an entirely voluntary decision.

Fifthly, through the configuration, I will pursue
efforts aimed at sustaining international support for the
implementation of the national development plan and at
assisting dialogue between the Government of Burundi
and its bilateral and multilateral partners around the
priorities identified in the plan.

I thank Council members for their interest and
continued support for the PBC.

