Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on
behalf of my delegation for your work in the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
April and to thank you for convening this open debate.
We also wish to express our gratitude to Ms. Hannelore
Hoppe for her presentation at the beginning of the
meeting, as well as to the Secretary-General for the
preparation of the report that has served as the basis for
the debate.

Seven years after the United Nations Conference
on Small Arms and Light Weapons and almost nine
years after the Security Council first debated this
matter, the diversion of small arms and light weapons
to illicit trade continues to be a threat to peace and
security. Its devastating effects continue.
According to the 2007 Small Arms Survey, more
than 875 million small arms and light weapons are in
circulation today. It is estimated that eight million arms
of this type enter the market each year. The
consequences in terms of loss of human lives have
been worse than those caused by nuclear weapons.
Given the existing stockpiles, small arms and light
weapons truly are weapons of mass destruction.
Nevertheless, the level of commitment to address their
illicit trade has been much less than that devoted to the
problem of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.
Greater decisiveness is required in acting and moving
forward towards universal and legally binding
instruments that effectively address that phenomenon.

Meanwhile, it is necessary to use all the tools
available to the international community, which
requires the will and resolve to fully implement
existing legislation and international instruments on the
matter. The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is one such instrument. It
offers precise recommendations for progress in the
fight against the scourge. We are confident that the
Biennial Meeting of States, to be held in July within
the framework of the Programme of Action, will lead
to substantive progress and concrete results. We will
work tirelessly towards that end. The Biennial Meeting
is an opportunity to strengthen the Programme of
Action and to promote its proper implementation at the
global, regional and national levels.

Colombia will have the honour to be a Vice-Chair
of the Meeting and will facilitate the segment on
cooperation and international assistance. Additionally,
Colombia will host the Latin American and Caribbean
meeting aimed at outlining a regional position in
preparation for the Biennial Meeting. All States must
offer their committed support to the process. In that
context, identifying international cooperation and
assistance measures is of particular importance. Such
issues as national capacity-building, the training of
police and customs officers, the rapid and timely
exchange of information, and support for prevention
campaigns must be given priority.

The report of the Secretary-General submitted to
the Council today contains various relevant
recommendations that once again put the issue of small
arms and light weapons, as well as the actions that
must be carried out to address the problem, into
perspective.

My delegation agrees with the emphasis placed
on the first recommendation on the need for States to
enhance their efforts to collect, maintain and share data

on small arms and ammunition. Government
transparency in that area is critical in order to fill the
gaps in the implementation of current international
instruments. In that regard, the issue of ammunition
must be addressed as an element inseparable from the
problem of small arms and light weapons. Any effort
on the latter will be inoperative if the supply of
ammunition is not effectively controlled.

The development of quantitative indicators in the
area of small arms, referred to in the second
recommendation, would also be a step forward in the
right direction. Such indicators should be limited
exclusively to small arms and light weapons. In
particular, the development of an arms-stock baseline
could allow for a genuine and reliable assessment of
the magnitude of the problem. On the other hand, it is
true that the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons can be related to other factors, such as
security, violence, crime, trade, human rights and even
development, among others, as suggested in the third
recommendation of the report. Nevertheless, the
existence of such a broad spectrum of factors should
not distract us from the concrete actions that must be
taken to handle that phenomenon - in other words, the
specific measures that must be taken to control the
trade in small arms and light weapons.

It would also be useful to understand in greater
depth the scope of the recommendation included in the
report on the subject of cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. No explanation is given in the
recommendation of either the objectives or the areas of
that cooperation.

The issue under discussion is of particular
relevance to Colombia. My country has suffered more
than most from the consequences of the illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons. However, it would not
be appropriate to frame the problem as if some
countries have been more victimized than others. That
would not be within the constructive spirit of joint
action that characterizes our Organization. All States
have a responsibility in the face of that illicit trade.
Collective commitment and genuine cooperation,
including regional and bilateral cooperation, are
needed to confront it.

A clear and firm political signal from the Council
on the various aspects of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons would be in harmony with the need
to provide decisive support for the tasks of the General
Assembly and to strengthen the interaction between
our two bodies within their respective mandates. It
would also be a positive contribution to the main role
that falls to States in the fight against such illicit trade,
within the framework of shared responsibility. Only
with such an approach can more effective cooperation
and international assistance mechanisms be developed
and more dynamic action developed to rid the world of
that scourge.

