Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank the Secretary-General and the Senior
Advisory Group for their efforts in preparing the report
before the Council today (see S/2011/85). It contains
many important ideas. We would also like to thank
Mr. Guehenno, Ms. Malcorra and Ambassador Gasana
for their detailed briefings.

If strengthening civilian capacity does not lead to
the establishment of peace, then civilian capacity will
not have a direct impact on many vital sectors in terms
of peacebuilding, for instance in stabilizing the
security situation, strengthening State institutions and
ensuring development. The Security Council has noted
the close correlation between strengthening State
institutions and social development, on the one hand,
and achieving lasting peace, on the other. It did so
during the two debates organized this year under the
presidencies of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Brazil,
respectively (6472nd and 6479th meetings).

In terms of future actions, we welcome the
formation of a steering group, to be led by Under-
Secretary-General Malcorra, to ensure follow-up of the
implementation of the report and its recommendations.
We encourage her to ensure that the follow-up process
is based on close consultations with Member States and
the parties concerned, and that it leads to concrete
recommendations on the best way of translating the
initiatives described in the report into reality.

In that regard, we would like to highlight three
aspects of the report, which in our view should be
given close attention as part of efforts to create a road
map for the implementation of the report's
recommendations.

First is national ownership. Like other speakers,
we wish to emphasize the importance of guaranteeing
national ownership in societies emerging from conflict.
National actors are indeed the primary stakeholders in
peacebuilding efforts. They are in the best position to
understand the needs of their society and to optimally
respond to them.

While the report has devoted considerable
attention to the best way of guaranteeing national
ownership, it is still true that experience has shown
that implementing such initiatives is an extremely
complex undertaking. In the future, we hope to see
practical proposals for the best way in which to
guarantee national ownership, which could be achieved
through the activities of civilian experts on the ground,
and on how those experts can help to enhance national
capacities.

Second is the issue of women's empowerment.
Women are essential partners in peacebuilding. We
note, however, that this important category is often
excluded, in spite of the fact that women account for
half of the population of societies emerging from
conflict. In this respect, we hope that concrete
proposals will be made concerning women's
empowerment and involvement that guarantee their
economic autonomy and access to basic services, such
as health services and education, in societies emerging
from conflict.

Third is the issue of partnerships. Partnerships are
a fundamental pillar of the United Nations ability to
deploy civilian capacity in a flexible, effective and
timely manner. In this respect, we believe that we
should first consider the expertise available in the
country concerned, and then in the region, and then
among countries of the South, and then at the
international level. We should clarify the best way for
the activities of a civilian partnership cell to contribute
to mobilizing the expertise of countries of the South.

Finally, we hope that the United Nations will
streamline its consideration of civilian capacity and the
challenges ahead, particularly since such consideration
is taking place in the broader framework of the efforts
of the Secretary-General and Member States to ensure
that our Organization can best respond to the needs of
societies for peace and development.

