Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish to
congratulate Mexico on its assumption of the Security
Council presidency for the month of June. I thank the
Mexican presidency for convening this open debate on
an important topic dear to our hearts. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his report contained in
document S/2010/ 181, and Special Representative
Coomaraswamy for her briefing before the Council.

We appreciate the efforts of United Nations
entities during the reporting period in protecting
children from violations in armed conflict, and
particularly in monitoring and reporting on grave
violations of children's rights, incorporating child
protection policy into peacekeeping operations, and
promoting the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. At the
national level, we are pleased to note that 131 countries
have ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, that significant successes
have been recorded in integrating child rights and child
protection goals into national development plans and
strategies, that many States have enacted new pieces of
legislation to prevent and prohibit grave violations
against children, and that more parties to armed
conflict are now engaged in establishing action plans to
release children from their ranks and to end the
recruitment and use of child solders.

My delegation, however, remains deeply
concerned about persistent violations committed
against children by many parties to armed conflict, and
equally concerned about the high numbers of civilian
casualties, including children, during military
operations in several parts of the world. We are
dismayed by the increasing hostility against
humanitarian aid work in more than one war-torn
country, driving civilian populations - children in the
first place - into extremely difficult living conditions.

We condemn all these acts and call on all parties
concerned to comply with international human rights
and humanitarian laws. We join the call for the
Security Council to ensure that specific provisions for
the protection of children continue to be included in all
relevant peacekeeping operations, and that child
protection concerns be integrated into mission planning
instruments and processes, as appropriate. It is our
view that child protection concerns should be
consistently reflected in peace processes and peace
agreements, and that children's particular needs
included in post-conflict peace planning and financing.

We recognize the work of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, which is essential to keeping us
all abreast of developments on the ground. At the same
time, we believe that greater caution is needed in
selecting specific situations to be mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, bearing in mind the scope
of the report as mandated by resolutions 1612
(2005)and 1882 (2009). It is necessary that this
mechanism operate with the participation of and in
cooperation with national Governments, and that all
actions undertaken by United Nations entities within
the framework of this mechanism be designed to
support and supplement, as appropriate, the role of
national Governments. Consultations with Member
States should also be further enhanced during
preparation of reports to ensure that the information
contained therein is updated, non-biased, reliable and
verifiable.

Let me reiterate Viet Nam's view that the State
bears the primary role and responsibility in protecting
its civilians, including children, in armed conflict. The
contact between the United Nations and non-State
actors should therefore be conducted in cooperation
with concerned Governments in order to avoid possible
prejudgment in giving political and legal status to those
non-State actors, including in particular terrorist
groups.

Furthermore, child protection in situations of
armed conflict should always be part and parcel of a
broader strategy of conflict prevention and response
that deals with hunger and poverty as well as
socio-economic development. I also wish to emphasize
the indispensable cooperation of United Nations bodies
in the successful implementation of such a strategy. In
this connection, it is vital to ensure closer and more
effective coordination among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as among peacekeeping and political
missions, UNICEF, the United Nations Development
Programme and other agencies.

