Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting and the briefings we
have just heard from Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
and Ambassador Carl Orrenius Skau, Charge' d'affaires
ad interim of Sweden, on behalf of the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

Peru is closely following the political and security
situation in Libya. We are particularly concerned at the
ongoing reports of violence in Tripoli and Benghazi and
other areas of Libya, as well as the presence of terrorist
groups there. We must therefore ensure the promotion
of respect for human rights throughout the country,
especially as concerns particularly vulnerable groups
such as refugees, women and children.

Given this situation, Peru supports the efforts
to implement the Libyan Political Agreement and
the United Nations action plan. We believe that
dialogue and commitment among the various Libyan
stakeholders, supported by the mediation efforts of
the Special Representative, are the only way to move
towards a national transition and achieve sustainable
peace. We would therefore highlight the progress made
in the talks between the High Council of State and the
House of Representatives, as well as the good offices of
UNSMIL throughout the process. Good faith and a the
spirit of understanding and cooperation must prevail
among the parties.

Furthermore, we commend the Libyan people for
their enthusiasm with respect to holding elections this
year. More than 2 million voters had been registered
by the end of January, including more than a million
women, as the Special Representative stressed. We
also wish to highlight the importance of the town hall
meetings, open to all citizens, that have been held with
the support of UNSMIL and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.

It is our view that these efforts must serve to
ensure that citizens are involved in and take ownership
of the political process leading to the election of
new national authorities, the convening of a national
conference and the drafting of a new constitution. We
deem important the participation of the entire Libyan
political spectrum and civil society, as well as the
support of the international community in this. Peru
encourages greater participation on the part of women
and young people at all levels of this process, and here
we wish to commend the inclusion of women in the
joint drafting committee and the establishment of a
forum to review draft constitutional proposals from a
gender perspective.

