Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We welcome you, Sir, as you preside over today's
wrap-up discussion. The Chinese delegation
appreciates the work of Ambassador Valdivieso and
congratulates him on his successful presidency this
month.

The Security Council considered a number of
agenda items in accordance with a well-prepared plan
and in a coordinated orderly manner. Notably, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Mr. Fernandez de Soto, personally presided over the
Council's open debate on small arms, on the basis of
which the Council today adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/200l/2l). We greatly appreciate
Colombia's efforts on that issue and the role it has
played.

Africa was one focus of the Security Council's
work in August. Beyond the Council's consultations on
some of the hot spots in that region, members also held
a meeting with the International Peace Academy on
regional approaches to conflict management in Africa.
Ambassador Mahbubani made reference to this, and I
endorse his views on the subject. China too attached
great importance to that meeting and hopes that its
positive outcome will be effectively implemented.

I wish also to state my views on the open debate
on Palestinian-Israeli violence, a debate which was
timely and necessary. The Council bears responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It should take prompt and active measures in response
to the deteriorating situation, and should help to quell
the violence and to maintain peace and security in the
Middle East. Especially over the past few months, the
Council spent a great deal of time consulting on a draft
resolution on the prevention of armed conflict. But
faced with an actual conflict, the Council ought not to
stand idly by. I need hardly ask what kind of
impression that would leave with the international
community.

But following the open debate on the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict, the Council did not play its proper role,
which was regrettable. I must put on record that this
was not the fault of the President.

I wish in conclusion to note that Ambassador
Valdivieso, as Chairman of the Afghanistan sanctions
committee, has done a great deal to bring the Afghan
issue to the attention of the Council, and we greatly
appreciate his efforts in that regard. We look forward to
the Council maintaining the momentum in its
consideration of the Afghan issue.

