Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome High Representative Inzko
to the Council once again and to thank him for his
comprehensive report on developments over the past six
months in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex).
We greatly appreciate his commitment to implementing
his mandate under the General Framework Agreement
for Peace.

The United States congratulates Bosnia and
Herzegovina on completing its first census since 1991.
Reliably quantifying the demographic changes that
have occurred over the past 22 years is essential for
formulating effective social and economic policy. We
hope the census results will be used constructively
to inform policy decisions as the results are released
in coming months. We also welcome the initiative
under way in the Federation to improve the efficiency
and responsiveness of governance in that entity. We
were proud to be a sponsor of the Federation Reform
Conference in May, and we hope that the Federation
Parliament will soon consider the amendments and
other legislative changes proposed by the Federation
reform experts group, with a view to implementation of
the reforms by next year's elections.

The United States strongly supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina's aspirations for its integration into
the European Union (EU) and NATO. In spite of
recent blockages, we continue to view the Euratlantic
integration process as the surest and most expeditious
path to the long-term stability and prosperity of the
country and the region. We hope the interests of all
citizens will be placed above narrow personal or
ethnic agendas. We strongly support the EU's efforts
to facilitate an agreement among Bosnians that will
lead to implementation of the 2009 judgement of the
European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie-Finzi
case, a prerequisite for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
apply for EU candidacy. Four years after the Court's
ruling, this case should not hold the country's EU
future hostage. We also look forward to progress on
registration of defence properties in order to meet
NATO's condition for activating its membership action
plan. With last summer's Constitutional Court ruling
confirming State ownership of all former Yugoslav
State property, including defence properties, a path
was cleared to register those properties necessary to
meeting the map condition with the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as soon as possible.

While some Republika Srpska politicians
continue to make divisive, anti-Dayton statements, it
is important to underscore that State institutions such
as the State Court and Prosecutor's Office are crucial
to strengthening the rule of law and meeting European
integration standards. In addition, a focus on developing
and implementing sustainable economic policies will
assure continued progress for the Republika Srpska.

Finally, we continue to stand by Bosnia and
Herzegovina as it overcomes the past. The continuing
discovery of mass grave sites and the ongoing
politicization of war-crimes cases are further
reminders of the importance of maintaining progress
on reconciliation. In the light of the ongoing challenges
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the United States continues
to strongly support High Representative Inzko and his
Office, as well as renewal of the mandate of the EU-led
military force under Chapter VII, which we sponsored
this morning (see S/PV.7055). It remains essential that
the international community retain those stabilization
instruments, given the work that remains to assure
progress on the Euratlantic reform agenda and to see
the continued and full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accords.

The international community must remain
committed to supporting the aspirations ofthe people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for a peaceful and prosperous
Euratlantic future, and their efforts to promote
reconciliation. We look forward to continuing to work
closely with our partners on the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board, among others, in order to do
so.

