Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Mr. Pascoe and Commissioner
Lamamra for their briefings today. I also thank you,
Madam President, for your own important statement. I
also welcome the insightful contributions from the
Foreign Minister of Kenya and the Minister of Defence
of Uganda.

As you yourself said, Madam President, we are
discussing Somalia at a time of real opportunity. The
current situation in Somalia is grave. Instability,
drought and famine continue to blight the country and
to inflict unimaginable suffering on the Somali people.
But this is also a time of opportunity. We have entered
a crucial year for the political process in Somalia, and
there has been some progress on the ground in the area
of security. Al-Shabaab is being driven back on several
fronts in south-central Somalia. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has secured most of
Mogadishu, and regional administrations continue to
develop. The United Kingdom believes that we need to
seize that opportunity to make real progress in Somalia
and to deliver a better future for the Somali people. I
would like to make four main points today: on the
humanitarian situation, the political process, AMISOM
and the upcoming London conference on Somalia.

First, we salute the work of the United Nations
and other humanitarian actors in Somali to combat the
famine and drought affecting the country. We also
welcome the support from new donors to the United
Nations consolidated appeal for Somalia. But it is vital
that the international community continue to provide
its sustained support for the relief effort. It is clear that
more work needs to be done in that area.

Secondly, the United Kingdom is committed to
supporting the United Nations-led Djibouti peace
process and to working with Somalis and international
partners to build a peaceful and stable Somalia. The
transitional governmental arrangements under the
Djibouti peace process end in August. We urge the
Transitional Federal Institutions to avoid squabbling
and to cooperate with each other to make substantive
progress in the implementation of the road map before
that date. In particular, it is imperative that we see
progress on reconciliation and establish dialogue
among all those who are willing to subscribe to a
peaceful political process. Local and regional
administrations can play an important role in that. The
process for developing a new constitution must be
more inclusive and representative, so that all Somalis
feel that the new constitutional arrangements reflect a
genuine national discussion. In short, it is time for
Somalia to move out of transition and towards genuine
legitimate and representative Government structures
based on a constitutional process. Somalis themselves
must determine their own governance structures. The
international community will support them, but the
transition must end in August.

Thirdly, I would like to welcome the considerable
success that AMISOM. and the Somali national security
forces have achieved in recent months. That has been
possible thanks to the commitment and courage of
AMISOM. troops. I would like to pay particular tribute
to the Ugandan and Burundian contingents, who have
suffered many losses in achieving that success.
However, as Defence Minister Kiyonga said, the threat
has not disappeared. Now more than ever, it is essential
that we provide AMISOM. the support that it needs to
consolidate security in the areas it controls and to
expand the secure areas as a part of a clear, realistic
and coordinated military strategy.

We recognize that predictable and sustainable
funding is essential for AMISOM. to be able to operate
effectively. That is why the United Kingdom is
providing $15 million in uncaveated funding to the
United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. That is in
addition to the $6 million that we contributed in 2011.
But such contributions are only a temporary solution.
We are determined that a long-term solution be found
to provide sustainable funding for AMISOM.
AMISOM. must be run in an effective, efficient and
accountable manner. Regional States and AMISOM
must coordinate effectively. A coordinated - indeed,
integrated - regional approach is essential to security
in Somalia. We welcome the United Nations-African
Union cooperation at the operational level, and on
peacekeeping more generally, and encourage the efforts
of the African Union (AU) and its partners to further
enhance AU peacekeeping capabilities. In that context,
we take careful note of the report (see S/2012/19, annex) of the African Union Peace and Security
Council following the technical assessment mission.
However, the report leaves a number of questions
unanswered, as Mr. Pascoe explained. We therefore
look forward to more detailed information and
recommendations in the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General. The United Kingdom will consider
those recommendations carefully, and we are ready to
lead the Council's response to them in the month of
February.

Fourthly, the United Kingdom believes that there
is an opportunity now to address the wider strategic
challenges facing Somalia. That opportunity should not
be squandered. That is why British Prime Minister
David Cameron will hold a conference in London on
23 February to discuss how the international
community might more effectively support progress
towards peace and stability in Somalia. The United
Nations and our African partners will of course
continue to lead for the international community, but
the United Kingdom aims to act as a catalyst for a new
action-oriented international approach to supporting
their efforts in Somalia.

Finally, the problem of piracy remains a serious
threat to the international community as a whole. It
destabilizes Somalia and undermines our efforts to
promote the rule of law and security. As a contribution
to those efforts, we will also use the London
conference to promote industry engagement in regional
maritime capacity-building.

Now more than ever, there is an opportunity to
build stability in Somalia. Now we believe is the time
for the international community to come together and
to act. We must take that opportunity and achieve real
and sustainable progress in the coming months.

