Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for her excellent briefing. We also thank Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, for his comprehensive briefing.
I should also like to join others in commending the
representatives of France, Bolivia, Equatorial Guinea
and the Secretariat for the impeccable organization of
the latest visit by the Security Council to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

As the holding of presidential and national and
provincial legislation elections in the Democratic
Republic of Congo is two months away, my delegation
welcomes the progress made by the National Independent
Electoral Commission in the implementation of the
electoral calendar. Cote d'Ivoire once again urges all
Congolese political stakeholders, in particular the
candidates to the various 23 December elections, to
work towards creating an environment conducive to
the holding of free, credible and peaceful elections
in accordance with the recommendations of the joint
communique of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the United Nations Security Council
(SC/ 13430) issued following their twelfth annual joint
consultative meeting, held in New York on 19 July. My
delegation also notes the commitment of the Congolese
authorities to hold transparent elections within the
necessary time frame and to ensure their financing.

Nevertheless, my delegation believes that despite the
progress made in implementing the electoral calendar,
the lack of consensus on the use of voting machines
and the security situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remain matters of
concern. Concerning the issue of voting machines, Cote
d'Ivoire regrets the persistent divergent views among
Congolese actors. My delegation therefore encourages
the main political actors to engage in constructive
dialogue without delay so as to reach consensus on
that issue. With regard to the security situation, its
deterioration, which is linked to the activities of armed
groups in the provinces of Ituri, North Kivu, South
Kivu, Tanganyika and Haut-Uele, and the consequent
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in those
regions are factors likely to destroy any hope of restoring
lasting peace, which is a prerequisite for development.
My delegation therefore urges MONUSCO to spare
no effort to ensure the protection of civilians and
strengthen its joint operations with the Congolese
armed forces in order to respond to the threats posed by
those armed groups.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the entire MONUSCO staff, as well as the relevant
agencies of the United Nations system, regional and
international organizations and all partners supporting
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation
shares the hope that the visit by the Security Council
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
5 to 7 October will make a significant contribution to
resolving remaining differences among stakeholders
with regard to the holding of free, credible and peaceful
elections on 23 December.

With regard to the Great Lakes region, my
delegation welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa. Despite the
progress made, the prospects for achieving lasting
peace and security in the Great Lakes region continue
to face major political and humanitarian challenges
within a complex security environment. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire appreciates the work of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern
African Development Community, the East African
Community and the Economic Community of Central
African States, in synergy with the African Union and
the United Nations, with a view to providing appropriate
responses to the challenges I mentioned. My country
encourages the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to pursue his efforts to implement the Addis Ababa
Framework Agreement and supports addressing the
priorities identified together with the leaders of the
signatory countries and the Secretary-General, with a
view towards implementing paragraph 24 of resolution
2389 (2017).

The Addis Ababa Framework Agreement outlines
the key national, regional and international measures
required to end the cycles of persistent violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
The countries of the Great Lakes region, regional
organizations and the international community continue
to dispose of a fitting cooperative framework with
which they can concertedly tackle the structural causes
of instability in the region. C6te d'lvoire therefore
calls on the United Nations and the entire international
community to increase their support for the effective
implementation of the Framework Agreement, which is
necessary to bring about peace and stability in that part
of the African continent.

