Mr. Starcevie (Serbia): We read with attention
the report submitted by His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/20ll/682, annex). We also listened
attentively to his statement this morning. We wished
that some formulations in the report and the briefing
had been perhaps more balanced with regard to the
positions of the two entities. Equally, perhaps not every
expression of the entities' views on some existing
problems can be understood as antagonistic rhetoric.
That is certainly not the monopoly of either part of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Also, the positive
developments of the kind mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina perhaps
merited more attention, as we must retain a positive
outlook on the future of that country.

I am certain that Mr. Inzko will take our remarks
in good faith, as they do not detract from our basic
appreciation for his work in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Allow me to express once again the consistent
and principled policy of the Republic of Serbia in
support of preserving the integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, lasting stabilization of its internal
situation and achieving a sustainable solution, in the
spirit of European standards, that is acceptable to each
of its three constitutive peoples.

As one of the signatories and guarantors of the
Dayton Peace Accords, Serbia considers that Bosnia
and Herzegovina should function more efficiently than
has been the case so far and believes that this can be
achieved only through substantive and legitimate
decisions of the democratically elected representatives
of citizens, all three constituent peoples and both
entities.

We fully support the stability, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and are
completely aware that every decision on changes to the
internal system defined by the Dayton Accords must
come as a result of complete consensus, in order to
ensure political efficacy and stability. Only the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the citizens
of that country can define its policy, and there are no
powers on the basis of which these functions could be
taken over by international presences. The history of
the Balkans teaches us that impositions and majority
domination cannot bring the needed and expected
results.

Serbia seeks the closest good-neighbourly and
friendly relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
orientation towards the advancement of relations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina was confirmed also through
constructive support during the negotiations on
constitutional reforms. We welcome the initiation of a
structural dialogue between the European Union (EU)
and Bosnia and Herzegovina on judiciary reform, as
well as the strengthening of the presence of the
European Commission through the unification of the
posts of Head of Delegation and Special
Representative of the European Union.

We wish Bosnia and Herzegovina every success
on its road towards the European Union. We regard the
decision taken by the European Union on the
liberalization of the visa regime as a strategically
important signal for the European future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We consider that additional, concrete
encouragements from the European Union are
necessary to further stabilize the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, bearing in mind that EU membership
is in the common interest of all in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We believe that the international community
should treat relations between the three constitutive
peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and
on the basis of respect for their mutual interests. Rather
than calling into question the integrity of the country,
every solution in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be
such as to contribute to its peace and stability. Serbia
encourages all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
make additional efforts to reach sustainable solutions
to all open questions.

Serbia is of the opinion that the process of
closing the Office of the High Representative and of
cancelling the so-called Bonn powers should be
embarked upon because the legitimately elected
representatives of all peoples and entities have the
ability and capacity to assume responsibility for the
independent conduct of the affairs of State and the
initiation of reform processes.

Serbia is fully committed to continuing to act,
through cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
other neighbouring countries, towards reconciliation in
the interest of the achievement of lasting stability in
the region.
