Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the speakers and welcome the
presence with us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo.

The Security Council has regularly stressed
that the Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict
and Build a Stable and Lasting Peace represents an
unprecedented and courageous path towards building
peace and national reconciliation in Colombia. The
Council has been united in supporting this collective
effort, including by establishing the United Nations
Verification Mission, led by Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
whose work I commend. Given the challenges facing
peacebuilding, we must, more than ever, continue to
support the rigorous approach chosen by the Colombian
Government, the former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and civil society in building lasting
peace. I wish to focus on the following several points.

The reactions to the announcement, which
France condemned, on 29 August by former FARC
commanders that they would rearm paradoxically
showed that the peace agreement is very much alive.
Indeed, the Colombian Government, the FARC party,
other political parties and civil society alike strongly
rejected that announcement and reaffirmed their
commitment to the agreement. Individual choices to
return to violence will not undermine the collective
process of building peace.

The security situation in former conflict zones
remains a priority, given the high number of killings
of social leaders, human rights defenders, FARC ex-
combatants and political candidates, especially in the
context of the local elections on 27 October. France
condemns those killings. In that regard, France
welcomes the adoption, on 26 August, of the National
Pact for Political Culture and Non-Violence during
the Electoral Campaign. We encourage the authorities
to step up their efforts to provide all the necessary
guarantees to men and women engaging in politics or
human rights activism.

Faced with these challenges, the solution is to
further strengthen the implementation of all components
of the agreement. With regard to the economic and
social reintegration of former combatants, significant
progress has been made and must be continued. The
peace agreement also includes ambitious provisions
on rural reform, political reform, substitution of illicit
crops, as well as crosscutting provisions in favour of
women and ethnic minorities. Their comprehensive
implementation is key for building peace in the long
term. The monitoring mechanisms provided for in the
agreement should also be used. The institutions of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition must be able to carry out their
work, which is essential to prospects for lasting peace,
in an atmosphere of calm.

In conclusion, we are fully aware of the challenge
the migration crisis poses to Colombia. In that regard,
I wish to commend the generosity of the Colombian
Government and people in welcoming the migrants,
with the support of the international community. Given
these various challenges, I would like to assure the
Government and the people of Colombia of France's
support and readiness, together with our partners in the
European Union, to continue supporting them on the
exacting road the peace.

