Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): In
Mexico's View, the Security Council should strengthen
actions aimed at protecting civilians in armed conflict
in three main areas: first, conflict prevention; secondly,
promoting a culture of respect for human rights and
humanitarian norms; and thirdly, ending impunity by
establishing or using mechanisms that ensure full
compliance with the rule of law. In that regard, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/431) is an
excellent contribution, enabling the Council to bear in
mind the humanitarian aspect.

My delegation notes with concern that civilians
continue to be the most seriously affected sector in
armed conflicts, and that in many cases they have
represented a disproportionately high number of the
dead and wounded; this could have and should have
been avoided, as they do not take part in hostilities.
Civilians have also been subjected to torture and other
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

Mexico reaffirms the need for the Security
Council to send a clear, strong message to all parties to
armed conflicts, whether or not they are regular armed
groups as defined by the Additional Protocol II of the
Geneva Conventions. In this regard, we reaffirm the
following: first, the Geneva Conventions are fully valid
and must be complied with under all circumstances,
and the Martens Clause has become obligatory, as
established by the International Court of Justice;
secondly, civilians do not constitute a legitimate target;
thirdly, deliberate attacks directed against them cannot
be tolerated; and fourthly, parties to a conflict have to
take all possible measures to limit the suffering of and
damage to civilians.

It is not enough for States to sign and ratify the
conventions related to parties' obligations and
civilians' rights contained in the normative body of
international humanitarian law relative to conflict
situations if they do not fully comply with the
obligations they contain.

With that in mind, a seminar on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict for the Latin American
region was held from 16 to 18 March 2004 in Mexico.
Experts from the region analysed issues such as the
protection of civilians in complex emergencies, the role
of various parties in protecting civilians, challenges in
protecting civilians in complex situations,
strengthening the protection of civilians during the
transition from conflict to peace and the creation of a
culture of protection. Like many other regions, Latin
America is affected by domestic armed conflicts or by
violent situations which do not qualify as armed
conflicts. In both situations, civilians are the targets of
indiscriminate attacks and are very vulnerable.

This is why the State's capacity to establish
preventive mechanisms is fundamental. It is imperative
to formulate strategies to promote the inclusion of
humanitarian issues in the political agenda and to
implement national legislation granting a framework of
legal protection for civilians in violent situations.

It is equally important to ensure unconditional
respect for common article 3 of the four Geneva
Conventions, which relates to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts not of an international
character, as well as the parallel struggle to eliminate
weapons trafficking and the use of anti-personnel
mines.

In addition, Mexico reiterates the importance of a
greater exchange among the principal organs of the
Organization, particularly the General Assembly and
the Security Council, as well as linking the distinct
tasks of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World Food
Programme and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

We welcomed the issuance of the Secretary-
General's bulletin on "Special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse"
(ST/SGB/ZOOS/ 13) as a positive measure. Nevertheless,
to our great concern, cases of abuse are still occurring.
We call upon the Secretary-General and the directors of
the programmes and agencies that provide
humanitarian assistance to comply fully with those
special measures and to adopt further strong measures
to put an end those practices and to punish those
responsible.

States must bring to justice those responsible for
grave violations of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law. The International
Criminal Court has a fundamental role to play, always
fully adhering to the principle of complementarity that
gives priority to national jurisdictions. States have an
obligation to respond firmly to terrorist acts, but they
have to do so based on the values upheld by the United
Nations Charter. Bearing that in mind, my country has
promoted the adoption of a General Assembly
resolution on the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the fight against terrorism.

Denying or blocking the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilians and persons not involved in
combat constitutes a war crime under the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. Access by
humanitarian personnel to people in need of assistance,
in particular the most vulnerable, such as refugees and
displaced persons, must be guaranteed.

We are concerned by the growing tendency to
undervalue humanitarian principles and to deliberately
attack humanitarian workers. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court has already classified
such acts as war crimes. That concern pushed Mexico
to submit to the Security Council resolution 1502
(2003) on the protection of humanitarian personnel,
which was adopted unanimously. By its paragraph 6,
the Council

"[requests] the Secretary-General to address in all
his country-specific situation reports, the issue of
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and its associated personnel,
including specific acts of violence against such
personnel, remedial actions taken to prevent
similar incidents and actions taken to identify and
hold accountable those who commit such acts,
and to explore and propose additional ways and
means to enhance the safety and security of such
personnel".

Nevertheless, States parties to the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols have to
assume their responsibility to respect and to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law. In this
regard, the use of meetings of States parties, planned in
article 7 of Additional Protocol I, should be
encouraged as a mechanism for guaranteeing full
compliance with the inviolable norms that are the
essence of international humanitarian law.

