Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like first of all to
thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Mr. David Beasley for their briefings. They may rest
assured of Indonesia's full support in what they are
doing. In responding to the briefings, we would like to
underscore three important points.

First, we welcome the agreement reached at the
joint meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee on new measures to reinforce the
ceasefire and concepts of operations for both phases
of redeployment. If implemented, the agreement will
help to further de-escalate tension in the area. It is also
another steppingstone towards the full implementation
of the Hudaydah Agreement. We certainly agree with
what Martin Griffiths mentioned regarding the fact
that the Agreement is a gateway to a political process.
However, we should not forget that the end objective is
a comprehensive agreement. Hopefully, we will be able
to reach that as soon as possible. I remain optimistic
about the work of Mr. Griffiths in that regard.

We also continue to push for the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and the continuation of
efforts to find a comprehensive political solution to end
the conflict. In that regard, we reiterate our support
for the work being carried out by the Special Envoy
and General Lollesgaard, and we thank them for their
tireless efforts in the quest for a wider peace in Yemen.
Like others, we condemn any action or attacks that
would further escalate the conflict, including on critical
infrastructure in Saudi Arabia, which would threaten
security and stability in the region.

Secondly, Indonesia is deeply concerned about
the unwillingness of the Houthis to cooperate with the
World Food Programme (WFP), resulting in a partial
suspension of aid in some areas under the control of the
authorities. We fully understand that that is the path that
WFP must take to prevent the diversion of food from
some of the most vulnerable people in Yemen. We call
on the Houthis to cooperate with WFP and we reiterate
our support for the humanitarian efforts of the United
Nations, including WFP. We supported the appeal
of the WFP Executive Director, Mr. David Beasley.
Hopefully, the agreement will be signed as soon as
possible and implemented. I think that that is a very
important part of achieving success. I would like once
again to underline that humanitarian aid should not,
and cannot, be politicized. That is simply unacceptable.

Indonesia also notes Mark Lowcock's legitimate
concerns about the funding issues. The commitments
made at the Geneva pledging conference are in urgent
need of being disbursed without delay. We will witness
a humanitarian catastrophe if the operation is left
unfunded. We heard what Mr. Lowcock said about
the suspension of medical services, food availability
and, of course, the closure of 21 more key programme,
which is quite alarming.

Thirdly, we welcome the mandate renewal of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA) for another six months and
the leadership of General Lollesgaard to navigate the
Mission. At thisjuncture, the Mission's full deployment
is critical, not only to monitor the implementation of
the Hudaydah Agreement, but also, very important,
to facilitate humanitarian assistance. We are glad that
since the establishment of UNMHA, there has been
an overall reduction in both violence and the number
of reported civilian casualties, alongside a growing
number of returnees to the area and greater economic
activity in Al-Hudaydah. In that connection, Indonesia
is honoured to be able to take part in the Mission, and
we stand ready to continue to contribute further to it.

In conclusion, the crisis in Yemen will be
remembered as one of the biggest humanitarian crises
in the history of humankind. However, it could also
be remembered as the Council's best success if we
continue to remain united and to support every effort to
find peace and to avert a future disaster.

