I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and Ambassador Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), for their briefings. At the outset, I would like to reaffirm Tunisia's commitment to the chemical- weapon non-proliferation regime, which is made up of the Chemical Weapons Convention and its implementing body, the OPCW. That regime constitutes a comprehensive and balanced framework that is founded on multilateralism, consensus and cooperation with the aim of ending the possession and use for hostile purposes of toxic chemicals and completely preventing the proliferation of that type of weapon of mass destruction, thereby promoting the maintenance of international peace and security. I would like to reaffirm my country's firm and principled position, which is that Tunisia condemns in the strongest terms the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and for any reason. We also reaffirm that those who commit such terrible crimes must be brought to justice. The use of chemicals as weapons constitutes a threat to international peace and security and a violation of resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention. Tunisia supports the important technical work carried out by the OPCW, in accordance with its mandate. That work led to the elimination of the chemical stockpile that the Syrian Arab Republic had declared. We commend the Director- General of the OPCW, as head of the Technical Secretariat, and the various parties concerned for their efforts, thanks to which the first part of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention was successfully convened despite the difficulties and challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We look forward to the Conference resuming its work next spring on various matters on its agenda, including the compliance of the Syrian Arab Republic with its treaty- based obligations. In view of the current situation, Tunisia welcomes the resumption of cooperation between the Syrian Government and the Technical Secretariat. We are therefore pleased that a team from the Technical Secretariat was able to conduct a seventh round of inspections last month in the Syrian Arab Republic. In that connection, we would like to reaffirm the importance of ensuring the safety and security of Technical Secretariat officials. We urge the Government of Syria to continue to engage in dialogue and to cooperate with the OPCW in a spirit of constructive engagement in order to resolve all outstanding issues as soon as possible and ensure full compliance with its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention. Tunisia reaffirms that all allegations of the use of toxic chemical substances as weapons, including by non-State actors, must be investigated in a thorough, impartial, independent and transparent manner. It is the responsibility of the international community and the Security Council to work collectively and in a united and coordinated manner to ensure the continuity and stability of the regime for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to close the issue of Syrian chemical weapons.
