Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In total disregard of the opposition and protest
of the international community, India conducted five
nuclear tests on 11 and 13 May, thus suddenly bringing
tension to the South Asia subcontinent. Then Pakistan
carried out its own nuclear tests. This serious
development of events has posed grave challenges to
international peace and security in the post-cold-war era
and aroused the concern of the whole international
community.

To prevent an arms race in South Asia, halt the
further escalation of tensions in the region and safeguard
the international non-proliferation regime, the Foreign
Ministers of the five permanent members of the Security
Council met in Geneva on 4 June and issued a joint
communique. The ministers made a coordinated response
to the nuclear tests conducted by India and then by
Pakistan. They expressed their deep concern about the
tension in the subcontinent and pledged to cooperate
closely to prevent an arms race in the region, to bolster
the non-proliferation regime and to encourage the
peaceful resolution of differences between India and
Pakistan.

The ministers also pledged that they would actively
encourage India and Pakistan to try to build confidence
rather than seek confrontation, and to find mutually
acceptable resolutions through dialogue that addressed the
root causes of the tension, including the question of
Kashmir. In that connection, the ministers urged both
parties to avoid threatening military movements, cross-
border violations and other provocative acts. The
coordinated action taken by the ministers of the Five
under the present circumstances is of great and far-
reaching significance. The draft resolution before us, by
giving its endorsement to the joint communique, fully
acknowledges the positive results of the meeting.

We hope that the joint efforts of the Council and the
rest of the international community will prevent an arms
race in South Asia, strengthen the international non-

 

proliferation regime, move the countries concerned to
peaceful resolution of their differences and eradicate the
root causes of the tensions.

The nuclear tests carried out by India and then by
Pakistan have dealt a heavy blow to international non-
proliferation efforts. Under the present circumstances, what
is most urgent, in our view, is to take measures to call on
India and Pakistan to exercise restraint, stop all further
nuclear tests, abandon their nuclear-weapons development
programme, make a commitment not to weaponize or to
deploy nuclear weapons and pledge to adhere to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons immediately and
unconditionally.

The draft resolution before us fully confirms the
importance of those two treaties and the determination of
the international community to continue to adhere to the
treaties, and makes corresponding demands of the two
countries in explicit terms. This is an extremely wise and
necessary thing to do.

The recent nuclear tests have also further strained the
bilateral relations between India and Pakistan and have
undermined the relative peace and stability in the
subcontinent. What is worrisome is that the two countries
have once again entered into military engagement in
Kashmir. There is no doubt that the escalation of the
Kashmir dispute will cause the situation to further
deteriorate, which will not only bring untold suffering to
the two countries and their peoples, but will inevitably
endanger the peace and stability of South Asia, Asia and
the world at large.

In order to defuse the tensions in the region, we call
upon India and Pakistan to be calm and restrained, to
resume talks between them, to halt any statements or
movements that might further escalate the tensions, and to
refrain from engaging in an arms race. In Kashmir, they
should respect and adhere to the control line. They should
under no circumstances step across the control line or seek
to change the state of affairs in the region unilaterally. On
this basis, the countries should look for a solution
acceptable to both sides, in accordance with the principles
in the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Simla
Agreement, and through peaceful negotiations. We are
opposed to any action which pursues regional hegemony.

The draft resolution before us is the Council's
response to the nuclear tests conducted by India and then
by Pakistan, as well as to the tension in South Asia. We
hope that India and Pakistan will respond to the call of
the international community and implement the draft
resolution in earnest. The international community should
continue to follow closely the development of events in
the subcontinent and encourage and create a favourable
external climate in which India and Pakistan can resolve
their differences peacefully. In the light of the nature of
the dispute in the subcontinent, the Council should play
a major and pivotal role.

In addressing and helping resolve the situation in
South Asia, China will as always take a fair and
responsible position and continue to play a constructive
role.

In view of what I have said, the Chinese delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

