The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Singapore.

Although earlier I conveyed the condolences of
the Council to the Government and the people of India
and of Pakistan, I should also like to add our national
condolences for the tragic loss of life resulting from the
earthquake in the subcontinent.

I would also like to add my personal words of
welcome to those already extended to Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for East Timor, and to Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, the member of the East Timor
Transitional Cabinet in charge of foreign affairs, and to
thank them for being here with us in the Council today.
We are also pleased to have been able to listen to
Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) Administrator, as
well as to representatives from the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. In addition, we were
honoured by the participation of Mr. Harri Holkeri, the
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth
session, who has recently returned from a trip to the
region. Their presence and their briefings have given
us invaluable first-hand perspectives.

More importantly, their collective presence at
today's open debate symbolically demonstrates the
direction in which East Timor is heading in the long
haul: a growing Timorization process to allow for a
smooth transition to independence and an increasing
emphasis on reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts
moving towards sustainable development and good
governance, with the ongoing collective responsibility
of the entire United Nations membership to oversee
and help ensure East Timor's success. East Timor is
very much the child of the United Nations - a child
which, as Mr. Vieira de Mello said earlier, is now at the
embryonic stage ofits development.

The United Nations has played a large part in the
process that has led East Timor to where is today. It has
played a critical role in the East Timor issue for the last
quarter century, or longer. Since 1982, regular tripartite
talks between successive United Nations Secretaries-
General, Indonesia and Portugal, aimed at resolving the
status of the territory, have taken place at the request of
the General Assembly. As the United Nations
shepherds East Timor towards independence, it is clear
that the responsibility of the United Nations for East
Timor is not coming to an end. As with parenthood, the
real test of the responsibility of the United Nations will
only just begin when the child is born.

In his report of 16 January 2000 on the progress
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) since 27 July 2000, the
Secretary-General has sketched a largely positive
picture of developments in East Timor. Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, speaking here today, has echoed
similar views. We commend Mr. Vieira de Mello - a
good friend of Singapore - for his tremendous efforts
and those of his team. Singapore is heartened to hear
about the steady progress made in the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of East Timor. UNTAET is, without a
doubt, one of the largest and most complex operations
undertaken by the United Nations. In East Timor, the
United Nations has not only to keep the peace but also
to re-establish entire social systems and provisional
institutions from scratch. It is a massive
multidisciplinary, multidimensional task, by any
reckoning.

With the support of the international community,
UNTAET has made progress in the important areas of
health, education and infrastructure. Efforts are also
under way to revitalize the economy. UNTAET is
hastening its critical Timorization efforts to help the
East Timorese people run their own country.
Politically, UNTAET has successfully established a
quasi-government: the East Timor Transitional
Administration, with key Cabinet positions staffed by
East Timorese. East Timorese leaders have outlined a
political calendar setting out the important political
milestones. As the Secretary-General noted in his
report, this timeline is ambitious but achievable.

However, Timorization must not only take place
at the political level, but percolate throughout the
entire administration. As a far-sighted parent,
UNTAET must build up the capacity of East Timor to
stand on its own two feet and not develop a crutch
mentality. While East Timor will look towards the
United Nations for support and advice for some time,
the United Nations must also listen increasingly to
what its child wants.

Nonetheless, it is clear that there is still a long
way to go for East Timor. More needs to be done in the
area of security, where the refugee and militia problems
have not yet been resolved. The killing of United
Nations personnel and the intimidation of refugees by
militias cannot be condoned. Singapore calls on
UNTAET and the Indonesian Government to work
together to prevent such instances and to take all steps
to bring the perpetrators to justice. In this regard, we
are pleased to note that both the Indonesian armed
forces (TNI) and UNTAET have agreed to launch joint
security operations along the border of East and West
Timor. The ongoing trials in Dili and Jakarta of
suspected militia members and leaders will also help to
ensure that justice is served.

Being a relatively young country, Singapore
knows from our very own experience that a stable and
lasting foundation for a country cannot be built
overnight. The Security Council must therefore send a
strong message of political support and engagement.
The credibility of the United Nations would be
damaged if it were seen to have raised expectations
only to leave before the job was done, and before it
was done well. A premature and precipitate exit from a
peacekeeping operation poses the danger of the
situation unravelling and becoming worse than it was
before the operation was initiated.

It is often easy for us, sitting in the Security
Council here in New York, to take a clinical View of
half an island at the far end of the earth. But let me be
clear about the stakes that East Timor poses for the
region. The issue is not just the fate of East Timor and
the East Timorese, but that of the entire South-East
Asian region. East Timor's future is intimately tied to
that of Indonesia- a large, diverse and complex
country spanning the breadth of South-East Asia, with
over 17,000 islands and 210 million people.
Indonesia's fate is indistinguishable from that of the
region.

East Timor achieved independence at a time when
Indonesia was undergoing a profound political and
economic transition. Its independence was a
consequence of the wrenching transformations that
Indonesia was itself experiencing. A decision taken
under these circumstances was bound to be
controversial, but East Timor's independence is now an
irrevocable fact. But it is also a fact that Indonesia's
transition is still ongoing. We cannot ignore either fact.
A volatile East Timor could set back Indonesia's efforts
to return to normalcy. Political uncertainty and
instability in Indonesia would in turn have far-reaching
implications for the rest of the region and East Timor's
future.

However, both Indonesia and East Timor have
spoken of reconciliation, notwithstanding the fact that
there are still a number of outstanding issues to be
resolved. In this regard, we welcome the positive
expressions of good will towards Indonesia made by
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta when he spoke here this
morning. We are of the view that, with good will and
understanding between the newly independent East
Timor and its larger neighbour Indonesia, these issues
can be resolved amicably. Cooperation between them
will usher in a period of peace and stability for East
Timor and Indonesia and also contribute to stability in
the South-East Asian region.

It is therefore vital that the United Nations take a
long-term perspective on this issue and, as in all other
issues that the Security Council considers - for
example, Kosovo and the conflicts in West Africa -
also recognize the regional context. I wish to quote the
statement made by Ambassador Chowdhury to the
Security Council on 15 November 2000 on "No exit
without strategy". Before I do, however, let me note
that, when he spoke an hour or two ago, Ambassador
Levitte also reminded us of the debate on "no exit
Without strategy". In November, Ambassador
Chowdhury said:

"the parameters for the conclusion [of a
peacekeeping operation] should include an
objective assessment of a given situation in the
medium- to long-term perspective. Such an
assessment should take into consideration the
political, military, humanitarian and human rights
aspects and the regional dimension". (S/PV4223, p~ 8)

These are important considerations which we should
always bear in mind.

Attaining independence is the easy part. It is
more difficult to be successful at it. East Timor's
interest would be best served by the full engagement of
the international community in the rehabilitation and
development of East Timor, even after its
independence. Much of what UNTAET has achieved
would not have been possible without the resources and
political support extended to it by the United Nations
and by the international community. We cannot expect
an independent East Timor to manage all of its
problems on its own. None of the regional countries,
including Australia and New Zealand, nor the
Association of South-East Asian Nations have all the
necessary expertise and capabilities to deal with East
Timor's enormous needs. The United Nations and the
international community therefore have an important
responsibility and obligation to East Timor to remain
engaged, even after independence.

On this, we strongly support the Secretary-
General's assessment that East Timor will still require
substantial international support after independence.
The President of the General Assembly, in his recent
visit to East Timor, also pledged his continued support
to UNTAET's efforts in rebuilding the country. The
Council's own mission to East Timor also returned to
New York in November 2000 with the View that a
strong international presence would be required in
post-independence East Timor. We find the same
conclusions drawn in our own consultations with the
East Timorese and the Indonesian Government.

Singapore has contributed actively to the
international and United Nations efforts in East Timor
right from the start. We have sent our troops, doctors
and civilian police to participate in the International
Force in East Timor and UNTAET. Bilaterally, we have
prepared a comprehensive technical assistance package
to assist East Timor in all aspects of rebuilding its
society. We are committed, within our abilities and
resources, to continuing to support the international
effort to help East Timor get back on its feet.

United Nations peacekeeping has seen its fair
share of successes and failures. East Timor and
UNTAET present a unique opportunity for the United
Nations to show its ability to draw on the lessons learnt
from past experiences to make it one of the most
successful peacekeeping operations in United Nations
history. The challenges facing East Timor and the
commitment displayed by the East Timorese people are
clear. With sufficient will and commitment, the United
Nations and the Security Council can turn and rebuild a
devastated and conflict-ravaged society and guide its
child towards becoming a peaceful, stable and
productive member of the international community and
the United Nations.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Australia. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make her statement. I also
wish her a happy Australia Day.

