Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting. I should like also to
convey my thanks to Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and to the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, for their
presentations. We welcome the great efforts of the
Secretary-General and thank him for his report on the
question before the Security Council.

The report of the Secretary-General concerns the
commitment to put an end to the recruitment and use of
children in situations of armed conflict and contains
information relating to the progress made by the
monitoring and reporting mechanism provided for in
resolution 1612 (2005). The report clearly reflects the
anguish of the international community at the suffering
of children in situations of armed conflict. It makes
clear also the great responsibility of countries to take
action to put an end to such suffering, in particular in
cases where the parties concerned flout the basic
principles of international humanitarian law and human
rights principles, in particular those relating to the
protection of children.

The statistics contained in UNICEF's 2006 report
on the state of the world's children make clear the
scope of the disaster facing developing countries. I will
confine myself to saying that more than 250,000
children have been recruited into armed conflict; there
are 140 million orphans in developing countries; more
than 1 million children are being detained and are
victims of physical or sexual violence; and more than
1.2 million children are being trafficked annually.
Those figures are cited in the report I mentioned
earlier.

In the context of information on compliance and
on the progress made in situations of which the

Council is seized, the report mentions the situation in
Iraq. It states that, in the light of the very difficult
security situation, it is very hard to determine the
number of children subjected to violence. We, too,
share this conclusion.

The suffering of Iraqi children is due not only to
the current acts of violence and terrorism, although
they are more painful and brutal, but also to three
decades of internal and external conflicts and wars, in
addition to the impact of economic sanctions lasting
more than 13 years. The current situation is especially
serious given that Iraqi children have in some cases
become the targets of terrorists and criminal groups.
That development prompted the Security Council to
adopt resolution 1618 (2005) condemning terrorist
attacks in Iraq, including the appalling massacre of 32
children. Recently, the killing and abduction of
children has become a means of inciting sectarian
violence.

In any case, the serious threat facing Iraqi
children at the present time is due to the vicious circle
of violence and terrorism. There is no doubt that it is
the responsibility of Iraq's national Government to
tackle that threat, but the support and assistance of the
international community are also indispensable. The
mechanisms and criteria adopted by the Government of
Iraq to protect children are internationally agreed ones,
in particular as concerns the rights of children.
Although the Iraqi Government and civil society
institutions are endeavouring to make the rights of
children a daily reality, the deteriorating security
situation, terrorism and violence are making this very
difficult. That is why political efforts should be
focused on the necessity to stop the security situation
from deteriorating further.

The Government, through the Prime Minister, has
taken a political approach to national reconciliation
and national dialogue. We have therefore established a
national programme whose vision is based on
improving the security situation through political
harmony, thus improving things on all levels. The
policy meetings of the Iraqi National Security Council
held on 23 and 24 November supported that approach.
The Prime Minister reaffirmed it on 26 November,
when he stated that sectarian violence would end only
when political actors realize that there will be neither
winners nor losers in this war.

The international community, the United Nations
and the friends and brothers of Iraq must offer greater
support to the Iraqi Government in order to bring about
national reconciliation, because it would be pointless to
take up the question of the rights and the protection of
Iraqi children given the current deterioration of the
security situation. Improving the security situation
would truly be the beginning of the end of the suffering
of Iraqi children.

