Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this very
important open debate on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security and your submission
ofa concept note on the topic (S/2010/322).

Azerbaijan reaffirms its commitment to an
international order based on international law and the
rule of law, and considers it essential to peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among States.

Since the adoption of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1) and the last open debate in
the Security Council on the rule of law held in 2006
(see S/PV.5474), there have been important
developments. A significant contribution has been
made to the strengthening and promotion of an
international order based on generally accepted legal
norms and principles. In a number of situations,
successful efforts have reduced tensions and ensured
that peace processes moved forward.

At the same time, more should be done to address
the major threats and challenges that continue to affect
the basic elements of the international legal order,
undermine the national unity, territorial integrity and
stability of States, and regenerate disregard and
contempt for human rights. The heightened
vulnerability of civilian populations during wartime -
in particular forcibly displaced persons, refugees,
women and children - brings an element of urgency
to the imperative of restoration of the rule of law.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the
basic principles of international law enshrined in
paragraph 3 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Indeed, the commitment to resolving disputes
through peaceful means and in accordance with
international law is one of the cornerstones of the
notion of the rule of law at the international level. The
true value of this principle is to commit States to
respecting each other's territorial integrity and political
independence, refraining in their international relations
from the threat or use of force, and resolving their
disputes in conformity with international law.

It should be made clear at the same time that the
reference to the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes must in no way impair the inherent right of
individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack
occurs against a Member of the United Nations until
the Security Council has taken measures necessary to
maintain international peace and security.

In circumstances where the aggressor State has
neglected its obligation to settle the international
dispute by peaceful means and thereafter has illegally
used force to acquire control over the territory of
another State, insistence on the application of the
principle of peaceful settlement of disputes will
inevitably play into the hands of an aggressor, tend to
entrench positions of control, reinforce perceptions of
the centrality of military strength in international
relations, and encourage impunity rather than
contribute to the triumph of justice.

Undeniably, invasion or attack by the armed
forces of a foreign State, military occupation and
bombardment constitute armed attacks, triggering the
right of self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations and customary
international law. It is obvious that, in situations of
protracted inter-State conflicts and long-continued
unsuccessful negotiations, the victim of an armed
attack, especially when it suffers from illegal
occupation of its territory and consistent measures by
the aggressor State to sustain the situation, is entitled
to the right to self-defence and can resort to it as soon
as it arrives at the firm conclusion that prolonging the
negotiations is an exercise in futility and that political
settlement is unattainable.

There should be better understanding that States
acting in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nation and international law, undermining the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, violating
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and ignoring Security Council resolutions that
explicitly condemn such behaviour, may forestall
enforcement countermeasures only by putting a prompt
end to their illegal acts and negotiating in good faith
the prospects for peace, stability and cooperation. The
fact that illegal situations continue because of political
circumstances does not mean that they are thereby
rendered legal or can go on forever. Law and justice
are more important than force.

As the concept note rightly points out, respect for
international humanitarian law is an essential
component of the rule of law in conflict situations and
plays a crucial role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, a defining feature of
most, if not all, conflicts is the failure of the parties to
respect and ensure respect for their legal obligations to
protect civilians and spare them from the effects of
hostilities. As a consequence, civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection in situations of
armed conflict. Therefore, further efforts in this regard,
in particular through insistent measures aimed at
ensuring strict compliance by parties to armed conflict
with their obligations under international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law, remain crucial and must
constitute an absolute priority.

Particular consideration must be given to
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict aggravated by population displacements and
foreign occupations. The impact of conflict on housing,
land and property in such situations requires a more
consistent approach in order to ensure the safe and
dignified return of those forced to leave their homes.

It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing return, be applied by
the international community with more systematic
regularity. Ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing
and offers important measures of justice to those
displaced from their homes and land, thereby removing
a source of possible future tension and conflict.

Integral to the existing challenges is the need to
ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, both for
individual perpetrators and for parties to conflict. In
recent years, important steps have been taken for the
protection and vindication of rights and the prevention
and punishment of wrongs. The punishment of crimes
with an international dimension and scope has
demonstrated how effective international justice can be
when there is political will to support it.

It is important to emphasize in this regard that
ending impunity is essential not only for the purposes
of identifying individual criminal responsibility for
serious crimes, but also for ensuring sustainable peace,
truth, reconciliation, the rights and interests of victims
and the well-being of society at large.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, that in
order to achieve the goals of the rule of law, we should
uphold fundamental principles, adhere to the uniform
application of international law, and promote the
democratization of international relations.

