Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Since our
last meeting, there have been a number of significant
developments.

As members know, Secretary Rice had a
productive series of meetings with Prime Minister
Olmert and President Abbas during her January trip to
the region. Both sides reiterated their support for the
road map. My capital then hosted a meeting of Quartet
principals on 2 February. Recognizing the critical need
to end the Palestinian-Israel conflict, which would
contribute to security and stability in the region, the
United States, the European Union, Russia and the
United Nations issued a statement that reaffirmed the
Quartet principles and support for efforts aimed at
realizing the two-State vision.

Secretary Rice subsequently discussed the
situation with her Quartet counterparts on 9 February.
She and her Quartet counterparts will meet again in
Berlin on 21 February to assess the situation. Prior to
that meeting in Berlin, Secretary Rice will travel to
Jerusalem, the Palestinian territories and Amman. She
will hold bilateral meetings with both Israeli and
Palestinian leaders, as well as a trilateral meeting with
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert on
19 February. In Amman, Secretary Rice will meet with
King Abdullah of Jordan and other members of the
Jordanian Government.
The United States strongly supports the bilateral
dialogue between Prime Minister Olmert and President
Abbas. We anticipate that the upcoming discussions, in
particular the trilateral meeting, will focus on
advancing our shared goal of a two-State solution to
the conflict, in accordance with the sequence of the
road map. Moreover, we will continue to assist the
parties as they work on day-to-day issues, such as
security, movement and access. In that regard, Saudi
King Abdullah's efforts to bring an end to the violence
between Palestinians is commendable. We continue to
assess the outcome of the meetings in Mecca and we
will be looking closely at implementation to ensure
that the three principles enunciated by the Quartet are
met.

While those developments are encouraging, the
situation in the region remains delicate. That can be
seen in the strong reaction to the construction of the
ramp at the Temple Mount, or Haram Al-Sharif. As
always, we urge all parties to exercise great care when
deciding whether and how to engage in any activity
near sensitive religious sites. All parties should ensure
that conduct and rhetoric regarding those activities are
appropriate and respectful. This is a delicate issue that
requires moderation and a clear understanding of the
facts. In that regard, we welcome steps by the parties
that can help reduce tensions and ensure transparency.
We reiterate that there is no justification for the use of
violence by protesters.

Any discussion of fostering greater peace in the
region must include Lebanon. The United States
remains committed to a sovereign, democratic and
prosperous Lebanon and continues to call for the full
implementation of all Security Council resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon, including resolutions 1701
(2006), 1680 (2006) and 1559 (2004).

The 7 February incident along the Blue Line
underscores the need for the parties to exercise
restraint, to cooperate with the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon in accordance with its mandate, and
to avoid actions that could further exacerbate tensions,
in particular the initiation of the use of force.

On the eve of the anniversary of Rafik Hariri's
death, the United States calls on all parties to exercise
restraint and to use peaceful and constitutional means
to debate the political issues before them.

We strongly condemn today's terrorist attack in
Beirut, which can only be seen as an attempt to silence
and intimidate those like Mr. Hariri who struggle to
realize the vision of a sovereign, independent and
democratic Lebanon. Allow me to express my
condolences to the victims and to their families.

It remains critically important for the future
stability and political development of Lebanon that all
those involved in the terrorist attacks in Lebanon since
October 2004, including those responsible for the
assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri and,
most recently, Minister Pierre Gemayel, are held
accountable. We support the efforts of the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission, and look forward to the timely
establishment of a tribunal of international character,
which will help ensure that justice is done.

We remain concerned about reports of continued
shipments of arms to Hizbollah and other armed
groups, and all on all States to observe the arms
embargo established by resolution 1701 (2006) and the
related arms provisions of resolution 1559 (2004). The
Security Council must be united in insisting that Syria
and Iran abide by their obligations under Security
Council resolutions to respect Lebanese sovereignty
and end their support for armed militias.

