At the outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of the Republic of Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and warmly welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi. I would also like commend the Republic of Indonesia for convening this high-level open debate on the theme "Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace". The current situation demands common action to address effectively and ina timely manner the difficulties the international community is facing while carrying out peacebuilding efforts amid the pandemic. As stated in the concept note for this high-level open debate, "International cooperation, collaboration and collective responsibility with regard to principles-based multilateralism are essential." (S/2020/765, annex, para. 6) Azerbaijan spares no effort in contributing to enhancing international solidarity, promoting multilateralism and mobilizing support and resources. The Government of Azerbaijan has made two donations to the World Health Organization and has also provided urgent humanitarian aid to 29 countries affected by the pandemic. The initiative of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, His Excellency Mr. Ilham Aliyev, put forward in his capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, to convene a special session of the General Assembly on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic at the level of the Heads of State and Government, has received overwhelming support from more than two-thirds of Member States from all regions and political groups. Accordingly, on 10 July, the thirty-first special session of the General Assembly commenced its proceedings. Azerbaijan welcomed the adoption this July of resolution 2532 (2020), which recognized that the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, demanding, in particular, a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on its agenda and calling upon all parties to armed conflicts to engage immediately in a durable humanitarian pause. Being an important tool for the cessation of hostilities and humanitarian action, ceasefire accords must be implemented in good faith to achieve a speedy political settlement. Unfortunately, in some situations of armed conflict, spurious peacefulness and declared commitment to truce and ceasefire, along with misinterpretation of the objectives of the humanitarian principles, are among the means that aggressors frequently employ in attempts to freeze military gains achieved as a result of the unlawful use of force and other actions in contravention of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Therefore, over the years passed since the establishment of the ceasefire between Armenia and Azerbaijan in 1994, the armed forces of Armenia have regularly violated the ceasefire, targeting the towns and villages in Azerbaijan situated along the front line and the border between the two States to direct and indiscriminate attacks. Such attacks continue notwithstanding the appeal of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. Furthermore, Armenia has pursued the deliberate policy of consolidating the status quo of the occupation, including by strengthening its military build-up in the seized territories and changing their demographic, cultural and physical character, in clear violation of international law. Neither the ongoing peace process nor a global public health emergency have convinced the aggressor to halt illegal activities. On the contrary, even the devastating impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has not prevented Armenia from continuing its armed provocations. On 12 July, in blatant violation of international law, Armenia launched a cross-border attack against Azerbaijan in the Tovuz district, with the use of artillery and mortars, resulting in a number of casualties, including civilians, and necessitating a strong response in order to neutralize Armenian fire and deter it from further acts of aggression. Therefore, Armenia's statement on its alleged support for and adherence to the appeal of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire is nothing other than utter falsehood. No doubt, Armenia's objective is not to save lives and alleviate the sufferings of people in need, but to prevent more than 700,000 forcibly displaced Azerbaijanis from returning to their homes and colonize the territories it has ethnically cleansed and occupied. Over the past few decades, the United Nations leading role in strengthening international efforts to sustain peace has produced notable progress in settling disputes, resolving conflicts, eradicating colonialism and restoring hope to those affected by war and instability. However, serious challenges remain, with the continued resurgence of conflict, increased levels of displacement and hate-driven violence. People throughout the world continue to suffer from prolonged foreign occupation, ethnic cleansing and the lack of accountability for serious violations of international law. Protracted conflicts and their political, military and humanitarian consequences must be addressed properly. Guided by the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, a comprehensive approach must be adopted to address the multidimensional risks to sustained peace posed by the global COVID-19 pandemic.
