Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to express to you, Sir, my delegation's
sincere congratulations on the assumption of the
Security Council presidency by your country, Peru, for
the month of November and to wish you every success
in carrying out that mission. I also thank you for
having convened this meeting. Likewise, I should like
to congratulate Ambassador Kenzo Oshima, Permanent
Representative of Japan, on his successful guidance of
the work of the Council during the past month. My
thanks go also to Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her briefing
on the tragic events currently taking place in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly the Gaza
Strip.

The difficult circumstances and the gravity of the
security and humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory give this Security Council meeting
particular importance. They offer my delegation an
opportunity to express its deep concern and to
condemn most energetically the most recent Israeli
aggression, which has caused the cruel loss of innocent
human lives, including those of women and children,
as well as significant destruction of basic infrastructure
in the Palestinian territory, in flagrant violation of
international legality.

The Israeli army's latest incursion into the Gaza
Strip, characterized by the abusive, disproportionate
and indiscriminate use of force against the civilian
population, is taking place at a difficult time when the
Palestine Authority, facing serious challenges, is
working to find a solution to the governmental crisis.
Since the beginning of the year, that crisis has served
as an additional pretext for Israel to strengthen its
blockade of the Palestinian territory and to transform
the Gaza Strip into a vast prison for an already sorely
tested civilian population.

Today, it is very symbolic to note that Israel's
latest aggression against the Palestinian people is
taking place at the very time when the General
Assembly's Special Political and Decolonization
Committee is discussing precisely the issue of the
tragic human rights situation in the occupied Arab
territories, and to note that Israel is committing this
inexcusable massacre - there is no other word to
describe it - of the innocent civilian population in
Beit Hanoun on the very day when the Committee is
concluding its general debate on that issue, while Israel
is announcing with great fanfare its withdrawal from
the martyred city following several days of massacre
and destruction. That shows Israel's scorn for the
international community and its lack of interest in the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and in respect for international legality.

The impunity with which Israel, itching for war,
periodically launches army attacks in Palestinian cities
and villages against an exhausted and defenceless
civilian population, without arousing any reaction on
the part of the international community, and puts

forward unacceptable and fallacious pretexts to justify
its aggression, must be firmly condemned and
denounced by the international community. History
will not pardon complicit silence, which is interpreted
as an encouragement for the criminal activities of the
Israeli army.

Following its Operation Summer Rains, carried
out last summer, with its trail of destruction and
innocent victims, including women and even children,
Israel recently returned with its Operation Autumn
Clouds, as if to create the impression that its army is
not engaged in a barbaric aggression against the
Palestinian population, but rather is taking actions for
which the international community is asked to show its
indulgence, if not its admiration. At this rate, my
delegation is entitled to ask whether it is planned that
the skies will someday clear up for occupied Palestine
and whether the quest for peace is really on the agenda
of the international community, particularly the
Security Council.

The right to self-defence and the fight against
terrorism have been held up, abusively and ad
nauseam, as pretexts enabling Israel to commit its
excesses, which are reprehensible and contrary to
international legality. Those excesses do not spare
Palestinian institutions, political figures - who have
been abruptly imprisoned for no apparent reason -
basic infrastructure or, above all, the civilian
population, which is subjected to daily humiliation.
The Palestinian people's exercise of its free democratic
choice in 2006 seems to have given Israel an additional
reason to carry out collective punishment against a
people whose latest transgression appears to have been
to democratically choose its leaders.

The gravity of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory causes my delegation to appeal
forcefully to the Security Council to end its apparent
complacency regarding Israel's repeated attacks against
the Palestinian people, to shoulder its Charter
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to exert the pressure necessary
to compel Israel to immediately end its aggression
against the Palestinian people and withdraw its troops
from the Gaza Strip. The Council must also impose a
ceasefire and compel Israel to comply strictly with its
obligations under the Geneva Convention of 12 August
1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War.

My delegation remains convinced that, given the
current impasse in the Middle East peace process, the
United Nations must once again take up that issue and
shoulder its full responsibility in the quest for a
settlement to the conflict. The relevant Security
Council resolutions - particularly resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which remain fully valid - are
the foundations for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace that ensures respect for the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people, including its right to self-
determination and its right to create an independent,
viable State living side by side in peace with its
neighbours.

