The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain. For the sake of brevity and in
view of the lateness of the hour, I shall try to condense
part of my statement so that we can move forward and
conclude this thematic debate, which I believe has been
a great success. Copies of the full text will be provided
to delegations.

Allow me to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General, the regional organizations - the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the European
Union - and all the ministers and representatives who
have spoken this morning for having participated in
this debate.

I believe I can summarize the discussion and part
of my statement by highlighting various points. First,
restoring security is an essential prerequisite for
undertaking activities of a civilian nature. Secondly,
after security, re-establishing the rule of law is the
most urgent task. Thirdly, we also need to devote
attention to issues related to the judicial system - a
matter to which Spain has been devoted greater
attention and interest in recent years. To that end, our
country recently hosted a criminal justice workshop in
Madrid, under the sponsorship of the European
Commission, precisely to improve training in that area
for peace mission participants. Along the same lines,
our Government believes that the penitentiary system
is also an essential part of a general strategy aimed at
re-establishing the rule of law. All of that is related to
the promotion and strengthening of institution-
building.

Similarly - as indicated in various statements
this morning - the holding of free and fair elections is
key to achieving democracy and good governance. But,
above all, I believe that a number of speakers have
stressed the urgency and necessity of swift deployment
in crisis management operations. Such swift
deployment would be much facilitated if immediately
available reserves of personnel and resources could be
established at the national and regional or international
levels. We should also promote the development of a
doctrine on procedures for setting up crisis
management operations. Likewise, I would like to
stress that I agree with the statements of many speakers
on the need to improve and strengthen coordination
mechanisms.

In conclusion, the relevance of the civilian
component in peace missions is being increasingly
appreciated. But, as is the case with military personnel,
we need to increase their numbers so that they can
carry out their tasks properly. In that connection, the
Spanish Government is promoting the creation of a
civilian guard unit of approximately 1,000 personnel,
which we hope will be operational in two years and
capable of responding immediately to the possible
needs of the international community. Therefore, we
will need sufficient institutional capacity in the system,
which could be achieved by creating a coordination
mechanism responsible for accomplishing that purpose,
hewing closely to the objectives of the Security
Council.

Finally, we would like the most significant
aspects of today's discussion - a discussion that I
believe has greatly enriched our debate - to have
continuity and follow-up. I am sure that, in the future
in this Chamber, there will be further consideration of
the need to expand our thinking on civilian aspects of
conflict management.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council met at the ministerial
level on 22 September 2004 to consider 'Civilian
aspects of conflict management and peace-
building'. Ministers recognized the increasing
importance of civilian aspects of conflict
management in addressing complex crisis
situations and in preventing the recurrence of
conflict. They affirmed the importance of conflict
resolution in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

"Ministers also acknowledged the
importance of civilian-military cooperation in
crisis management. Military and police
components are essential to address and stabilize
certain serious crisis situations and to guarantee
security. Moreover, the participation of a strong
civilian component is key to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, the re-establishment of
public order, functioning public institutions,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and peace-building
for longer-term sustainable development.
Substantial civilian participation in crisis
management is also essential for a strategy of
military disengagement and plays a crucial role in
the phase of post-conflict peace building. In this
context, it is important that there be coordination
between the civilian and military components in
crisis management from the first phase of
integrated mission planning. In addition, there
should be significant coordination with actors
involved in longer-term reconstruction and
development, including in particular the other
organs of the United Nations system, in
accordance with their respective mandates, and
the international financial institutions, as well as
cooperation with the business sector.

"Ministers recognized the increasing role of
some regional and subregional and other
international organizations in crisis management.
They also recalled that Articles 52 and 53 of the
United Nations Charter set forth the contribution
of regional organizations to conflict management,
as well as the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations. They
encouraged these organizations, whenever
possible, to continue to develop their crisis
management capabilities, including in the civilian
field, in close coordination with the United
Nations and in accordance with the provisions of
Article 54 of the United Nations Charter. When
applicable, clear schemes for joint operations
should be developed. Also, greater coordination
and interoperability among those organizations,
as well as developing and sharing common
strategies, operational policies and best practices
in civilian crisis management would enhance
efficiency and coherence in crisis management.
Continued internal coordination in this field
among all relevant United Nations organs and
agencies should also be strengthened.

"Ministers supported the efforts by Member
States to continue to develop, as appropriate,
their own civilian crisis management capabilities,
including, inter alia, rapid civilian response
teams, and they also supported their initiatives to
make these capabilities available to the United

Nations and other relevant regional

subregional organizations, as a contribution to
their efforts in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Adequate capabilities should
be developed in key areas of civilian crisis
management, such as police, justice and the rule
of law, preparation of electoral processes and
electoral observation, civil protection and public
administration. The Security Council should
consider the nature and availability of these
capabilities when approving the necessary

mandates for United Nations operations.

"Adequate and flexible means

transitional peace support and crisis management
activities, such as protection of civilians,
including United Nations and humanitarian
the

personnel, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the end of
impunity, public institution-building and
transitional justice, as well as the promotion and
protection of human rights and the integration of
a gender perspective are essential to ensure
lasting peace after a conflict. Also, the
involvement of local actors in the policy-making
process and a fruitful relationship with civil
society should be among the priorities of any
post-conflict strategy.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts of the Secretary-General in addressing all
relevant issues relating to the civilian aspects of
crisis management and invites him, other
institutions and agencies of the United Nations
system, regional and subregional organizations
and Member States to continue to give serious
consideration to this matter, with a view to
making further progress in this field."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/33.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.10pm.
