Mr. Richardson (United States of America): I would
like to thank Council members for their kind words
regarding the United States presidency during the month of
September.

The United States strongly supports this draft
resolution, which makes clear that the illegal military
regime in Sierra Leone must step down.

The people of Sierra Leone have suffered greatly
during six years of insurgency and domestic terrorism by
the Revolutionary United Front. President Kabbah tried
hard, with the assistance of the United Nations, to find a
way to end this conflict and establish a Government which
represented all the people of Sierra Leone in a fair, honest
manner.

But in May the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
and the Revolutionary United Front seized power. At a
stroke, they rejected the efforts of the citizens of Sierra
Leone and of so many other nations of Africa to emerge
from the debilitating cycle of rule by violence.

The people of Sierra Leone have refused to accept
the regime of the junta. The United States admires their
commitment to democracy just as it condemns the abuses
of the junta, particularly its overthrow of an emerging
democracy and its grave violations of human rights.

The United States, in voting for the draft resolution,
joins with the citizens of Sierra Leone and with the other
Council members to demand the immediate restoration of
the democratically elected Government of President
Kabbah. With this draft resolution, the Security Council
makes clear its willingness to exercise the enforcement
powers of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter in
the service of this goal.

With this draft resolution, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, the Security Council also
joins in the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to try to resolve the crisis as
ECOWAS successfully did for neighbouring Liberia. We
commend the efforts of the ECOWAS Committee of
Five - Nigeria, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and
Liberia - as well as the work of the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy to bring about a peaceful restoration of
democracy.

The Security Council is voting today to support the
ECOWAS plan of action for Sierra Leone with concrete
measures: sanctions. The sanctions have been carefully
targeted: prohibitions against the supply of arms and
petroleum products, and restrictions on the travel of
members of the junta and their families. The draft
resolution calls upon all States to cooperate with these
measures and authorizes ECOWAS, as necessary and in
conformity with applicable international standards, to
inspect incoming ships to ensure compliance.

The draft resolution does not limit shipments of food
or medicines or other basic necessities. It contains
provisions for regular review of the implementation and
impact of the sanctions. The sanctions are designed to
have maximum impact against the illegal junta of Sierra
Leone, while imposing a minimum burden on the civilian
population.

Some members of the Council have argued that
these sanctions should have an expiration date. An
expiration date would require the Council to reapprove its
sanctions down the road. It would cause doubt about the
Council's future intentions. It would create uncertainty for
suppliers and others about the possibility that sanctions
would lapse. Most important, an expiration date in, say,
 

six months would encourage the junta in Freetown to try to
tough it out, in the hope that in six months and one day the
world would have changed, so they would not have to.

The call by some Member States to accept less than
full compliance in other sanctions regimes might even feed
such a pernicious hope. It would be tragic if this led the
junta to make the wrong decision. This is why the United
States believes that compliance, and not the calendar,
should govern the Council's approach.

The draft resolution makes clear how the junta can end
these sanctions: by restoring the legitimate Government of
Sierra Leone. ECOWAS and the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy stand ready to mediate. The path is clear.
Sierra Leone can return to the urgent task of national
reconciliation and economic development. We call upon the
military officers in Freetown to meet with the mediators
this week in Abuja, to achieve a negotiated settlement, and
to restore the constitutional order and the democratically
elected Government.

This is why the United States strongly supports this
draft resolution, which makes it clear that the illegal
military regime in Sierra Leone must step down. And this
is why this draft resolution imposes sanctions until they do.

