The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council's
prior consultations, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. De Mistura to take a seat at the
Council table.

Before proceeding with the item on the agenda, I
would like to say a few words in my national capacity
about the importance of this meeting from Turkey's
point of View.

As we all know, Iraq has been on the Security
Council's agenda for almost two decades now, and this
Chamber has witnessed many significant milestones in
the history of Iraq. For the past six years in particular,
the Security Council has been an important forum,
where the international community has reviewed and
responded to various challenges facing the new Iraqi
2
regime and, in fact, the entire United Nations
membership for that matter. Indeed, this is where the
road map to security and stability in Iraq was devised,
and the commitment of the United Nations and of the
international community to help Iraq along that path
has been reconfirmed time and again.

That said, as Iraq has taken encouraging strides
towards achieving the objectives set forth in numerous
Security Council resolutions and assumed increasing
ownership of its future, the discussions in the Council
have, over time, become more concerned with
stocktaking. That is a welcome development. In fact,
we look forward to a time when Iraq will not be
discussed as an issue of concern for the maintenance of
international peace and security, but where Iraq itself
will contribute to regional and global peace and
security on its own. We feel that we are getting close to
point.

In the light of the foregoing, one may happily see
today's meeting as a regular discussion on the situation
in Iraq even though today Iraq is passing through a
critical point in time, with various challenges still
standing in the way of a stable and prosperous future.
Iraq's assumption of security responsibilities from the
Multinational Force MNF-I and the holding of national
elections are two examples that immediately come to
mind.

Thus, reaffirmation of the support of the United
Nations and of the international community at this
particular moment is critical. Indeed, we need to
acknowledge the good work done by the Iraqi
Government and express our readiness and willingness
to stand with them in tackling the challenges that lie
ahead. That is why we have seen these regular debates
on the basis of the Secretary-General's quarterly
reports as a golden opportunity to convey a strong
message of support by the Council.

Being an able and strategic partner of Iraq, we
felt that Turkey's presidency of the Council during this
meeting makes it even more meaningful. At least, that
is how we see the situation and that is why I have
travelled to New York for the second time in less than
15 days in order to be present at this important
discussion. I am looking forward to a lively exchange,
where, hopefully, we will unequivocally confirm the
terms of our commitment to the territorial integrity,
unity and political sovereignty of Iraq, living at peace
with itself and its neighbours.
09-37304
Without further ado, I resume my functions as
president of the Council and continue with the order of
business.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/284, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1830 (2008).

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Staffan de Mistura. On behalf of the
Council, I would like to express our gratitude to
Mr. De Mistura, who is today making his last
appearance before the Council in his capacity as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq.

We appreciate Mr. De Mistura's capable leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and his
unwavering approach to that challenging work since he
assumed the post in September 2007. We wish him
success in his upcoming work with the World Food
Programme and in all his future endeavours. I now give
the floor to Mr. De Mistura.


