Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Today
the Council will once again act with dispatch to address
the pressing humanitarian needs of those most in need in
Iraq. Credit should go the United Kingdom for its
leadership on this issue.

In his report to the Council, the Secretary-General
identifies ongoing problems and concerns attending the
implementation of the programme established under
resolution 986 (1995). He notes the serious nutritional and

 

health situation affecting the most vulnerable groups in
Iraq; the sometimes slow pace of delivery of humanitarian
goods to Iraq; and difficulties with their distribution once
those goods arrive in the country.

We take all these problems very seriously, and believe
they must be addressed on an urgent basis. We therefore
welcome the commitment of the Secretary-General to
prepare a thorough and systematic study of the entire
resolution 986 (1995) process. This study will be an
immeasurable help to the Council.

We are willing, in the light of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General, not only to find ways of improving
the implementation of the humanitarian programme, but
also to consider additional resources which may be needed
to meet the priority humanitarian needs of the people of
Iraq.

As I have said, the Council has acted with dispatch to
address the humanitarian concerns of the Iraqi people. Iraq
should now do the same. Iraq should stop playing politics
with resolution 986 (1995) contracts.

Iraq should stop submitting resolution 986 (1995)
contracts that fail to meet the prima facie criteria and
procedures that Iraq agreed to, and in some cases insisted
upon, with the United Nations Secretariat.

Iraq should end its threats - made as recently as late
last week - to cease cooperation with the United Nations
on this programme unless its excessive demands for
changes are met.

The Government of Iraq should restore the food ration
for each Iraqi citizen that was cut by the Government even
as more food was flowing into the country.

And Iraq should never again unilaterally and
inexplicably interrupt the sales of oil that the Council has
authorized to help feed the Iraqi people. I point out that by
operative paragraph 2 of this draft resolution the Council
would specifically decide:
"that the provisions of the distribution plan in respect

of goods purchased in accordance with resolution

1111 (1997) shall continue to apply to foodstuffs,

medicine and health supplies purchased in accordance

with this resolution pending the Secretary-General's
approval of a new distribution plan".

We are including this language so that, despite the
Iraqi leadership's not having submitted a distribution plan
on time, the flow of food and medicine to the Iraqi
people will not be interrupted.

In short, we call upon the Iraqi leadership to
demonstrate as much compassion for the Iraqi people as
the Security Council has by adopting resolutions 986
(1995), 1111 (1997) and 1129 (1997), and will
demonstrate once again by adopting this draft resolution
today.

I think by now it should be clear to all where
genuine concern for the welfare of the Iraqi people
resides. This concern has been unshaken by the
determined efforts of the Iraqi Government to undercut
the Security Council and its resolutions at every turn. My
Government will continue to support the resolution 986
(1995) humanitarian programme, because it was the right
thing to do when the resolution was adopted in 1995, and
it remains the right thing to do now.

