The President (spoke in French): I thank
Minister Tshibanda for his statement.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes its
enhanced dialogue with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It reiterates
that the challenges the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is facing as it enters a phase of
stabilization and peace consolidation require a
strategic partnership with the United Nations,
including with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO). The Security
Council appreciates and welcomes the
constructive approach of the Congolese
authorities, and welcomes the efforts made by
MONUSCO in this regard.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of four key issues for the stabilization
of the country: peace and security, the
forthcoming elections, governance and institution
building, and economic development.

"The Security Council considers that the
overall peace and security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has improved
in recent years. It acknowledges the results of the
action taken to address the threat of foreign and
national armed groups, particularly the progress
made against the Forces Democratiques de
Liberation du Rwanda, including through the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration process. The
Security Council underlines that significant
security challenges remain, in particular in the
Kivus and Orientale province. The Council is
concerned about the difficulties which have been
encountered throughout the integration process of
the Congres National pour la Defense du Peuple
into the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the limited progress
made in the reform of the security forces, both
army and police. It calls on the Congolese
authorities to swiftly adopt the necessary legal
framework and implement their long-term vision
for the role and structure of the army and police,
and strongly encourages MONUSCO and
international partners to provide coordinated
support for these reforms.

"The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern about the persistent high levels of
violence, especially sexual violence, and human
rights abuses against civilians, mostly affecting
women and children, including the use and
recruitment of children by parties to the conflict,
in particular in the eastern part of the country. It
reiterates its deep concern about continuing
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army. It calls
for an urgent end to the attacks against the
civilian population by all armed groups. It
condemns all violations of human rights,
including those committed by some elements of
the Congolese security forces. The Council
welcomes progress with the recent prosecutions
after the incidents in Fizi and other cases. It
reiterates the urgent need for the swift
prosecution of all perpetrators of human rights
abuses, and urges the Congolese authorities, with
the support of MONUSCO, to implement the
appropriate responses to address this challenge,
including in Walikale. It urges the Congolese
Government to take all necessary steps, including
ensuring proper conduct by their armed forces in
compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law, to facilitate the return of
refugees and displaced persons.

"The Security Council notes with interest
the electoral calendar presented by the Congolese
authorities and urges the Congolese Government
as well as all relevant parties to ensure an
environment conducive to a credible, inclusive,
transparent, peaceful, timely, free and fair
electoral process. It expresses its thanks to
MONUSCO and the international community for
their support to the electoral process to date, and
encourages continued support. The Security
Council recalls that ensuring freedom of
expression and freedom of movement for all
candidates, as well as for journalists, human
rights defenders and actors from civil society, is
of the utmost importance. It calls upon the
Government and all Congolese stakeholders to
meet their responsibility in this regard, and
further calls upon MONUSCO to support these
efforts, in particular through the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, enhanced and regular dialogue with the
Commission Electorale Nationale Independante
through the Election Partnership Committee, and
follow-up on human rights violations. It also calls
upon MONUSCO and all relevant international
actors to swiftly support the training of the
Congolese police, and for donors to provide
support for police equipment. It requests the
Secretary-General to keep it regularly informed
on the electoral process, including on
MONUSCO's support to this process.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
urgent progress, with regard to governance and
institution building, on judicial reform and
support to domestic courts, in order to ensure the
rule of law and strengthen the fight against
impunity. In this regard, the Council notes the
interest of the Congolese authorities for
establishing specialized mixed courts to address
serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, complemented by their
existing cooperation with the International
Criminal Court. It calls upon MONUSCO and
other relevant international actors to support the
efforts of the Congolese Government in these
fields, and to assist in the restoration of basic
services, including access to justice, road access,
priority health and education infrastructures, and
security infrastructures, throughout the country,
and especially in conflict-affected areas.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of economic development to ensure
long-term stabilization and peace consolidation.
It stresses that special attention should be placed
on women's empowerment and participation in
the economy, job creation for youth, and
reintegration of former combatants. It also
underlines the need for further progress in
ensuring that the trade in mineral resources is
founded on sound economic governance
practices, and is therefore transparent, fair and
legal. It notes that urgent attention is needed to
create an enabling environment to attract the
public and private investment necessary to
address food security, infrastructure and energy
needs. The Security Council reiterates that
regional cooperation with neighbouring countries
should play a key role in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's economic development.

"The Security Council calls upon the
international community, the African Union and
all relevant subregional organizations to further
engage in support of the stabilization efforts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, notably in
the fields of security, the fight against illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources, and
socio-economic development."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l 1/1 1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15pm.
