Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Allow me, at the outset,
to join others in expressing our deepest sympathies on
the passing of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency and, in particular, to his
bereaved loved ones.

I also wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your successful presidency of the Council for the month
of July. I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for her
comprehensive and detailed briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Last month, in his presentation on behalf of
the Secretary-General of the tenth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) to the
Security Council (see S/PV.8557), Mr. Mladenov once
again underscored that no concrete steps had been
taken to implement that historic resolution. Notably,
settlement activity has continued in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, with Israeli authorities
advancing, approving or tendering nearly 6,000 housing
units - the largest settlement advancement in two years.
I take this opportunity to reiterate that settlements are
illegal under international law and represent an obstacle
to peace. Furthermore, the demolition and seizure of
Palestinian-owned structures by Israeli authorities also
continue throughout the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. We firmly condemn the demolition of
dozens of Palestinians homes in the Palestinian village
of Sur Baher yesterday.

The security situation in Gaza remains particularly
tense and, as the past has shown, the situation could flare
up at any moment. The humanitarian situation is also
extremely worrying. According to UNICEF's quarterly
humanitarian situation report on the State of Palestine
for the period from January to March 2019, over 50 per
cent ofPalestinian families in Gaza are living below the
poverty line. Namibia also remains deeply concerned
by the serious movement and access constraints being
placed on national staff from United Nations agencies
and international and non-governmental organizations
in Gaza. These individuals provide lifesaving services
to Palestinians in Gaza and their access should not
be restricted.

Despite these negative trends, there are a few
positive developments that should be highlighted.
The State of Qatar's continued provision of financial
assistance for the humanitarian situation in Gaza has
proven essential and has had a positive impact on efforts
to de-escalate the situation in Gaza. Furthermore, the
work of the Office of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process to create more sustainable
solutions in the energy sector - an area that has been
plagued by problems for many years - should be
recognized and highlighted.

I take this opportunity to commend the successful
holding of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
pledging conference, which took place on 25 June here
in New York. I thank those countries that helped raise
$110 million, ensuring that the life-saving services of
UNRWA are not interrupted for the time being. I also
take this opportunity to reaffirm Namibia's support
to UNRWA and its mandate in providing essential
services to Palestinian refugees across the West Bank,
Gaza, Lebanon, Jordan and Syria.

The financial crisis that the Palestinian Authority
is currently facing as a result of Israel's decision to
withhold part of the clearance revenues of the Palestinian
Authority is severely impacting the Palestinian
economy. The continuation of this crisis threatens to
destabilize an already volatile situation. We urge parties
to implement and respect their bilateral agreements.
The Peace to Prosperity workshop held in
Bahrain on 25 June made it clear that the international
community remains steadfast in its belief that economic
development cannot be achieved without negotiations
leading to a two-State solution. The solution to this
protracted conflict remains political. No amount of
humanitarian or economic support will provide a
solution to the conflict. We urge parties not to abandon
the political process that would secure the foundation
for economic development.

Due to a similar experience, Namibia knows that,
for as long as the people are denied their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence, tension,
frustration, anger and even hatred will continue to
mount. The oppressed people who are denied their
right to self-determination and freedom will never be
silenced. A boiling point will be reached sooner rather
than later, which would certainly have far-reaching
consequences for Israelis and Palestinians alike, as well
as devastating effects on prospects for peace in that
region. The continued violation of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions by the occupying Power,
ongoing settlement expansions, unilateral actions
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, the
annexation of the Golan and the withdrawal of funding
for UNRWA are causes for great concern as they
gravely undermine the process of reaching a mutually
acceptable, just and lasting solution. We must stand on
the side of respect and upholding of international law.

