Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the holding of this meeting and thank
Mr. John Ging for his valuable and informative briefing
this morning.

Peru is following the situation in Syria with great
concern. The conflict continues to claim lives and
destroy civilian infrastructure. The sorely needed
humanitarian assistance is still delivered only in a
limited way. More than 13 million people - two out
of three Syrians - need it. Our main focus at the
moment is Idlib, a highly volatile scenario. The extreme
vulnerability ofnearly 4 million civilians should compel
us to direct our attention to the need and responsibility
to protect them. Under no circumstances can the fight
against terrorism be used as an excuse to violate human
rights and international humanitarian law, especially
when, as in Idlib, the lives of approximately 2 million
children are at stake.

It is essential to prevent a further escalation of
violence. Its humanitarian impact is incalculable. It
could lead to massive new refugee flows and further
complicate regional stability. We are also concerned
about the situation of nearly 5 million internally
displaced persons and the 6 million Syrian citizens,
who constitute the largest population of refugees and
displaced persons in the world today. These people,
who are in many cases exposed to the most precarious
living conditions, have the right to return voluntarily
to their homes and businesses, in a safe and dignified
manner, under internationally accepted parameters.
The right of ownership of these persons must not be
undermined in any way.

More than ever, the tragic situation demands that
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors have
immediate, safe and unrestricted access to those most
in need. We Wish to reiterate our admiration of, and
support for, the work of humanitarian workers. We also
stress the importance of cross-border assistance for
the survival of millions of people. The international
community, and in particular the countries with the
greatest resources and those committed to peace and
stability, must ensure stable and predictable funding for
the humanitarian response plan in Syria.

Finally, we must bear in mind the urgency of a
political solution to this protracted conflict, based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). All parties, especially the
Government, must engage constructively in those
efforts. Our ability to ease the suffering of the
population and to ensure the necessary and urgent
rebuilding of the country ultimately depend upon it.
In that regard, we hope that the upcoming meeting in
Geneva between the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and the Astana guarantors will enable progress
in establishing a constitutional committee that is
inclusive and representative, especially with regard to
Syrian women. We believe it is essential that the Astana
guarantors, other countries with influence over the
Syrian Government, and the opposition contribute to an
atmosphere of moderation, detente, dialogue in order to
ensure peace, the well-being of the people of Syria and
the territorial integrity of the country.

