Mr. Alatas (Indonesia): I deem it a distinct privilege
to be able to participate in this special meeting of the
Security Council in commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations. It is indeed fitting that
the Security Council should mark this milestone in our
Organization's history with a special observance.

My delegation wishes to commend Italy for
convening this significant meeting of the Security Council
at the Ministerial level. It offers us a unique opportunity
for sober reflection on the Security Council's performance
since its inception, as well as on ways to further enhance
its efficacy.

It may be recalled that the United Nations was born
while humankind was still recoiling from the horrors of
the Second World War. The international community,
"determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war", endeavoured at the San Francisco
Conference, 50 years ago, to create an international
Organization that would be able to prevent such
calamities in the future by establishing the political,
economic and social conditions for a new, more peaceful
and safer world. An important part of that task, the
maintenance of international peace, was entrusted to this
Council.

The high hopes that the international community
invested in the United Nations, however, were soon
overcast by the shadow of the cold war. The lofty
intentions of the United Nations Charter could no longer
be fully realized in a world split into two rival military
and ideological blocs locked in a struggle for dominance.

In this Council, a sense of higher responsibility and
common purpose among its members had been
presupposed, but time and again the Council would be
paralysed precisely because the major Powers could not
achieve unanimity. As a result, the Council too often
failed to take decisive action to resolve conflicts, and its
resolutions were frequently defied or ignored. The
superimposition of East-West rivalries on the deliberations
of the Council rendered even unanimously approved
resolutions unimplementable.

 

But it cannot be denied that even during the cold war
era, the Security Council did manage to bring about some
measure of global stability by limiting the scope and
intensity of conflicts. Working with the Secretary-General,
the Council provided modalities for conciliation, mediation,
good offices, fact-finding, truce observation and quiet
diplomacy. Time and again the Council would formulate
guidelines for the solution of complex problems and
substitute dialogue and negotiations for armed hostilities.

With the end of the cold war, a new era in the search
for peace has dawned. Breakthroughs have been achieved
in long-standing conflicts in some countries and regions. On
a number of occasions in the recent past, the permanent
members of the Security Council have recognized the
international responsibilities inherent in their status and
have shown a capability for united action never seen before.
We are thus given a glimpse of what the Council could
achieve if it could be made strictly faithful to the vision of
the United Nations Charter.

Still, the lessons of the past 50 years are clear. We are
called upon to further strengthen our institutions and to
adopt more effective and innovative approaches to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. We have to recast
the Charter's concept of collective action for peace and
security so as to render the United Nations more capable of
carrying out its primary function. We need to devise a more
viable system of collective security in which all Member
States can participate in accordance with their respective
capabilities. In this way, the burden of making the world
better and safer for all will be equitably shared by all. The
General Assembly, the Security Council and the Secretary-
General should assume their respective, complementary
roles in preserving the peace, as mandated by the Charter.

Peace-keeping operations have to be armed with a
clear mandate and provided adequate means, including
financial, to fulfil their missions. Indeed, in this context, it
is of critical importance to come to grips with the serious
financial crisis that the Organization is facing; otherwise, all
our endeavours to maintain international peace and security
would grind to a halt. Concepts of peacemaking, peace-
keeping, peace-building and preventive diplomacy need to
be adapted to the new realities, especially in view of the
qualitative changes that have occurred in the nature of
conflicts. Questions relating to the future use of powers
vested under Chapter VII of the Charter call for a collective
re-thinking on the basis of insights derived from recent
experience.

The profound changes that have taken place in the
course of the past fifty years should now be reflected in
the composition of the Security Council. An equitable and
balanced expansion of the permanent and non-permanent
membership of the Council, coupled with reforms in its
working methods and procedures, would render the
Council more responsive and relevant to prevailing
geopolitical realities and more open to the participation of
small and medium-sized States, which constitute the
majority of the Organization. It would also be timely and
pertinent to review the manner in which the veto is
exercised at present, with a view to mitigating its
arbitrary use and to ensuring a more democratic decision-
making process.

The United Nations may not have been a perfect
instrument for peace but it has given us fifty years
without a global war and fifty years of experience in the
pursuit of peace. Let us look back at the road we have
traversed, distil useful lessons from that experience and
set out again with refreshed determination. With renewed
commitment we can create the world of peace envisioned
in the Charter fifty years ago.

