Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, Sir, allow me, on behalf of the Foreign
Minister of China, Mr. Tang Jiaxuan, to thank you for
presiding over this meeting and to welcome Mr. Amara
Essy, Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), as well as distinguished guests from
other countries and regional organizations, to today's
meeting. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the delegation of Mauritius for convening this public
meeting and for preparing the "Guidelines" document.

Peace and development in Africa have always
been matters of great concern to the Security Council.
The United Nations has achieved varying degrees of
progress in its peacekeeping efforts in Sierra Leone, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the
Ethiopia-Eritrea border, inter alia. The recently
declared official end of the civil war in Sierra Leone,
for example, is attributable partly to the United Nations
peacekeeping role there.

At the same time, however, we can see that in
some areas of the African continent, which are still
plagued by armed conflicts, poverty, disease and other
problems, the situation remains grave. Today's meeting
is an opportunity for the Security Council to engage in
a direct exchange of views with representatives of the
OAU and of African countries on the issue of Africa.
This is very important to the strengthening of
communication, cooperation and coordination between
the Security Council and the OAU, with a view to
finding solutions to the problems of Africa.

Here I should like to share with the Council my
views on the following points.

First, ours is a world of diversity, of which the
African continent is an important part. After long and
unremitting efforts, most African countries won
national independence by the middle of the twentieth
century. However, due to years of colonialism and for
other reasons, their economic foundations remain
extremely weak; the level of their peoples' education is
relatively low; and their socio-economic development
has been hampered by many factors.

After winning independence, many African
countries travelled a difficult path, full of twists and
turns. At present, Africa, like many other places, also
faces the twin tasks of achieving peace and
development. However, on the African continent these
tasks have unique characteristics. Many aspects must
be taken into account: its history, the relations between
countries and ethnic groups, and socio-economic
realities. We believe, therefore, that when discussing
and seeking a solution to the African issue, we should
never forget the realities in Africa or neglect its unique
characteristics.

In 1998, the Secretary-General submitted his
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,
in which he put forward, in the light of the root causes
of African conflicts, a series of ideas and
recommendations on ways of establishing durable
peace and of promoting economic development in
Africa. He highlighted in his report the fact that the
international community must summon the political
will and take concrete action to intervene where it can
to have an impact and invest where resources are
needed. We fully agree with the Secretary-General on
this point.

The Millennium Summit clearly identified as a
priority the issue of peace and development in the
African region. The Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted at last year's World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance stressed that poverty and economic
disparities are closely related to racism and racial
discrimination; that they have also contributed
significantly to the underdevelopment of developing
countries, especially in Africa; and that they are among
the root causes, as well as the consequences, of armed
conflicts.

After the events of ll September, the
international community has come to realize that
poverty and armed conflicts are also causes of
terrorism. We believe that only by increasing
development aid to African countries and helping them
develop their economies and eradicate poverty can we
lay a solid foundation for a comprehensive solution to
African conflicts. The aforementioned report of the
Secretary-General and the Millennium Declaration
have already provided many proposals and concrete
objectives in this regard. The most important thing now
is when and how to translate them into real action.

Thirdly, the OAU and other African subregional
organizations are working hard to resolve African
regional conflicts and to promote economic
development in that continent.

As a primary organ for maintaining world peace
and security, the Security Council has the responsibility
of resolving the problem of African conflicts.

Therefore, we fully support the Security Council
in its strengthening of cooperation and coordination
with the OAU and subregional organizations and in its
paying more attention to the will of the African people
in the process of resolving regional conflicts, so as to
formulate relevant strategies to that end. The Council
should consider institutionalizing its dialogue with the
OAU. We hope that the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in West
Africa, to be inaugurated soon, will play a positive role
in promoting cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Community of West African States.

Fourthly, promoting peace and development in
Africa and strengthening cooperation with African
countries constitute an important part of China's
foreign policy. In October 2000, China successfully
hosted the China-Africa Forum on Cooperation, in
Beijing. The senior officials' meeting and the
ministerial meeting of the China-Africa Forum on
Cooperation will be held in Ethiopia this year and next
year, respectively. Preparations for these two meetings
are proceeding smoothly. The Chinese Government has
always tried to provide necessary assistance to African
countries to the best of its ability. The China-Africa
Forum on Cooperation has already identified areas and
some projects for cooperation between the two sides.

The Chinese Government has also made a pledge
on reducing and cancelling debts owed by African
countries to China. By now, more than 20 countries
have signed a protocol with China on debt reduction
and cancellation.

The Chinese Government also decided recently to
raise the level of China's participation in standby
arrangements for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. This means that China will take a more
active part in peacekeeping operations in Africa. The
Chinese Government will, as always, continue to
strengthen its cooperation with African countries and
work for solutions to regional problems in Africa.

