Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First I would like to note the skill of the Council's
presidency this month - the United Kingdom - on
proposing for the theme of this debate, for the second
consecutive year, the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies.

In the context of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/616), which we have examined
closely, my delegation would like to highlight a
number of points that we regard as particularly
important. I would like first to congratulate the
Secretary-General and to thank him, not just for his
introductory statement this morning, but also for his
important address at the start of the General Assembly
session this year (see A/59/PV.3), which placed
consideration of and action on law and human rights,
both within and among countries, at the very centre of
the debate on the direction the Organization should
take.

Before I move on to the specific points that I
would like to make in this regard, I would like to note
that Spain fully endorses the statement to be made later
by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of
the European Union.

Creating security and trust among populations in
crisis and in post-conflict situations is indispensable if
we are to consolidate or restore - depending on the
situation - the rule of law and the justice system.
Legal certainty provides a foundation for ensuring
stability - with regard not only to the political system
and the citizenry, but also to economic and social
issues. The United Nations has broad experience,
acquired in the field, in peacekeeping operations. It
also has a wealth of contributions from the deliberative
bodies of the Organization, in particular the General
Assembly, which as long ago as 1985 adopted the
Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary
and, subsequently, the Basic Principles on the Role of
Lawyers and the Guidelines on the Role of
Prosecutors. Nor should we overlook the important
contributions made by the Commission on Human
Rights or the advice provided in this respect by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

First and foremost, we must keep in mind that
local actors and local institutions are key in this
respect. We must minimize the risk of United Nations
actions in this area sometimes being perceived as
constituting external interference or as disregarding
circumstances and traditions peculiar to the country in
question. We therefore fully support the Secretary-
General's statement that, in its actions, the United
Nations must not try to direct, but to assist and provide
guidance to, fragmented societies that require outside
assistance for the restoration of conditions in which
their own institutions can function properly.

Furthermore, it is essential to ensure that justice
not be just an abstract idea, but a tangible reality for
citizens, especially victims. In that regard, we believe
that the initiatives put forward by the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia with a
View to establishing mechanisms to provide reparations
for victims should be studied carefully and in a
positive manner. The Victims Trust Fund, set up by the
States parties to the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, is already beginning to operate.

We also look forward to the completion of the
work begun by the Commission on Human Rights
aimed at formulating basic principles and guidelines on
the right to a remedy and reparation for victims of
violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law.

The report of the Secretary-General also refers to
the problems resulting from rule of law vacuums -
when peace operations take place in environments
marked by the effective absence of working criminal
justice systems.

The Brahimi report on peace operations
(S/2000/809) raised the possibility of developing a type
of legal code that could provisionally be applied in
situations such as I have just described, with a view to
filling such vacuums. We are gratified to note that,
over the next few months, the preparation of
instruments that could facilitate the work of the United
Nations in this regard is expected to reach completion.

In the area of international justice, given the
experience of special and mixed criminal tribunals, the
International Criminal Court has a key role in
combating impunity for the most serious crimes of far-
reaching international importance. The international
community now has at its disposal a permanent,
independent and impartial instrument to ensure justice
in the most significant cases of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law when,
in keeping with the principle of complementarity,
national penal systems are not in a position, for one
reason or another, to address such important issues in a
genuine and effective manner.

We welcome the fact that, in recent days, a
number of countries have ratified the Rome Statute,
and that consequently more than half of the States
Members of the United Nations are now parties to the
Statute. We also welcome the fact that the Secretary-
General and the President of the International Criminal
Court have signed an agreement on cooperation and
consultation, with the result that the Court is now part
of the United Nations system.

During the past few years we have sometimes
seen positive results from the application of
complementary measures, which can help to ensure
justice in specific transitional situations. That is
something to which Mr. Mendez also referred in his
opening statement. I have in mind truth and
reconciliation commissions, commissions aimed at
establishing a historical record, national commissions
on human rights, commissions to investigate the
records of administrations, and so forth. Such
mechanisms may be particularly appropriate in a
political and social context by emphasizing the national
character of the process of restoring justice and the rule
of law.

It may sometimes be possible to set up
specialized tribunals or courts. At other times, the
proper functioning and strengthening of national
capacities in the administration of justice might make
such specialized tribunals or courts unnecessary. The
particular formula will depend on the circumstances,
and the will of the peoples most directly affected will
always be decisive.
The training of local personnel in the area of
justice and the rule of law is a key element - one that
must be worked on at all levels. To that end,
appropriate resources must be mobilized. In this
regard, in coordination with the European Commission,
Spain recently held a workshop on criminal justice
with the assistance of experts from various
international organizations, including the United
Nations and associations and organizations of civil
society. That workshop was designed precisely to
enhance existing capacities in this area - particularly
in connection with crises in post-conflict situations. In
this regard, we must not overlook the potential
contributions of organizations like the Council of
Europe, with its unparalleled experience in the
protection of human rights, judicial cooperation in civil
and criminal matters and the modernization of justice
systems. Then, there is the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, which has been doing
effective work in preventive diplomacy and crisis
management.

In conclusion, let me state that my delegation
fully supports the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General,
particularly in the last chapter, entitled "Moving
forward". I would also like to make the point that
Spain is ready to cooperate actively in the
implementation of those recommendations. Because of
the far-reaching importance of the subject under
discussion, it would be desirable for the Security
Council to review periodically the progress made in
implementing those recommendations, so as not to lose
the momentum which the United Kingdom initiative
has generated.

