Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Judge Agius, President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY); Judge Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); and Judge
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and thank them
all for their briefings. I also thank Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. J allow for their briefings.

The establishment by the Security Council of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda was
the result of the international community's deeply
held conviction that there was a need to end the most
atrocious ofinternational crimes, such as crimes against
humanity, war crimes and the crime of genocide. It
also wanted to ensure that criminal justice was duly
dispensed and to prevent any of those involved in such
atrocities from escaping being held accountable for
their crimes and ensure that justice was rendered. The
goal was to uphold the rule of law. The establishment of
such international criminal tribunals is an affirmation
that international criminal justice, stability and peace
go hand in hand. It is impossible for us to achieve
lasting peace without holding accountable those who
have committed crimes.

The two Tribunals have made major progress
recently on delivering on the objectives for which they
were set up. We find that to be true in many of the
cases that have been heard by the Tribunals, although
a few cases remain outstanding in one of the Tribunals
and have still to be heard. With respect to the ICTR
making its final ruling last week, we think that it is
a perfect opportunity to express our appreciation for
the enormous efforts made by the Tribunal to ensure
that it could duly complete its work by the date on
which its responsibilities were to be transferred to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. It has met that deadline.

Nonetheless, Jordan remains concerned about the
fact that nine persons who have been accused or indicted
are at still at large. They are fugitives, and we call upon
the Residual Mechanism to continue to pursue them
and to work to ensure that they are apprehended, in line
with resolution 1966 (2010). The achievements of both
Tribunals and all that they have done for the rule of
law has demonstrated the wisdom of establishing the
Tribunals in the first place, and also attest to the efforts
made to support their work despite the various financial
and administrative challenges that both Tribunals have
had to face over the past few years. Despite such issues,
they have succeeded in playing a key role in developing
the principles of international criminal law.

Moreover, the interpretations and rulings provided
by the two Tribunals pertaining to the provisions of
international humanitarian law and their definitions
of legal terms in international criminal law have laid
the foundation for other international and national
courts and tribunals, including the newer International
Criminal Court itself, which refers to the work of ad
hoc International Tribunals in rendering its judgements.
That is why we call upon all national tribunals and
courts and international justice bodies to make use
of and learn lessons from the experiences of and
example set, at the judicial and administrative levels,
by the Tribunals and to benefit from their archives,
jurisprudence and achievements.

The two Tribunals were established on the basis
of constructive cooperation. We must continue to
lend such support to the ICTY while its work is still
ongoing, and make available to it all the resources it
needs so that it can complete its work by the date set by
its President. We call upon the countries of the former
Yugoslavia to continue to cooperate fully with the
Tribunal and with the Prosecutor. We would also like to
reiterate that the transition to the Residual Mechanism
must be as smooth for the ICTY as it has been for the
ICTR. We also call for the full implementation of the
completion strategy and for all trials to be duly brought
to a successful conclusion. We therefore support the
Residual Mechanism in its pursuit of ensuring that
international criminal justice has been served.

Once again, we thank those who briefed us for all
that they have achieved and for their presentations. We
pay tribute to the exceptional work they have carried
out and express our full support to them.

