Mr. Pedersen (Norway): As my contribution
to enhancing the working methods of the Security
Council, I will not read out my full statement, but it
will be circulated.

Norway aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the Nordic
countries and by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the informal group of like-minded
States on targeted sanctions, which comprises Austria,
Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland.

In order to further strengthen the effectiveness and
due process guarantees of the United Nations sanctions
regimes, the group of like-minded States on targeted
sanctions re-invites the Security Council and Member
States to consider the following proposals and ideas,
which were submitted in writing on 17 April 2014.

First, the Office of the Ombudsperson should
be made permanent. That will give more weight and
credibility to the work of the Ombudsperson.

Secondly, information-sharing between Member
States and the Ombudsperson, as well as among the
Sanctions Committee and Member States, national
and regional courts and other authorities, should be
improved.

Thirdly, transparency should be enhanced. All
decisions, regardless of whether they maintain or
discontinue a listing of an individual or entity, should
be accompanied by adequate and substantial reasons
Moreover, those reasons, as well as a redacted version of
the comprehensive report of the Ombudsperson, should
be published, allowing for legitimate privacy, security
and confidentiality interests to be adequately protected.
We welcome the steps taken in resolution 2161 (2014) as
far as the provision of reasons for delisting and retention
as well as the transparency ofthe process are concerned
and encourage the Council to consider further steps in
that regard.

Fourthly, the Committee must continue to conduct
the triennial review in a timely and thorough manner
and regularly inform Member States about the results
of all reviews provided for under resolution 2161
(2014). In the course of the review, a reasoned decision
for a continued designation should be provided, if the
individual or entity is to be kept on the list. If a listing
is not reviewed and confirmed within the three-year
period, it should automatically be deleted.

Besides those four proposals for the immediate
future, the group of like-minded States would also
like to submit a few ideas for the longer term aimed at
ensuring that targeted-sanctions regimes satisfy basic
due-process guarantees and are in conformity with
internationally recognized human rights standards.

First, we recommend that the Ombudsperson be
given the authority to decide, after having examined
a request for a delisting, whether to maintain or
discontinue the listing. At the same time, Member
States and the relevant international organizations
and bodies should encourage individuals or entities
that seek removal from the Al-Qaida sanctions list to
challenge their listing by first petitioning the Office of
the Ombudsperson before the case is brought up at the
national or regional level.

Secondly, we propose to start reflecting on how
to improve due-process guarantees in other targeted-
sanctions regimes. We once again submit the idea
that the Ombudsperson's process should be gradually
extended, on a case by case basis, to other appropriate
sanctions regimes. In so doing, the need for possible
adaptations in the Ombudsperson's mandate should
be explored. We are of course fully aware that each
sanctions regime with its underlying political situation
is indeed unique and that some sanctions regimes are
more suitable for such an extension than others.

Moreover, the listed individual or entity should be
adequately informed about the listing, and a narrative
summary of reasons should be communicated. Lastly,
no decision to maintain or discontinue a listing should
remain pending before the respective Sanctions
Committee for longer than six months.

