The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Erwa
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2005/57 and addendum 1, S/2005/68 and
S/2005/140, containing the reports of the Secretary-
General dated 31 January, 4 February and 4 March
2005, as well as document S/2005/60, containing a
letter dated 31 January 2005 from the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Darfur.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2005/198, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1590 (2005).

I give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.


