Mrs. Andelic' (Bosnia and Heerzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam, for organizing
this important and timely debate in order to address
issues related to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, with a special emphasis on the protection of
journalists. I am also grateful to Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson and representatives of media for
their briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.

Every single day, the United Nations undertakes
very tough and hard work to ensure due protection from
the scourge of war. The most desirable approach in
situations of conflict would be the peaceful resolution
of disputes through diplomatic efforts. Unfortunately,
armed conflicts still occur and civilians in those
situations still need protection. Today, the United
Nations endeavours represent important landmarks in
the global efforts to better protect civilians in armed
conflicts. We cannot doubt that there is a need for the
United Nations, and especially for the Security Council,
to further work on improving planning, preparedness
and policies aimed at reducing the vulnerability of
innocent civilians in conflicts. We would like to
reaffirm our commitment to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, and to the continuing and full
implementation of all relevant resolutions.

The trend of the unlawful targeting of
civilians - including women, children, the elderly,
humanitarian workers and journalists is of great
concern to us. There is no justification for armed
groups to attack civilians. Therefore, we emphasize
the responsibility of all parties to conflict to ensure
the security of civilians and to comply strictly with the
norms of international humanitarian and human rights
law.

 

The protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression, including the right to receive and
express opinions and impart information, is crucial in
all societies. However, journalists and the media have
often been subjected to various forms of pressure,
blackmail and even physical attacks. It is quite clear
that attacks on journalists weaken and endanger the
freedom of every citizen.

The fact today is that an increasing number
of journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel are killed or injured while reporting from
conflict situations, even though they are considered
to be civilians and should be respected and protected
as such. While we express our deep concern regarding
this issue, we would like to remind all parties to armed
conflicts of their legal obligations with regard to the
protection of journalists. Furthermore, it is essential
to emphasize the obligation of States to prevent such
attacks and the need to bring tojustice those responsible.
Efforts must be enhanced to support the fight against
impunity, at the national and international levels alike.

Sanctions and other targeted measures play an
important role in overall efforts as well as in initiatives
to improve compliance with the law by non-State armed
groups.

Although the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with States, the United
Nations plays a crucial role through its systematic
approach to the protection of civilians, which is at the
forefront of global efforts. We support the provision of
more comprehensive and detailed information on the
protection of civilians in country-specific situations, as
well as on measuring progress in the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates related to the protection of all
civilians, including journalists.

We need to ensure the protection of the right to
the freedom of expression and, at the same time, to
punish unethical behaviour byjournalists or the media.
Unverified or even fabricated information is often
used as a weapon in situations of peace and of conflict
alike. Bosnia and Herzegovina has experienced the
worst effects of hate speech in the past, which was not
an issue of freedom of speech, but speech that incited
ethnic hatred and killings. In that regard, we are of
the View that all journalists have to hold themselves
to high ethical standards at all times and under all
circumstances. Preventing and fighting against the
encouragement, representation or profiling of ethnic,
national or religious intolerance, hatred and violence
are of vital interest for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We condemn all incitement to Violence against
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We further
reaffirm the need to bring to justice, in accordance
with the applicable international law, individuals
who incite such violence. Mandating peacekeeping
missions to protect civilians remains one of the most
significant actions taken by the Security Council
to enhance protection. The United Nations and the
Security Council need to indicate their willingness,
when authorizing missions on the ground in conflict
situations, to consider, where appropriate, steps to
respond to all violence against journalists and media
professionals. At the same time, it is crucial to consider
steps to respond to media broadcasts inciting crimes
against humanity and serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

The objective and impartial work of journalists
in armed conflict is, on the one hand, appreciated
and necessary, but, on the other hand, it is adversely
affected by high risk. We are half way through 2013
and already a significant number of journalists have
lost their lives reporting on various conflicts. We must
also note that journalist causalities have dramatically
risen, making the job of reporting on conflict areas
one of the most dangerous jobs in the world. We also
believe that today's meeting of the Security Council
could provide additional impetus in our efforts to fight
for truth and objectivity, to set mechanisms to address
the root causes of violence against journalists and to
combat impunity.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to all thosejournalists
who have lost their lives carrying out their work for the
benefit of all citizens to realize their right to receive
reliable information.

