Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for having organized this
important open debate on the protection of journalists
in armed conflicts.

I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
Mr. Jan Eliasson for his briefing and to recognize
the presence here today of Ms. Kathleen Carroll,
Mr. Mustafa Haji Abdinur, Mr. Richard Engel and
Mr. Ghaith Abdul-Ahad. We commend their work,
done despite the challenges and risks involved, and
their dedication to ensuring that the world be informed.

Since Rwanda became a member of the Council in
January this year, we have put our time into debating
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, in both
thematic debates and country-specific situations.
Following the debates on the protection of civilians,
sexual violence in conflict, children and armed conflict
and specific human rights and humanitarian situations
such as Syria, today we are discussing the protection of
another group of people who are vulnerable in situations
of armed conflicts, namely, journalists.
Journalists play a critical role in informing the
world on ongoing conflicts and on our daily work in the
Council. With new technology and social media we feel
like we are living in various conflict theatres, following
every event and breaking news. By reporting on cases
of international concern, journalists provide us with
useful information inside certain points of reference. In
this context, it is always the worst news to hear when
a person who was providing others perspective on a
conflict was killed by a bomb or stray bullet or, even
worse, was assassinated in cold blood by belligerents.
At times, we hear that a well-known face was abducted
by armed groups. Most of us followed the recent ordeal
of our friend Richard Engel in Syria. In other cases,
journalists are jailed, tortured, raped or sexually
assaulted.

Rwanda is alarmed by reports of failure to comply
with humanitarian obligations to protect journalists,
including reports of deliberate killing, disappearance,
torture or other cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment
ofjournalists by parties to conflicts.

In addition, while recent reports indicate that the
number of abuses against journalists has declined in
some countries, it is our concern that the violence in
Syria and Somalia continues to endanger journalists
and media professionals reporting on those conflicts.
We therefore find it rational for the Security Council,
with regard to specific crisis situations, to always
recognize the particular vulnerability of journalists
in its resolutions and other outcome documents. In
those cases, the Council can consider mandating the
protection ofjournalists as a group of civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence. In conflict
situations with peacekeeping missions, the protection
ofjournalists could be included in mission mandates.
In the meantime, we urge armed groups in all conflict
situations to ensure respect and protection for the
civilian population, including journalists and their
property, and to abide by international humanitarian
law.

We find it pertinent to speak today on the
reciprocal role of the media andjournalists in engaging
in activities that ensure the protection of civilians, most
especially as catalysts of peace, rather than fueling
armed conflicts. We believe the best protection is the
prevention of armed conflicts in the first place.

It is of equal value to ensure that journalists
reporting from war zones bear the moral responsibility
to report in an accurate and balanced manner all stories
in the proper context. The 1994 genocide in Rwanda is
a stark and constant reminder that information can save
or kill. Rwanda has been on the receiving end of the
media being used in a destructive manner to perpetrate
violence and instill hatred among the people. Indeed,
in Rwanda the media proved to be a powerful tool for
escalating the conflict. For instance the infamous Radio
Television Libre des Mille Collines urged listeners to
pick up machetes and take to the streets to kill what
they called "cockroaches".

It is therefore important to stress that reporting
comes with great responsibilities, and we call on all
journalists and media professionals to resolve to report
in an accurate and balanced manner.

However, the media have proved to be a powerful
instrument for peacebuilding and reconciliation. In post-
genocide Rwanda, the media have played a constructive
role as bridge-builder and a tool for reconciliation.
Since implementing media reforms in Rwanda, we are
seeing growing media that have become an essential
part of development, good governance and democratic
progress, media that promote greater freedom and
responsibility among practitioners, that promote
improved public process and access to information,
contribute to greater accountability and foster diversity
and competition.

To conclude, let me play tribute again to all women
and men around the world who, armed with a pen, a
camera, a computer or a microphone, have taken the
risk of leaving the comfort of their families to inform
our own and have made the ultimate sacrifice in the
name of truth for generations to come.

