Mr. Sharma: It is a pleasure, Sir, to address the
Council under your presidency, once again on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

Since I last addressed the Council, in April this
year, the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) has been extended
by the Council for another year, and the Mission now
terminates on 20 May 2004. As my final statement
before the Council will be on the eve of the conclusion
of the Mission, I take this opportunity both to assess
the situation in important areas of security and
governance within UNMISET's mandate and to
anticipate areas of continuing support post-UNMISET
to which the Council is expected to give closer scrutiny
early next year.

In the 17 months since UNMISET's
establishment, the advances and gains made by Timor-
Leste have been remarkable, particularly given the
paucity of means and experience at the starting point.
The country has made a determined start in various
aspects of governance: open leadership, the enactment
of legislation, the rehabilitation of infrastructure,
responsible development planning and budgetary
discipline, promoting the country's regional and global
integration and, most important, commitment to
democratic norms and personal freedoms. UNMISET
and United Nations agencies and bilateral and
multilateral partners have played a supportive role in
strengthening the institutions of State, in advancing
economic and social objectives and in enhancing State
security. The example and wisdom of the leadership of
East Timor - particularly President Kay Rala Xanana
Gusmao, Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, President of the
National Parliament Francisco Guterres and Foreign
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta - have been a decisive
element in the confident and mature start provided to
nation-building within the compressed period since
independence. The progress made has been detailed in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/944) now
before the Council.

Even as we rightfully acknowledge the
achievements, we must be cognizant that, in its current,
nascent stage, the State will inevitably have areas of
concern requiring both sustained attention on the part
of State actors and continuing engagement and support
on the part of development partners. While there have
been no major security challenges over the past six
months, reports persist of alleged sightings of armed
groups by residents in rural areas and of the presence
of criminal elements in those areas, particularly in the
border districts. There is a risk that these may increase
as downsizing progresses. A repetition of the incidents
that took place in the earlier part of the year has to be
prevented. In urban areas, civil disturbances, including
sporadic violence among such groups as martial arts
groups and youth gangs, and incidents related to
smuggling, extortion and robbery carry the potential of
undermining public perception of security. There is,
therefore, legitimate concern as to potential threats to
stability in rural and urban areas alike and there is
particular nervousness among residents of border areas
as the efforts to neutralize elements that can cause
mischief and exert pressure on security in the border
areas are still not complete.

There is apprehension lest capabilities be tested
in the post-UNMISET period. The psychological and
substantive requirements to preserve confidence in
security arrangements, including mobility, particularly
in the sensitive areas, will therefore be a priority
consideration in assessing the longer-term needs of
stability and security. It is important to appreciate that,
in the backdrop of recent traumatic history, the
consequences of violent incidents can be deeply
unsettling and undermine public confidence.

The National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) now
bear the responsibility for general policing duties in 12
out of the 13 districts. The entire national territory will
be handed over operationally to the PNTL before the
end of the year. During the last 17 months, UNMISET
has not only continued with the training of the National
Police force in Timor-Leste, but has also made
concerted efforts, working closely with the
Government of Timor-Leste, to strengthen the force,
including its special units. A comprehensive plan of
action has been prepared as a road map that addresses
policy, administrative and legislative measures
recommended by the joint assessment mission on the
police. While intensified efforts in the next months will
address certain institutional, training and performance
issues, longer-term measures will require an increased
effort by the Government, supported by the
international community, to buttress the continued
development of the PNTL as a professional, efficient
and accountable force serving the people of Timor-
Leste.

PNTL is a young and as yet inexperienced police
service and it is doubtful that it will be able to respond
effectively if it is tested by major internal security
challenges in the period immediately following closure
of UNMISET. It needs to mature and develop without
being continually tested to the point at which it could
falter, shaking its confidence and that of the
community it serves. Operational support and further
mentoring and training in specialized and professional
policing skills will be required on a longer-term basis,
as well as external reinforcing capability in sufficient
strength in the areas identified.

Maintenance of professional standards in the
fledgling police force is a core concern. There have
been several incidents of breach of discipline and code
of conduct and excessive use of force. Ensuring that
police officers abide by human rights standards and
maintain professional standards is a priority. The
establishment of clear standard operating procedures
and continued training on human rights and ethics need
to be accompanied by effective disciplinary structures.
I have been in frequent contact with the leadership on
these matters, which is in complete agreement that
decisive action needs to be taken to ensure discipline in
and respect of human rights by the police force.
Concrete action is envisaged in this regard.

The handover of defence responsibilities to the
Government of Timor-Leste will take place at the end
of UNMISET's mandate on 20 May 2004. The East
Timor Defence Force is currently responsible only for
one district, thus allowing the Defence Force to
continue to focus on capability-development and
individual and collective training activities. The
development of the Defence Force continues to rely
primarily on support from bilateral partners willing to
provide equipment, training and facilities and will
continue to do so for the foreseeable future. Given the
programme of capability-development, it is understood
that the Defence Force is not likely to become fully
operational at required professional standards at the
battalion level until around 2005-2006.
The military component of UNMISET has
continued to downsize according to the revised
schedule that was approved in Security Council
resolution 1473 (2003). As they withdraw from the
border areas, the Timorese agencies, particularly the
border patrol unit of the National Police, are taking on
increasing responsibilities for border management. The
members of the unit have performed commendably in
the last few months at all the border crossing points
that they have taken over from the Peacekeeping Force
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor, despite the handicaps they face in terms of
logistics, availability of facilities in the remote border
areas and equipment. UNMISET is working with the
Government of Timor-Leste to address these
shortcomings so that the unit can be self-sustaining. All
junction points will be in the hands of the border patrol
unit by the end of the month.

The rapid deployment service of PNTL, once
trained and functional, will provide a response
capability to deal with armed criminal groups in rural
and border districts. Despite best efforts, however, it is
not likely that these two crucial units, responsible for
border and internal security, will have the confidence
or maturity to handle security challenges independently
by the end of UNMISET's mandate. They will continue
to need advice and support as they exercise their new-
found abilities. Apart from the requirement of support
by specialized units, there are other areas in policing
requiring support related to continuing
professionalization, civilian supervision and additional
capacities, such as the areas of forensics, transnational
crime, counter-terrorism and trafficking, which will
require continuing international cooperation.

Until Timorese security agencies are fully trained
and equipped to perform the tasks currently undertaken
by UNMISET's military component, international
assistance in some form may also be necessary beyond
the period of UNMISET's mandate. They could advise
and mentor the Timorese security agencies in the
various tasks of monitoring and managing the border,
including assisting in liaison and thus enhancing
cooperation with Indonesian security agencies at the
border and providing psychological support to a
population not yet prepared for complete withdrawal of
the reassuring international presence.

I wish at this time to draw the attention of the
Council to the very useful and necessary work that the
engineers in UNMISET's military component have
been doing in maintaining the major arteries of the
road system in Timor-Leste. Without continued
international support for this task, capacity for rapid
response to security challenges post-UNMISET would
be rapidly degraded all over the country. In the absence
of aviation, rail and coastal traffic, the lack of reliable
road links would in effect entail physical fragmentation
and all its social, economic and security consequences.
Continuing support and capacity-building in this area is
essential to build on the excellent start made by the
Japanese self-defence engineering group.

The evolving relationship between Timor-Leste
and its only land neighbour, Indonesia, is a primary
asset in the rapid and confident evolution of the
nationhood of Timor-Leste. Constructive and
cooperative relations between the two countries have
continued to develop, mature and strengthen in diverse
fields, and the exchange of high-level visits has
reinforced them. Prime Minister Alkatiri visited
Indonesia in June, and Foreign Minister Wirayuda of
Indonesia visited Timor-Leste for the second meeting
of the Joint Commission in September 2003.

The holding of two Joint Commission meetings in
close succession attests to the desire to advance the
substantive relationship. The political direction guiding
the relationship from both sides is strong and forward-
looking. UNMISET has attempted to contribute to this
as appropriate, consistent with its mandate. As on
previous occasions, I must again record my deep
appreciation for the warm reception, supportiveness
and high-level access accorded me by the leaders and
officials concerned of Indonesia.

Both sides are cooperating, with mutual goodwill
and cooperation, in the settlement of the border
negotiations, residual refugee issues and the
continuation of pension payments to former Indonesian
civil servants. Finalization of the agreement on the land
border between Timor-Leste and Indonesia is a key
priority for both Governments. At the recent meeting of
the Joint Ministerial Commission, both parties agreed
to finalize agreement on the provisional border line by
30 November 2003, leading to an interim report of the
joint border survey. However, meeting this deadline,
although consistent with the latest work plan agreed at
the technical level, will require additional efforts on
both sides.

The two Governments are in touch with each
other on the approaches required to tackle the question
of the residual refugees, which is important for the
normalization of the border. As I stated earlier,
accomplishing the formidable task of repatriating and
resettling the bulk of the refugees through collaborative
efforts between the two countries, supported by United
Nations agencies concerned, has been a truly
remarkable example of cooperation, which deserves to
be better applauded. UNMISET, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration stand
ready to assist both sides, as required. The resettlement
of refugees, particularly the ex-militia elements, away
from the border with Timor-Leste would also reduce a
potentially destabilizing factor.

UNMISET has continued to provide support to
the core administrative structures of the Government of
Timor-Leste in 18 ministries, as stipulated in the
mandate implementation plan, through its stability
advisers. They have undertaken skills transfer and
mentoring of Timorese counterparts, and assisted the
Government in the delivery of essential services to the
public. This process has on occasion been affected by
the lack of enabling legal frameworks and of essential
basic knowledge of the counterparts. It is clear that
although the training provided to Timorese civil
servants, both in the country and abroad, has helped to
broaden the skills base, they will in many cases require
further training courses in specific areas, both at home
and abroad, with the assistance of bilateral and
multilateral partners.

Following a recent needs assessment undertaken
jointly by the Government of Timor-Leste, UNMISET
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) to ascertain the requirements of the
Administration in the post-UNMISET period, the
Government of Timor-Leste has identified some
critical functions which it considers will require
continued international support. Without international
advisers in identified critical posts, the functioning of
State institutions and public administration would be
jeopardized. Since reliance on bilateral funding has
produced mixed results, a reliable source of funding for
critical posts identified for continuing support would
need to be assured.

The vital institution of the judiciary is another
critical area which will require continued international
support. I need not emphasize the importance of a
functioning justice system for ensuring the primacy of
the rule of law. As the Secretary-General told the
Security Council on 24 September in the ministerial-
level meeting under the agenda item, "Justice and the
Rule of Law: the United Nations role":

"We have learned that the rule of law
delayed is lasting peace denied and that justice is
a handmaiden of true peace." (S/PV.4833, p.3)
The debate reiterated the centrality of the rule of law in
the success or failure of peacekeeping operations and
the nation State. The coherence of a State based on the
rule of law and the outcome of other State functions
depends upon the integrity of, and efficient delivery by,
the judiciary - hence the need for the Council to
ensure a continuing focus on and support for this area
until the judiciary is firmly established as a pillar of the
State.

It is widely acknowledged that the justice sector
in Timor-Leste, which has had to be created virtually
from scratch, is currently largely dysfunctional and
must overcome many challenges. The myriad tasks
include dealing with excessive delays in the courts;
recruiting additional administrative staff; continued
and consistent training for personnel, including judges;
drafting and approval of key legislation; and the
establishment of independent and transparent oversight
mechanisms for the prisons.

The deficiencies in the justice sector are also
having unintended secondary effects on police
development and law and order enforcement. The
Government, UNMISET and UNDP have completed
reviews of the justice sector and developed a
comprehensive justice sector support programme,
identifying areas most in need of support from the
international community. This crucial sector deserves
and requires the continuing financial, training and
human resources backing of the international
community. Shortcomings in this sector have to be
addressed in a holistic manner; ad hoc or short-term
solutions will not suffice.

The problems that plague the justice sector also
affect the delivery of justice in the serious crimes
process. The schedule outlined in the mandate
implementation plan for UNMISET indicated an
expectation of completion of investigations by
UNMISET's Serious Crimes Investigation Unit and the
filing of indictments in respect of 10 identified priority
cases, as well as of five additional investigations into
widespread patterns of violence, by June 2003. The
indictment in the tenth priority case was filed in early
July. The first-instance judicial process in respect of
the 10 priority cases and the five concerning
widespread patterns of violence may be completed by
June 2004, provided all the trials can commence.
However, it is clear that appellate procedures cannot be
completed within that time frame.

Furthermore, the additional case load of some
850 murders, which fall into the category of serious
crimes, will remain uninvestigated by June 2004. Some
75 per cent of those accused of serious crimes to date
remain beyond the jurisdiction of the Special Panels in
Dili, since they reside outside Timor-Leste. These
factors, including the orientation of the Government of
Timor-Leste, will need to be carefully evaluated with a
view to taking appropriate decisions as UNMISET
completes its mandate.

Social peace, security and stability are, of course,
a prerequisite for sustainable gains in areas of
governance and economic development. UNMISET
also continues to work closely with the wider United
Nations system of agencies, funds and programmes,
and international financial institutions, as well as
bilateral actors and civil society, in support of national
programmes. I would like once again to acknowledge
the sterling support given to me by Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Resident
Coordinator Sukehiro Hasegawa.

As Timor-Leste moves forward in the longer-term
process of nation-building, it faces formidable
challenges in creating a favourable climate for
sustainable social and economic development. In order
to develop the private sector, the Government has taken
steps to establish a legal framework for insurance
companies. Key economic legislation, such as
investment and company registration laws and the
bankruptcy bill, is under consideration. Once
promulgated, those laws are expected to augment
investor confidence and strengthen economic growth.
Still, transforming an agrarian and largely subsistence
economy into a market economy generating jobs and
entrepreneurial capacities will be a challenge for
decades to come, nurtured by policies to encourage
agricultural productivity and desired investments, lift
trading volumes, increase the pace of activity and
transactions and build professional services and a
middle class.

I would like to emphasize the importance of
continuing the process of inculcating and promoting a
culture of respect for human rights in different
activities, of which the Government is fully supportive.
UNMISET's Human Rights Unit has contributed
immensely to that process by training and advising and
through capacity-building in the major institutions of
the State, such as the judiciary, the police, and also in
civil society. The role of the Human Rights Unit has
been critical, not only for improving the quality of
governance, but in supporting the work of the United
Nations agencies in Timor-Leste. A human rights
presence in the post-UNMISET period will continue to
be needed to provide technical assistance to the
Government in meeting its treaty obligations,
establishing a national human rights institution,
reviewing and developing legislation, mainstreaming
human rights policy-making across the Government
and in developing and implementing the National
Human Rights Action Plan.

Timor-Leste has ratified the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW). Training and activities for its
implementation are ongoing with the assistance of
UNMISET's focal point for gender and the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM),
which has reopened its office in Dili, and the
Government is preparing the first report to the CEDAW
Committee. The gender focal point in UNMISET is
actively leveraging all resources to pursue the tasks
ahead. Strong proactive measures have been taken to
effectively deal with the emerging ills of prostitution
and trafficking before they are allowed to attain
unmanageable proportions.

A brief word on HIV/AIDS: the incidence of HIV
among the Timor-Leste population remains lower than
1 per cent. Nevertheless, UNMISET has taken several
steps to spread awareness of the disease and is the only
peacekeeping mission to provide voluntary counselling
and testing services. We also encouraged and organized
the visit by an HIV-positive person to the mission area
to share his testimony as a prevention and behavioural
change strategy.

With seven months remaining in the mandate of
UNMISET, we will, together with the Government of
Timor-Leste, redouble our efforts to realize all the
objectives in the mandate implementation plan.
Notwithstanding those efforts, however, it is clear that
many emerging and some continuing needs will
remain. The Timorese leadership and representatives of
civil society, both national and international, with
whom I have had intensive consultations, have
conveyed to me their strong belief that the impressive
progress made so far through a comprehensive
association with the United Nations should not be
jeopardized in the absence of adequate support
mechanisms, based on assured funding, after the
completion of the mandate of UNMISET. That View is
shared by many partner countries. Given the traumatic
experiences of Timor-Leste's recent past, the nascent
and fragile state of the new emerging institutions, the
as yet unsettled security situation and the daunting
challenges of nation-building, they have clearly
indicated to me the centrality of the requirement of a
continued United Nations presence to provide both
psychological assurance and substantive support in the
immediate post-UNMISET period. The Council will no
doubt take all considerations into account in deciding
on the best way in which the legitimate requirements of
the country, guided also by Secretary-General's
forthcoming report, could be ensured in the post-May
2004 period, even as UNMISET proceeds with the
plans for a smooth liquidation of the mission, in which
respect all timely and requisite measures have been
taken.

UNMISET has also designed a training
programme which will give an opportunity to develop
new skills to our Timorese colleagues who will be
affected by the downsizing process. The programme is
designed to effectively leverage opportunities that
could ultimately foster further development of the
private sector, entrepreneurship and sustainable
livelihoods.

The Secretary-General, in his report on the work
of the Organization, stated that,

"Peacekeeping and peace-building are two
sides of the same coin, providing as they do
assistance to societies emerging from conflict so
that they can consolidate their fragile peace"
(A/58/I, para. 39).

The process of strengthening the foundations for
a lasting and stable peace, of fostering a culture of self-
reliance and democracy and of building a State in
which the people have choices and opportunities to
enjoy a decent standard of living and in which their
lives and property will be safe, within a society that
respects human rights and the rule of law, has achieved
remarkable progress but will continue to remain our
challenge in Timor-Leste.

