Mr. Von Ungern-Sternberg (Germany): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). Armenia, Iceland, Georgia, the former Republic
of Macedonia, Moldova, Serbia, Turkey and Ukraine
align themselves with this statement. I would like to
thank the President of the Security Council for the
opportunity to discuss this important issue. I would
also like to extend our appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. John Holmes, for his very informative briefing.

The EU is deeply concerned about the growing
number of refugees and internally displaced persons
worldwide. Right now, we witness yet again the
tragedy in the Middle East. The European Union
welcomes the approval by the United Nations Central
Emergency Response Fund of nearly $6 million to
Palestinian refugees who are fleeing the fighting in and
around the Nahr El Bared refugee camp. The EU is
also pleased that, through contributions made by the
European Commission and some of its Member States
in their national capacity, further funds have been made
available. Overall, the Flash Appeal for $12.7 million
has been met.

Women, children and other vulnerable groups are
especially affected by armed conflict. Sexual
exploitation and abuse continue as widespread
atrocities affecting millions of victims. It is estimated,
for example, that 40 women are raped every day in
South Kivu. Such violence is not an inevitable
consequence of war, it needs to be prevented. Sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping personnel is
also unacceptable. The EU welcomes the zero-
tolerance policy that has been introduced by the United
Nations and has adopted the same in its own European
security and defence operations.

The illegal recruitment of child soldiers must end.
Currently, an estimated 300,000 child soldiers
participate in armed conflicts. Recently, we heard
alarming reports from Sri Lanka. But there are also
some encouraging developments: in the Sudan, the
Sudan Liberation Movement signed an agreement on
12 June to begin handing over children associated with
its armed groups. Previously, similar agreements led to
the release of several hundreds of former child soldiers
in Cote d'Ivoire. In the Republic of the Congo, United
Nations peacekeepers and the Congolese police
launched a six-month law-enforcement campaign to
improve the protection of children.

The growing number ofjournalists being killed is
also extremely disturbing. Just recently, UNESCO
voiced grave concern over the alarming increase in the
number of journalists who lost their lives in Iraq in the
last month. Security Council resolution 1738 (2006),
on the safety and security of journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel, has become
even more relevant. Equally disturbing is the number
of humanitarian personnel being killed. We strongly
condemn the recent killings of two workers of the
Lebanon Red Cross, of two Red Cross workers in Sri
Lanka, of two United Nations workers in Gaza, of a
member of Medecins Sans Frontieres in the Central
African Republic, of a member of Caritas International
in Darfur and all other killings of humanitarian
personnel.

International standards for the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts are largely in place. On
8 June we celebrated the thirtieth anniversary of two
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 that are essential for strengthening the protection
of civilians Also, international human rights law
continues to be applicable in times of armed conflict.

At the 2005 World Summit, heads of State
established the responsibility to protect. The EU
welcomes the reaffirmation of that responsibility by the
Security Council in subsequent resolutions, including
resolution 1674 (2006).

Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
establishes an enhanced framework for the protection
of children in armed conflict. The EU is currently
developing country-specific recommendations for its
actions in countries in which children are affected by
armed conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to
recall the important adoption, in February 2007, of the
Paris Commitments and Paris Principles against the
illegal recruitment of child soldiers.

International humanitarian law urges all parties to
allow full, unimpeded access by humanitarian
personnel to civilians in need of assistance.
Furthermore, all those concerned are encouraged to
make available all facilities necessary for the
operations of humanitarian United Nations and
associated personnel and for promoting the safety,
security and freedom of movement of such personnel.

The International Criminal Court, international
criminal tribunals and special courts, as well as
reconciliation commissions, are working to end
impunity. Ending impunity is essential if a society in
conflict or recovering from conflict is to come to terms
with past abuses.

In 2001, the United Nations adopted a
Programme of Action aimed at preventing, combating
and eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The proliferation and misuse of such
weapons constitute the primary cause of civilian
deaths. Under German chairmanship, the Group of
Interested States in Practical Disarmament Measures,
in New York, works closely with the United Nations to
identify support for States in their endeavours to
reduce and control such arms. In 2005, the EU adopted
its own strategy to combat their illicit accumulation
and trafficking.

Finally, we need to continue to strengthen these
standards and to ensure their full implementation. Let
me point out three areas of priority for international
action.

First, there must be worldwide recognition of
standards. The EU calls on Member States that have
not done so to ratify and support the existing
conventions and resolutions forming the legal
framework for the protection of civilians and to
implement them fully within their national legal
systems. The EU also calls upon all Member States to
abide by and support all resolutions relating to the
protection of civilians.

Secondly, there must be clear and sufficiently
robust Security Council mandates for peacekeeping
operations. As pointed out in resolution 1674 (2006),
mandates have to include provisions regarding the
protection of civilians within their zones of operation,
the facilitation of the provision of humanitarian access
and, finally, the creation of conditions conducive to the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The EU
strongly supports Under-Secretary-General Holmes's
request for Council support in situations in which
access to humanitarian work is being denied. We also
agree that it might be useful to evaluate the practical
effects that the inclusion of language concerning the
protection of civilians has actually had on the ground.

Thirdly and finally, there must be prevention.
Civilian suffering should be prevented in the first
place. Early action in the case of simmering conflicts is
therefore critical. Timely briefings by the Secretary-
General, his Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Emergency Relief Coordinator and
other relevant actors are extremely helpful in drawing
the attention of the international community to areas
where conflicts are prone to erupt.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
complex task. The EU is fully committed to meeting
that challenge. In cooperation with the United Nations,
the EU continues its work for the promotion of peace
and the prevention of conflict so that, one day in the
future, human suffering can end.

