Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Please allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am convinced that under your
guidance the Council's work this month will be successful.

At the beginning of our meeting today, Sir, you
expressed sympathy on behalf of the Council for the heavy
losses suffered by China in the recent serious floods. I will
faithfully convey your words of sympathy to the
Government and the people of China. I am sure that your
expression of sympathy will provide strong support to the
people of China, who are at this moment fighting the
floods. On behalf of the Chinese people, I would like to
express my heartfelt thanks to you and through you, Sir, to
the other members of the Council.

I wish also to pay tribute to Ambassador Elaraby,
President of the Council last month, and to the Egyptian
delegation. The excellent job they did fully demonstrates
the skills of the ancient civilization of Egypt and the
intelligence and wisdom of the Egyptian people.

I take this opportunity also to extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency the Vice-Minister without Portfolio of
Angola and to thank him for coming to the Council and
making a statement, which we greatly appreciate.

The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. This draft resolution decides to extend
the mandate of the largest current United Nations
peace-keeping operation by a further three months. This
demonstrates the strong support of the international
community for the Angolan peace process. We sincerely
hope that both parties in Angola, particularly the Uniao
Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA),
will seize this opportunity and make full use of the
favorable conditions created by the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) to accelerate the peace process
with a view to ultimately achieving national
reconciliation.

Developments during the past two months show that
the parties concerned in Angola have taken a number of
concrete steps to accelerate the process of national
reconciliation and that some substantive progress has been
made in the peace process.

We appreciate the Angolan Government's enactment
of an Amnesty Law and its completion of the quartering
of the rapid reaction police force. These are necessary
measures to build mutual trust and we would like to
express our appreciation.

However, we are deeply concerned at the failure to
achieve the anticipated objectives in implementing the
Lusaka Protocol and the relevant agreements reached by
the two Angolan parties. We call on the two parties,
particularly UN ITA, to demonstrate greater political will
and a sense of national responsibility, to refrain from
further delaying the implementation of the provisions of
the Lusaka Protocol and the timetable reached by the two
sides, to complete the quartering of forces and to take
part in real earnest in the establishment of a Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation and of joint national
armed forces. The Chinese delegation wishes emphatically
to point out once again that stagnation in the Angolan
peace process is inconsistent with the spirit of the
agreements reached by the parties concerned and is not
what the international community would like to see.

The Angolan peace process is now at a critical
historical juncture. If the two parties in Angola,
proceeding from their overall national interests, can truly
remove past grievances, bury the hatchet, build mutual
trust and firmly advance the peace process, the future of
Angola is bound to take a turn for the better, and the
Angolan people will be able to embark on the broad road
of national rejuvenation and development. Conversely,
continued stagnation, or even retrogression, in the peace
process will let slip the peace and tranquility long desired
by the Angolan people and thrust the Angolan nation into
further chaos and misery. We expect the two parties,
particularly UNITA, to live up to the wishes of the
Angolan people and the international community by
making a choice in line with the historical requirements
and by taking a political decision in the interests of
Angolan nation.

 

The Chinese Government and people have always
been very much concerned about the destiny of African
peoples and have sympathized with and supported the cause
of peace in African countries. During his visit to Africa last
May, Chinese President J iang Zemin pointed out that most
African countries are moving towards political stability and
entering a new historical period of seeking peace, stability
and development. We are most gratified by the advent of
such a period.

Now, the question of Angola has become the last hot
issue in southern Africa to be resolved. We are in favour of
continued strong support for the Angola peace process by
the international community, so as to bring peace and
tranquility to southern Africa as a whole.

Full-scale reconstruction remains to be undertaken in
the post-war Angola. Economic recovery and reconstruction
will be an arduous task for Angola, but this is the key to
lasting peace. The international community should attach
great importance to this question and give it effective
support. China will continue to do its best to contribute to
Angola's economic reconstruction. We are confident that
once peace comes to Angola, the great and industrious
Angolan people will overcome their difficulties and build
Angola into a prosperous and beautiful country.
