Mr. Sisa (Botswana): At the outset, allow me
join other representatives who spoke before me in
congratulating your country, Mr. President - the
Republic of Kazakhstan - on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. My delegation also wishes to commend you
on convening this important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine, which has been on the agenda of the Security
Council and the General Assembly for a long time.
In that regard, Botswana welcomes the open debates
held by the Security Council on a quarterly basis on
this important topic. I also applaud the briefers for
providing us with insightful and instructive briefings
on the subject matter.

Botswana aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Botswana fully supports the various peace
initiatives that have been undertaken by the United
Nations, the Quartet for Middle East peace and the
international community to find a comprehensive,
just and durable solution to the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine, on the basis
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and the two-State solution.

We are encouraged by the positive developments
with regard to the intra-Palestine talks, the
implementation of the Cairo agreement and the return
of Gaza to the control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, including the handover of Gaza crossings in
November 2017.

Despite those positive developments, Botswana is
still deeply concerned that the question of Palestine
has remained unresolved for many decades. We are
also concerned about the escalation of violence and the
continued documented settlement-related activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which, regrettably,
undermine all international efforts aimed at the
achievement of a lasting solution.

Botswana reaffirms its support for the fundamental
principle of self-determination for peoples still under
colonial and foreign occupation and domination.
In that respect, Botswana supports the Palestinian
people in their legitimate quest for sovereignty and
independent statehood.

We also firmly believe that there is no alternative
to the two-State solution. Consequently, Botswana will
continue to support a negotiated solution to the question
of Palestine that embraces the peaceful coexistence
of the State of Israel and the State of Palestine as two
sovereign States living side by side.

Above all, Botswana recognizes the holy city of
Jerusalem as a final-status issue in terms ofthe relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

In recognition of those points, Botswana urges the
States Members of the United Nations to avoid taking
any unilateral action that may prejudice peace in the
Middle East and the peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine and the status of Jerusalem. In that light,
Botswana regretted the decision by the United States
of 6 December 2017 to recognize the city of Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Israel, contrary to strong
international consensus that affirms that the status of
Jerusalem should be determined through a negotiation
process between the States of Israel and Palestine.

With regard to other areas of the Middle East, we
welcome resolution 2394 (2017), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
which monitors the ceasefire between Israeli and
Syrian forces in the Golan region, until 30 June. We
encourage the parties to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement to abide by its terms and to observe the
long-standing ceasefire.

In conclusion, we support the continued efforts of
the Secretary-General, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, the Quartet, the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the international
community to find a comprehensive, just, durable and
peaceful solution to the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. It is our hope that
the situation in the Middle East will be resolved so that
the people in that region can live in peace and harmony.

