Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for the briefing and
for presenting her seventeenth report to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Azerbaijan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless, we
acknowledge the rights and obligations of the States
parties to the Statute. We take note of the efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor aimed at investigating
the violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law in Darfur. In this regard, we reiterate
our position that the activities of the Prosecutor
should strictly comply with the appropriate framework
established by resolution 1593 (2005).

It is obvious that there is no military solution to
the conflict in Darfur and that the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur constitutes the primary basis for
sustainable conflict resolution. In this context, those
movements that have not yet signed the Doha Document
must cease hostilities andjoin the peace process without
precondition.

We are concerned over the deterioration of the
security situation, which continues to adversely affect
the civilian population and restrict humanitarian
access to areas of confrontation. Intensified attacks by
non-signatory armed groups and heavy intercommunal
clashes have led to a significant increase in civilian
casualties and displacement in Darfur. Reports of
such violations - including killings, rape, looting,
hostage-taking and the destruction of property - should
be properly investigated in order to bring those
responsible to justice and prevent their recurrence in
the future.

We note that the Sudanese Government continues
its efforts to defuse intercommunal tensions and
promote reconciliation in Darfur. Unfortunately, the
international presence in Darfur, including United
Nations staff members, aid workers and peacekeepers,
have continued to face constant attacks during the
past six months. It is particularly distressing that the
personnel of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) have been targeted
in the violence. The attack on UNAMID of 19 April,
which left a Nigerian peacekeeper dead and two
others wounded, should be thoroughly investigated
and the perpetrators brought to justice. Criminality
and banditry in Darfur are among the most significant
threats to civilians and humanitarian workers.

In conclusion, we stress the need for the international
community's further support for the implementation of
the Doha Document and the importance that the rebel
groups renounce violence as vital prerequisites for
ensuring durable peace in Darfur.

