Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Assistant Secretary-
General Wane and President Mogae for their
comprehensive, insightful briefings. My delegation
would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.

We are gravely concerned that, despite the unilateral
ceasefire declared by the transitional Government in
May, the Sudan People's Liberation Army continues
to fight.

It is also equally alarming that incidents concerning
humanitarian access and violence against the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
humanitarian personnel have sharply escalated, which
has led to an increase in internally displaced persons.
Such hostile actions undermine efforts made by the
transitional Government and the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission to facilitate the peace
process, further deteriorating humanitarian and
security conditions.

In that regard we urge that all parties to the conflict
immediately cease hostilities, especially in Equatoria
and the Greater Upper Nile region. We also urge all
parties stop attacks on humanitarian workers, so that
access to famine-affected locations is not impacted.
We also urge that UNMISS staff members not face
arbitrary arrests or detention.
We welcome the recent decision of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to convene a revitalization forum, which will include
all parties. It will allow parties to discuss how to
effectively implement the peace Agreement and prepare
for the forthcoming democratic elections. We hope
that the outcome of the forum will lay the necessary
foundations to help build stable State institutions.
Simultaneously, we need to ensure that the national
dialogue launched in May is thoroughly inclusive and
transparent. In order to achieve true political progress,
we urge the transitional Government to demonstrate
political will and engage positively with the United
Nations and regional actors.

There is a need for closer cooperation and
assistance from the United Nations, the African Union,
IGAD, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, leaders of neighbouring countries and
other international partners. Only coordinated and
united efforts will bring about the long-awaited peace
and stability to South Sudan. It is our strong conviction
that the Government should speedily allocate personnel
to operate the proposed one-stop-shop, which would
the free up the Mission's operations and the movement
of UNMISS patrols.

We would like to pay sincere tribute to UNMISS
personnel and Special Representative for South Sudan
Shearer for working in such a difficult environment on
the ground.

To conclude, Kazakhstan fully supports the
concerted efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and IGAD. We will work with the Council and
key actors to find a lasting solution to the conflict
in South Sudan, which should remain high on our
priority list.

