Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having invited us to

participate in this meeting to discuss the situation in
Darfur. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. We greatly value your
vast experience and wise leadership of the work of the
Council. I would also like to commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Ghana,
for having so ably presided over the deliberations of
the Council during the month of August.

The League of Arab States welcomed the results
of the Abuja peace negotiations, which culminated in
the signing, on 5 May, of the Darfur Peace Agreement
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
Liberation Movement. The League of Arab States has
also appealed to all parties that did not sign the
Agreement to commit to dialogue as the sole means of
achieving peace in Darfur. Furthermore, the League of
Arab States welcomed the positive steps taken by the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan Liberation
Movement to begin the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement, as well as the related positive
developments at all levels.

The League of Arab States is coordinating its
efforts and cooperating with the African Union in that
respect. We call on the armed groups that have not yet
signed the Darfur Peace Agreement to halt the military
escalation, and we call on the international community
to make efforts to prevent any undermining of the
Agreement by military means. At the same time, we
call for further cooperation and assistance with a View
to finding a solution to the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Darfur.

Cooperation and dialogue are the only path to a
solution to the question of Darfur. Having considered
Security Council resolution 1706 (2006), the Council
of the League of Arab States stresses the need to secure
the consent of the Government of the Sudan before
dispatching forces to Darfur so as to ensure that they
are not rejected. The Arab League Council also called
for cooperation and consultation among the
Government of the Sudan, the United Nations, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
members of the Security Council, aimed at arriving at
an understanding in the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement. It also called on the international
community to fulfil its commitments to implement the
Darfur Peace Agreement.
06-51559

