Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, allow me to
express my appreciation to the President for convening
today's open debate on children and armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/821), as well as Ms. Gamba and
Mr. Shaikh for their insightful briefings.

The international community has made important
strides in ensuring that children have the best start
in life. The implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol, the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments, the UNICEF
Children, Not Soldiers campaign and the Security
Council's various tools and mechanisms have provided
us with important momentum.

However, as we have heard today from many
delegations, thousands of children continue to be
subjected to violence at an early stage in their lives.
Some, unfortunately, do not survive. Even if they do,
theoe vulnerable victims must overcome their own
internal battles. We are deeply concerned about the
grave situation in many conflict areas that affects
children, and we are also concerned about the many
reports that show worsening trends in that regard.

As one of the pathfinder countries in the global
efforts to protect children from Violence and exploitation,
Indonesia believes that it is imperative for us to take
a comprehensive approach to identify real actions
to address the impact of armed conflict on children.
Ending Violence against children cannot be done with
silo or sporadic approaches; it requires comprehensive
social, economic and political approaches, as well as
the formulation of a long-term strategic plan and an
effective legal framework. At this juncture, I would like
to share Indonesia's Views.

First, we must condemn, in the strongest terms, all
violations and abuses committed against children in
armed conflict. We urge States and other parties engaged
in armed conflict to stop Violence against children,
including the recruitment and use of children in such
conflict. Attacks on schools and hospitals, detainment
by the occupying Power, child abductions, torture, the
loss of caregivers, psychological and physical trauma,
forced recruitment and denied humanitarian access
are also unacceptable and the perpetrators should be
held accountable.

Secondly, integrated and comprehensive solutions
are urgently needed to address the issue ofprotection of
children in armed conflict, particularly girls as part of
the women and peace and security agenda. We also urge
the speedy and full implementation of the action plans
designed to end violations against children. Indonesia
also urges that actions to address the impact of armed
conflict on children include the formulation of a long-
term strategic plan for reintegration and rehabilitation.

Thirdly, we should place special emphasis on
the reintegration of children into otheir families and
societies. Reintegration programmes should be in
perfect synchronization with education to ensure
that children can regain their missing education.
Reintegration and education programmes should also
pay particular attention to children separated from their
families, as well as children with disabilities.

Fourthly, we must to promote more intensive
cooperation among subregional, regional and
international organizations by sharing best practices
and lessons learned, strengthening law and regulations
and by enacting and adopting region-specific
instruments and frameworks for protecting children in
armed conflict. We also support efforts made by the
United Nations to raise awareness.

Indonesia is committed to ending violence against
civilians in armed conflict, particularly women
and children. We are firm believers that the United
Nations should play a more significant role through
its peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. In that
regard, special attention should be given to the plight
and safety of children. Indonesia's Peacekeeping
Centre in Sentul, West Java, has thereby developed a
curriculum that includes skills and knowledge needed
for United Nations peacekeeping forces to address the
increasing complexity of challenges in peacekeeping,
including the promotion of protection for women and
children in armed conflict. We therefore welcome the
idea to develop dedicated child protection capacity in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, in our quest to safeguard the rights
of children, we duly appeal to all Member States to
enhance cooperation in building a better world where
children can grow up proudly, freely and peacefully.
Let us all preserve the innocence of children.

