Major General Asarta Cuevas (spoke in Spanish): Please allow me to answer the questions in
my own language, Spanish, so that I can respond more
precisely.

Concerning the so-called Hizbullah arsenal, in the
mandate in resolution 1701 (2006), the primary
responsibility to ensure that there are no weapons other
than those belonging to the Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL falls to the Government of Lebanon and
the Lebanese Armed Forces. Under our mandate, under
resolution 1701 (2006), the primary responsibility for
ensuring that there is no type of weapon other than
those of the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL in
UNIFIL's area of operation falls on the Government of
Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed Forces. Under our
mandate, UNIFIL cannot go into private homes or onto
private property unless there is credible evidence and
an immediate threat relating to a violation of resolution
1701 (2006).

Our troops which are deployed in southern
Lebanon, between the Litani river and the Blue Line,
consist of about 12,500 soldiers and more than 1,000
civilians. Those soldiers, who are from 35 different
countries, are involved in between 10,000 to 12,000
operational activities a month. During those
operational activities, we have discovered, in the five
years since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006),
stores of ammunition, bunkers and weapons, but all of
that predates the conflict - the 2006 war. To date also,
taking into account the fact that we cannot go onto
private property or search homes - that is an
obligation of the Lebanese Government and the
Lebanese Armed Forces - there has been no evidence
of the illegal trafficking of weapons. What I mean by
that is that neither I personally nor any of my soldiers
have seen the arsenals that have been referred to. We
would like to see them to determine if they do in fact
exist.

I should like to say also that the most recent
launching of rockets from our area of operations
against Israel took place in October 2009, so for almost
two years now, thanks to the efforts of the population
of the south, the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL,
the cessation of hostilities has been maintained and
there have been no rocket launchings against Israel.

Turning to the second question, which was asked
by the representative of Lebanon, I should like to refer
to the recommendations that UNIFIL made to the
parties following the tragic incidents that took place on
15 May, Nakba Day, this year. Those recommendations
included the fact that only the Lebanese authorities are
responsible for law and order within Lebanon, and that
they had to take the measures necessary to prevent
incidents along the Blue Line, which, as is well known,
is a very sensitive area, where most incidents take
place; it has been the line of withdrawal of the Israeli
forces since the war of 2000. Therefore, to prevent
such incidents from occurring, what is necessary is
comprehensive oversight of the population.

Also in our recommendations, which I will read
word for word, we said that the Israeli forces should
refrain from responding in such situations, unless it is
clearly required for their own immediate self-defence,
taking into account the fact that both countries,
Lebanon and Israel, have the right to self-defence. But
the Israel Defense Forces must not resort to the
excessive use of force and must always take action that
is commensurate with the offence, and therefore they
should also include equipment, units and experts for
controlling demonstrators and for crowd control.

We also said that both countries - Israel and
Lebanon - should ensure that in these types of
situations, they use troops that are properly trained and
equipped to try to prevent this type of incident from
occurring. In the tripartite meetings and in the
meetings I have with the parties, I always say the same
thing:

(spoke in English)
Do not give, do not take.
(spoke in Spanish)

Do not provoke, and do not react to any provocation.
That is the best way of avoiding incidents along the
Blue Line.

I think that I have answered the questions, but if
further clarifications are required, I would be happy to
provide them.

