Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by thanking Soren Jessen-Petersen,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing, and by
reiterating the European Union's full support for his
work. We would also like to warmly welcome the
participation of Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo. At the same time, we also warmly welcome
the presence of the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Agim
Ceku, in the delegation headed by Mr. Jessen-Petersen.

Two years ago, Mr. Jessen-Petersen took up
leadership of the United Nations mission in Kosovo at
a very difficult phase. He has since made a decisive
contribution to the stabilization and development of
Kosovo. We would like to pay tribute to him for his
tireless efforts towards our common goal: a multi-
ethnic Kosovo in which all inhabitants can live in
peace and dignity.

The main task of Mr. Jessen-Petersen's successor
will now be to continue that work while at the same
time preparing the transition from the current United
Nations administration to an international presence
after the determination of the future status of Kosovo.
The sustainable implementation of all standards by the
Kosovo Institutions will be of crucial importance for
the European future of Kosovo.
At the last meeting of the Security Council on
Kosovo (see S/PV.5373), we urged Kosovo's
Institutions to renew their efforts to ensure substantive,
accelerated and sustainable progress in the
implementation of the standards, especially in key

areas such as returns, equal access to justice and the
preservation of cultural heritage. Like the Secretary-
General, the EU welcomes the renewed vigour in the
implementation of standards and expects that concrete
and demonstrable results will follow. Nonetheless, the
EU remains disappointed with the low numbers of
returns. To ensure tangible improvements in the
conditions on the ground, not only political but also
financial commitment at all levels is required. In this
regard, both Pristina and Belgrade have a role to play;
we welcome the recent signature of the Protocol on
Returns on 6 June 2006.

The European Union underlines that real progress
on implementing standards remains an essential factor
in determining progress in the political process to
determine Kosovo's future status. At the same time,
accelerated implementation of standards should not be
viewed merely as a goal in itself or only as a way to
achieve a decision on the future status of Kosovo.
Effective standards implementation, including dialogue
and outreach to Kosovo's minority communities,
leading to a sustainable democratic and multiethnic
society, is also a prerequisite for the fulfilment of
Kosovo's European perspective.

The Partnership for Kosovo, adopted by the
European Union last December, incorporates the
standards as requirements for Kosovo's long-term
European perspective, thereby underscoring that their
effective implementation must continue to be the
primary focus of efforts by the Provisional Institutions
throughout, and beyond, the status process.

The European Union shares the Secretary-
General's assessment that increased outreach to all
Kosovo communities, particularly the Serbian, by
Kosovo's leaders is welcome. However, that process
needs to go hand in hand with a change in attitudes
within Kosovo. Indeed, all people in Kosovo have a
responsibility and a role to play in implementing the
standards. We therefore call upon the leaders and the
population in Kosovo, but also upon Belgrade, to
increase their efforts to engage in reconciliation and
the promotion of confidence across communities. In
doing so they must not tolerate any violence, and those
responsible for committing acts of violence must be
brought to justice. Such efforts should be
acknowledged and not dismissed.

We also believe that it is equally essential that
Kosovo Serbs rejoin the Provisional Institutions at all
levels and actively engage in them. We share the
Secretary-General's concern about reports of pressure
on Kosovo Serbs to withdraw from positions within the
Provisional Institutions, and we call upon the
authorities in Belgrade to encourage, rather than
discourage, Kosovo Serb leaders to participate
constructively in the Provisional Institutions. To do so
would allow the Serb community to engage in shaping
their political future within Kosovo and contribute to
improvements in their living conditions. The EU
encourages concrete steps in that regard. At the same
time, leaders on all sides will have to prepare their
populations for difficult compromises ahead.

The European Union has consistently attached
particular importance to the establishment of a
substantial dialogue between all Kosovo communities,
as well as between Belgrade and Pristina. The EU
strongly urges both Belgrade and Pristina to work
towards a lasting Kosovo status agreement that
promotes a multi-ethnic and democratic society and
contributes to regional stability.

On 16 June, EU heads of State or Government
reaffirmed their support for the ongoing talks about the
future status of Kosovo being led by Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari. In that regard, it should be noted that,
at their meeting in Salzburg in March, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States members of the European
Union, the acceding States, the candidate States and the
potential candidate countries of the Western Balkans
reiterated that every effort should be made to engage in
good faith in the status process in order to find realistic
solutions.

The European Union has been at the side of
Kosovo and its inhabitants throughout the post-conflict
period and has provided a major part of international
aid, economic access, political support and reform
advice. It is clear that Kosovo will require an
international presence to supervise compliance with the
provisions of the status settlement to ensure, inter alia,
security throughout Kosovo and the protection of
minorities and to support the continued implementation
of the standards. The EU heads of State or Government
have just reaffirmed their full support for the agenda
set out at the Thessaloniki Summit in 2003, and for the
Stabilization and Association Process, which will
remain the framework for the European course of the
Western Balkan countries.

We fully support the Secretary-General's call to
all parties to continue to engage so that the eventual
transition following a political settlement will be
smooth and orderly. Consequently, the European Union
has established a planning team in order to ensure a
smooth transition between selected UNMIK tasks and
the possible EU crisis management operation in the
field of the rule of law and other areas that might be
identified in the context of the future status process.

In close consultation with key international
actors, the European Union stands ready to assume its
responsibilities and to enhance its role in Kosovo
following a status determination, in particular in the
areas of police, rule of law and the economy, with a
view to assisting a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo
in its efforts to realize its European perspective.

