Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Welcome
to New York, Mr. Minister. It is a privilege for us that
this meeting is taking place under your presidency.

First of all, I should like to convey the
condolences and solidarity of the French people to the
Afghan people, struck once again by a cruel ordeal: the
earthquake that has just destroyed an entire region in
the north of the country and claimed thousands of
victims.

The representative of Spain will be making a
statement on behalf of the entire European Union, and
France subscribes fully to it. Therefore, I shall limit my
statement to a few comments.

This meeting is taking a first look at the record
six months after the beginning of the military
intervention by the coalition, three months after the
Interim Administration began to function and three
months before the convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga.

That record, which Louise Frechette has just
described in eloquent detail, is clearly positive. The
ground covered over the past six months is impressive.
The fight against terrorism has been marked by several
decisive elements and is being pursued vigorously and
relentlessly. The United States and its allies, including
France, are tracking down Al Qaeda elements day by
day.

The political transition is also progressing. The
Afghan people is regaining control of its destiny. The
Emergency Loya Jirga, scheduled for June, will be a
new step towards the creation of a multi-ethnic,
representative and democratic Government. The
responsible conduct of the transitional authorities has
made it possible largely to avoid repeating past errors,
such as the ordeals in 1992 in Kabul or in 1997 in
Mazar-e-Sharif.

Finally, the reconstruction of Afghanistan has
now begun with the assistance of the entire
international community, illustrated by the pledges
made in Tokyo. Throughout the country there are signs
of this true rebirth. The most moving example, referred
to by Louise Frechette, is undoubtedly the beginning of
the school year: last Saturday, a million and a half
children of both sexes literally rushed to their schools
and to knowledge. The French Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Hubert Vedrine, who was in Kabul at the time,
shared this moment of hope by visiting the two schools
rebuilt by France - the Esteqlal high school for boys
and the Malalai high school for girls.

The success of the reconstruction now depends in
part on good coordination between bilateral and
multilateral donors, organized in the Afghan Support
Group and the Implementation Group, or through the
United Nations system. Locally, one person, in our
view, should provide this indispensable coordination:
Lakhdar Brahimi.

In New York too, impressive ground has been
covered in only six months. A series of resolutions
were adopted, at a sustained pace on the principles for
a settlement - resolution 1378 (2001); the
endorsement of the Bonn Agreement - resolution
1383 (2001); the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) - resolution 1386 (2001);
and, finally, the creation of a de-territorialized regime
against Al Qaeda to replace the sanctions against
Afghanistan - resolution 1390 (2002).

A new draft resolution is now being prepared. It
will allow for the rapid implementation of the excellent
recommendations of the Secretary-General, as
described to us by Louise Frechette. It will give
structure and a unified form to the United Nations
presence, which has developed, with impressive
effectiveness, under the authority of Lakhdar Brahimi.
France is working on this draft, which will be
submitted to the Council tomorrow during our
consultations.

The issue of security remains a more difficult
one. Agreement is emerging on the extension of ISAF
beyond the time frame set out in resolution 1386
(2001) - that is, 20 June. Together we will have to
decide on the right time to announce it and also on the
right time frame.

Regarding the geographic expansion of the Force
beyond Kabul and its vicinity, the position of the major
contributors is clear: they are not in favour of it.
Indeed, a force spread out beyond Kabul and its
environs would have to be involved in settling conflicts
falling under the purview of Afghan authority.

Absolute priority, then, must be given to the
training of a unified Afghan police force and army. We
must create an army that is free from ethnic and
regional divisions and from the influence of political
parties and warlords. We must also use all available
instruments to help in achieving security and law and
order in the provinces. The economic lever should then
be used with determination. Assistance in
reconstruction cannot be brought to provinces where
local authorities commit massive violations of human
rights or maintain a climate of insecurity. On the other
hand, of course, humanitarian assistance should not be
made conditional.

France will participate fully in the reconstruction
of Afghanistan. It has already entered into specific
commitments with regard to health care, education,
agriculture, administration, the preservation of its
patrimony, training of the future Afghan army and
police, as well as assistance in combating drugs.

The fulfilment of these commitments has been the
subject of in-depth discussions with the Afghan
authorities, first of all during the visit of President
Hamid Karzai to Paris on 28 February, and, quite
recently, last Sunday, when Mr. Hubert Vedrine went to
Kabul.

