Mrs. Albright (United States of America): My
Government supports this resolution as an expression of
continued commitment by this Council to peace and to the
relief of human suffering in the former Yugoslavia.

We regret the decision by the Government of Croatia
to launch an offensive against the Krajina region. We also
urge all parties to refrain from further attacks, whether
within Croatia or in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The latest round of violence has produced yet another
flow of civilian refugees within the former Yugoslavia. By
tractor, truck, car and cart, tens of thousands have fled the
current military operations. The protection of those civilians
must be a priority for all parties concerned. The rights of
Serbs who choose to remain in Croatia must also be
respected. History warns us that the failure to safeguard
innocent lives leads only to more hatred, killing and
destruction. For this reason, it is essential that international
agencies have unimpeded access to observe conditions in
Krajina and to provide humanitarian relief where needed.

The turbulence of the past week' s events, coupled with
restrictive policies imposed by the Government of Croatia,
have made it difficult to assess the extent to which Croatian
forces or their Bosnian allies may have been guilty of
violations of international humanitarian law. My
Government expects the war-crimes Tribunal to investigate
allegations of abuse against unarmed civilians - including
reports that five elderly Serbs were killed and refugees
bombed in the village of Dvor - and we will support fully
the Tribunal's work.

We join as well in condemning in strong terms the
wrongful acts committed against United Nations peace-
keeping forces and in the Council's extension of
condolences to the families of the Czech and Danish peace-
keepers who were killed. In this regard, let me welcome the
statement of the representative of Croatia accepting
responsibility for attacks on United Nations peace-keepers,
making a commitment to investigate these incidents and
promising cooperation with the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) and other
international organizations.

Many in Croatia have hailed the recent military actions
as a great victory. But it is difficult to see how any society
can derive real satisfaction from the defeat and flight of
hundreds of thousands of its own citizens. This resolution
reminds Croatia of its obligation to create conditions
conducive to the safe return of those persons who have left
their homes, and it stresses the importance of granting
access by the International Committee of the Red Cross
to those who have been taken prisoner or detained.

At the same time, while we regret the means used,
we must also recognize that the new safe area of Bihac is
now open to humanitarian relief. For the citizens of
Bihac, the long siege is over - and let it remain so.

The events of this past week have not changed the
overriding imperative for all parties in the former
Yugoslavia, which is to cease the conduct of war and
explore instead, with seriousness and good faith, the
options that exist for achieving peace. That is the one
path towards real security. That is the only way to bring
the cycle of disruption and tragedy that has affected all
the peoples of the region to an end.

Finally, let met categorically deny the allegation that
I was told had been made by Mr. Djokic - that the
United States gave tactical advice or logistical support to
the Government of Croatia's military operation. This
baseless charge can only make it harder for my
Government to see the day when Serbia and Montenegro
can rejoin the community of nations.

