Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
welcome the presence of the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
and Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has on
many occasions expressed its strict adherence to
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, wherein the peaceful settlement of disputes
and direct dialogue between the parties are an essential
component. That is why we reiterate our conviction
that the full implementation of resolution 2202 (2015),
in support of the decision by the leaders of Ukraine,
Russia, France and Germany on 12 February 2015 in
Minsk, is the fundamental basis for the consolidation
of efforts to encourage the parties to work together
towards a political and peaceful solution to the
Ukrainian crisis. In that context, our country considers
the ongoing work of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in support of the
effective implementation of the Minsk agreements to
be a positive step forward and has been following the
recent violent events in the Donbas region with great
attention.

On 5 April 2016, the representatives of the
countries of the Minsk Group of the OSCE condemned
the resurgence of violence and further stated that "there
is no military solution to the conflict". Also, the joint
statement after the ministerial meeting of the OSCE
Troika on 12 April expressed

"deep concern at reports of increasing numbers of
violations of the ceasefire and the presence of heavy
weapons in the area security in eastern Ukraine".

Furthermore, they rejected the incidents involving the
monitors of the Special Monitoring Mission.

Venezuela remains convinced that a military
escalation and spread of the conflict should be avoided,
for which the support of the international community
and strict compliance with the Minsk agreements and
resolutions of the Council are required. All parties
should continue working to address the structural
causes of the crisis, in order to achieve a firm and
lasting peace. Any effort to manage the situation will
succeed as long as there is dialogue and support for
direct negotiations, and the parties show political will
using the Minsk agreements as a guide.

Venezuela is convinced and has argued in various
forums of the Organization that the application
of unilateral coercive sanctions are contrary to
international law. In that context, we believe that the
current sanctions are counterproductive to the desire
for peace and stability in the region and are eroding
the climate for dialogue necessary to restoring trust
between the parties.

In any conflict, civilians are the most affected by
violence. We therefore call upon the parties to strictly
abide by the obligations relating to their protection,
including the need to ensure access for humanitarian
assistance to residents, internally displaced persons
and refugees in the affected areas. We reject violence,
ethnic and political persecution and acts of terrorism,
regardless of who commits them. Any incident
should be independently investigated, with evidence
being provided to support the conclusions of such
investigations.

Finally, we call on all parties to work with conviction
in efforts to achieve ajust and lasting political solution
that is in their own interest and in that of the entire
region.

