Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
welcome your presence in the Chamber, Sir, as well as
that of Her Excellency Mrs. Preneet Kaur, Minister of
State for External Affairs of India. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.

Allow me to emphasize that security sector
reform is one of the essential elements of any
stabilization and reconstruction effort in a post-conflict
situation. Strengthening security sector reform and
security forces requires strong commitment and
cooperation among the Government and international
stakeholders. However, national ownership and
leadership in that process is essential.

The role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and the Peacebuilding Fund in security sector reform is

important, and providing assistance to national
authorities to define a credible security reform strategy
contributes to the accountability of the security sector
and enhances the professionalism of national security
structures. Security sector reform must be included
within a broader nationally led peacebuilding
framework and strategy.

The lessons learned, the specificities of each
country and the conditions on the ground must be taken
into account. Cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations is necessary. It is also
important to emphasize sector-wide and context-driven
approaches in governance, economic policy and efforts
to enhance rule of law and strengthen the security
sector.

Security sector reform is also an integral part of
multidimensional peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. Very often, it is a crucial component
of the exit strategy of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

The regular reports of Council-mandated
missions must better reflect the assessments of
institution-building processes. That will contribute to
determining existing capacity gaps that require
streamlining of immediate or long-term support from
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole.

Rebuilding and strengthening State institutions in
the area of rule of law is a basic precondition for a
stable and secure environment, development and better
protection of human rights and individual freedoms.
Therefore, security sector reform must be carefully
implemented as part of a broader framework for
conflict prevention and development. A common
framework and a coherent system-wide approach are
necessary to reinforce the ability to provide consistent,
well-coordinated and relevant advice for security
sector reform in peacekeeping or peacebuilding.

The role of the United Nations is to assist
countries in building capacity to deliver enduring
security through effective and resilient institutions. The
countries concerned must determine the approach and
priorities for security sector reform. Factors that
greatly contribute to the success of that process are,
first and foremost, political will and consensus of
domestic stakeholders, as well as extensive
consultations, involvement of relevant domestic and
international stakeholders, proper and well-executed
strategies, coherence, good timing and long-term,
predictable and sustained support.

Moreover, the success of security sector reform
relies on national ownership, the quality of dialogue
with recipient countries, the adaptability of tools for
security sector reform, good coordination among
relevant national and international partners, sensitivity
to gender issues and involvement of civil society. None
of these factors can be neglected, because only a
combination of those elements can lead to the success
and sustainability of security sector reform.

