Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): A
month ago the Security Council, on the initiative of its
President, the representative of the United States, received

 

the heads of State of the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Those heads of State reiterated their commitment to the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement. The Secretary-
General presented his recommendations on the expansion of
the mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for
which my delegation has been calling for some months.
The Secretary-General recommended the implementation of
the Lusaka Agreement in its entirety: respect for the
ceasefire, disengagement of the parties, disarmament of
armed groups, and withdrawal of all foreign forces. His
recommendations also included the future, convening of an
international conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region.

At that special meeting of the Security Council, the
French Minister Delegate for Cooperation and
Francophonie, Mr. Josselin, observed that, by supporting
United Nations intervention, the Security Council should
consolidate respect for the ceasefire. He welcomed the
Secretary-General's recommendations to that end, with the
proviso that security matters should be addressed in all their
aspects.

The draft resolution before the Council today is
intended to implement the recommendations of the
Secretary-General. It clearly sets out the conditions on
which the deployment of an expanded MONUC must be
based: respect for the ceasefire, formulation of a plan for
the disengagement of forces, and guarantees by the parties
to ensure the safety, security and freedom of movement of
United Nations personnel. The draft resolution is not
perfect; it is a compromise text, as the Permanent
Representative of Namibia has rightly noted. We might
wonder in particular about the optimal number of observers
and of the military personnel who will support them. But,
as the representative of Namibia also observed, the text
clearly sets out, for anyone willing to read it carefully and
to understand it, what was at the origin of the deterioration
of the situation: it clearly indicates where the responsibility
lies. For that reason, the French delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

The draft resolution can be implemented only if
concrete steps are taken by the parties to the conflict. In
that connection, we welcome yesterday's Lusaka meeting of
the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement; that was
a positive sign, but it is necessary to go beyond what
remain declarations of intent - even if signatures have
been affixed to them.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is indeed a matter for concern, particularly in the
eastern part of the country, where heightened tension has
been noted. The most recent information on developments
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
we received late yesterday from the Secretariat, indicates
that the presence of foreign forces is increasingly resented
and has quite naturally led to resistance among the
population. The information supplied by the Secretariat
indicates also that massacres and inter-ethnic
confrontation have occurred, raising the spectre of a new
escalation of violence.

We cannot fail to be concerned at the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in violation of that country's
sovereignty. As the draft resolution clearly states, such
activities contribute to the continuation of hostilities.

Hence, all parties must make a major effort to
implement the Ceasefire Agreement.

In supporting the deployment of MONUC, it is our
hope that it will help bring about a true implementation
of the Agreement. It ought also to contribute to
reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that national dialogue, with the help of the
facilitator, President Masire, will make such a
reconciliation possible. Beyond that hope, and beyond its
moral and political support, France is prepared to respond
to the appeal addressed to all Council members by the
President in January by providing material support to the
facilitator.

