Mr. Egeland: I offer warm thanks to all members
of the Council for their encouraging comments, advice
and questions.

Indeed, as I have come to brief the Council on
Africa regularly these past three years, I feel as if I
have come mostly with bad tidings, including after my
first big trip in 2003 to northern Uganda and the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was
profoundly shocked by what I saw and deeply
pessimistic after leaving our humanitarian colleagues
on the ground.

This time, we have a very positive message that
two of the worst wars of our time, age and
generation - the wars in eastern Congo and the war in
northern Uganda - can be brought to an end. It is not
often that we have that kind of historic opportunity,
and we should not fail as we work together to bring an
end to the haemorrhage of human life in the eastern
Congo and to the enormous suffering, especially of
children, in northern Uganda. Twenty thousand
children were kidnapped in northern Uganda. That is
unparalleled anywhere in the world.

Now, as we see that militias are giving up their
arms in the eastern Congo and the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) is assembling at the assembly points in
the southern Sudan, we need urgent action to stabilize
the situation and we need a flexible way of responding.
We want to give the Mayi Mayi soldiers, whom I saw
giving up their arms, the $110 package and some tools
to become carpenters or to resume work as farmers.
That is not happening at the moment. The alternative
could take effect, and they could go back to raping and
pillaging the civilian population.

Hopefully, the 400 LRA fighters who have come
to the assembly points will be joined by thousands of
others, by our estimation, at the two assembly points in
the southern Sudan. We would rather have them there,
eating canned food, watching videos or doing whatever
they wish, than going back to northern Uganda and
starting the whole indiscriminate attack on the civilian
population again. That would spare a lot of human
suffering and save us a lot of money in terms of life-
saving humanitarian assistance.

The representative of the United States
commented that there should now be a consistent
recovery effort, to be included in the appeals for 2007.
Indeed, the country teams are working very hard as we
speak on a very ambitious programme covering the
areas of recovery, reconstruction and the protection of
civilians in eastern Congo and northern Uganda. That
will be included in the 2007 appeal that the Secretary-
General, with my assistance, will launch at the end of
November from this very building.

I also agree with those who commented that we
need more help to realize that programme. We often
feel that we round up the usual suspects when we want
to foot the bill for such historic reconstruction
programmes. That usually involves a dozen donors, the
same ones over and over again. There are five dozen
viable economies in the world, and they should all
contribute.

Many commented on reconciliation and peace, on
the one hand, and justice and accountability, on the
other. I think that Africa is a model for other continents
in terms of reconciliation, being able to build bridges
and looking to the future. Europeans, Middle
Easterners and Asians can learn from that. What is a
problem in Africa is that too often it has been forgive
and forget, and there has not seemed to be much of an
interest among political, military and economic elites
to put an end to impunity for serious violations of
human rights, including rampant sexual abuse. What
we are therefore striving for now is peace with justice.
That can come in many ways in northern Uganda. 1 am
sure that we will succeed in northern Uganda.

I was very heartened to hear that the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) himself has
called for work to be done now to end the war, ensure
the demobilization of soldiers and so forth and develop
something that will satisfy national and international
laws, including the Rome Statute, as well as the local
need for reconciliation and the local interest in the use
of traditional justice mechanisms. I think that the ICC
indictments will not be a stumbling block, and that
they can actually provide impetus for future progress
towards peace in northern Uganda, which is now at
hand.

The representative of Peru asked about the
second round of elections and the chances of their
being free, fair and secure. I think there are very good
possibilities for that. I congratulate our colleagues in
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for what
they did in the first elections. I also wish to
congratulate Bill Swing, the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, for what he has done of late
with many ambassadors in Kinshasa to reconcile the
tensions between the two contenders in the second
round of presidential elections. I feel very confident
that we are now going to have good elections. I really
hope, and we all pray, that the results of the elections
will not lead to further tension.

But the marathon in the Congo has only been half
run. The billions of dollars the international
community has invested in MONUC must now be
supplemented with future investments in peace,
security and reconstruction. It was a very bad sign that
many non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have
now been told that they are likely to have less money
for humanitarian work in 2007, and that many of their
colleagues working in the area of development were
given no promises of increased funding for 2007. That
is a bad omen for our ability to finish the marathon.

The representative of Denmark, as well as the
representatives of several other countries including
Qatar, referred to Darfur. Let me just say the following
in that regard: I fear that we will return many times to
Darfur. We are growing increasingly desperate as

humanitarian actors. Today we released $4.5 million
from the Central Emergency Response Fund for
helicopters to try to reach groups with whom we have
lost all contact by road. We will go in with those
helicopters when there is a lull in the fighting, in an
attempt to deliver food and exit quickly. That is a very
crude life-saving measure, which in a way shows how
great the desperation has become in our attempts to
keep people alive.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) is sending more staff to Darfur as we
speak, in an effort to help NGOs stay. Non-
governmental organizations are now all debating
whether to leave. One non-governmental organization
recently lost five out of seven of its vehicles to car-
jacking and armed robbery by various armed groups,
including rebels, Janjaweed militia and organized
crime groups on the ground. If NGOs leave, it will be
like pulling the plug. The result will be an end to
humanitarian relief. Were the African Union Mission in
the Sudan (AMIS) to leave, the effect would be exactly
the same. All who now have influence - African
neighbours, Arab States, Islamic States, China and
westerners - have to do what they can in the coming
days to impress upon the Government, the rebels and
everyone else the need to avoid a meltdown, which
would be beyond description.

The Permanent Representative of Japan asked
about the situation in southern Sudan. I was
encouraged by what I saw there. But there is also the
fear that the progress in southern Sudan will also be
threatened by a possible collapse in Darfur. We must
therefore endeavour to avoid having another conflict to
deal with. With the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
now in assembly points rather than continuing to loot,
pillage and attack, the situation has improved in
southern south Sudan. The Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) has been able to absorb several armed
groups that were on the loose earlier. The United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has brokered
agreements between the SPLA and other local groups.
In short, the situation is now so good that the security
level was lowered from phase-IV to phase-III just a
few weeks ago. Things in southern Sudan are going in
the right direction, but they continue to be very fragile.

Several representatives mentioned the situation in
the Southern African region, and in Zimbabwe in
particular. In addition, the representative of Denmark
asked about the present humanitarian situation. When I
visited last year, after the disastrous eviction campaign,
Government officials showed me a number of houses
under construction. I was promised that all those who
had been evicted would end up in better housing than
they had before. The fact of the matter is that 92,460
housing structures were destroyed during Operation
Murambatsvina. That is our firm estimate based on
Government information. Very few - some 3,325
houses - have been built, as opposed to the more than
90,000 structures that were demolished. Those new
houses went to many people who had not been evicted.
Indeed, those who were in bad housing before this
operation are in even worse conditions today.

The Amnesty International report that just came
out is, in the view of our colleagues on the ground, to
the point. No inaccuracies were found. We ourselves
have tried to construct housing for the evicted, and,
altogether, some 1,400 temporary shelters were
constructed. In general, it has been very difficult to do
so, because there has not been any Government
cooperation at all to make it happen. We have released
$2 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund
for housing for those in need.

The harvest will, thankfully, be better this year
than last year in Zimbabwe. Better rains may be the
best explanation for that. Still, 1 million people will be
18

in need of food assistance. Social services are still
declining, the economy is still declining, and
vulnerability is greatly increasing. We need more
funding for our appeal, which is badly underfunded in
Zimbabwe, and we need diplomatic and other help to
try to get out of a very vicious circle in Zimbabwe - a
country that could easily feed itself and which is now
in a very steep decline in terms of social indicators.

Finally, I acknowledge the wish expressed by the
Ambassador of Tanzania that, next time, there be a
greater review of the situation in southern Africa and in
other parts of Africa. I am very grateful for the regular
invitations of the Council to brief on these situations
and I am always willing to come whenever the Council
has time to hear from me and from my humanitarian
colleagues.

