Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Pakistan is pleased to see
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela presiding over the
Security Council, and we appreciate its convening of
today's debate on a subject of fundamental importance.
There is no better way to mark the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations than by renewing our collective
pledge to fully and unequivocally respect its purposes
and principles. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing this morning.

The Charter of the United Nations does not just
collectively bind us to efforts aimed at saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, it is also a shared
commitment to creating a world order based on the rule
of international law. Of course, the Charter's greatest
success is that for 70 years there has been no general
conflagration. But today we see a world that is hardly
at peace, where conflicts abound, human-rights abuses
remain rampant and humanitarian law is flouted in
open violation of the Charter's principles. We have yet
to see a world order emerge that is based on justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law and, most critically,
on the purposes and principles of the Charter itself.

Member States solemnly entered into our covenant
in the trust that those principles were immutable. Yet we
see them flouted in pursuit of narrow national interests,
especially by the powerful. We see unilateralism and
arbitrariness in consequential decisions of war and
peace. We see unwarranted foreign adventures, and
then we also see their unforeseen and unintended but
devastating consequences. The statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
whose members represent more than half of the
membership of the United Nations and with which
we fully align ourselves, reflects cracks in the trust
represented by the Charter. That must be remedied if
we are to advance and augment the moral authority of
the United Nations as a just and credible organization
that safeguards the interests of all Member States as
equals, in accordance with international law. I would
like to make a few suggestions on how to rebuild that
trust.

First, the management of peace and security must
be based on a genuine consensus forged on the basis
of the principles of the Charter, not on power politics.
A cooperative approach, rather than the imposition of
coercive measures shaped by the interests of powerful
States, should guide our actions.

Secondly, there should be a renewed focus on using
peaceful means to address breaches of international
peace and to settle international disputes, with wider
and more effective use of Chapter VI measures.

Thirdly, it is the Organization's responsibility to
prevent violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. The use or the threat of the use
of force, which is in contravention of international
law, must be censured and effectively deterred. The
failure to do so has already created the impression that
the United Nations has become an instrument of the
powerful rather than a guardian of the principles of
international law.
Fourthly, the United Nations must uphold the
principle of the sovereign equality of States. Equality
includes the concept of equal opportunity, which is
a safeguard against discriminatory measures and
policies. That should be at the heart of the reform of
any United Nations institution.

Fifthly, the United Nations must fulfil its purpose
of developing friendly relations among nations
predicated on the principles of equal rights and the
self-determination of peoples. It is counter-intuitive to
expect peaceful and friendly relations among nations if
the United Nations cannot guarantee the application of
the fundamental principle of self-determination.

The peoples of the world expect fairness and justice
from the United Nations. It is our responsibility as
Member States to ensure that we abide by the principles
that we agreed to seven decades ago. We agreed on
them because we believed in their utility in promoting
our collective interest. We reaffirm our commitment
to them today because we continue to believe that
adhering to them will save us from the scourge of war.
Let us therefore translate those beliefs, commitments
and statements into action. For, if we are unable to do
so, we will not only endanger the progress achieved
in previous years, we also risk making the institution
appear irrelevant in a world marked by increasing
turmoil and trouble, in which insecurity prevails
and injustice persists. That would be a huge price to
pay, especially at a time when so many conflicts are
devastating the lives of millions of people and raising
questions in people's minds about the relevance and
effectiveness of the United Nations in managing
international peace and security.

Before concluding, let me once again pledge my
country's commitment to translating our trust in the
Charter of the United Nations into practice.

