Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's important debate. We appreciate
the insightful briefings by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, as well as the perspective
provided by the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF
and civil society representatives. We hope that our
deliberations today and the concept note circulated by
the French delegation (S/2015/168, annex) will become
useful guidelines on how to prevent and effectively
respond to the abuse of children by non-State armed
groups and bring the perpetrators to swift justice.

Violence and attacks on children, particularly
by non-State actors, are on the rise globally. Armed
groups have committed barbaric acts of terror against
children. But children are also victims of brutal force
in several situations of foreign occupation. We all
witnessed on our television screens what happened
to the children of Gaza. We join the international
community in condemning these atrocities in the
strongest terms. Terrorist groups have intentionally
targeted and attacked schoolchildren. They have killed,
abducted and inflicted serious injuries on thousands of
children in utter disregard of all norms of humanity and
international law.

The massacre of over a 100 school children - 132,
in fact - in my country's city ofPeshawar three months
ago was one of the worst atrocities perpetrated against
children. In so doing, these terrorist outfits have sunk
to new levels of cruelty and displayed a reprehensible
capacity to attack the core values of humanity. The
Peshawar school attack has strengthened the resolve of
the Government and the people of Pakistan to combat
terrorist violence and the groups that inflict it. It has
further reinforced our national consensus to defeat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. That school
children across my country stood in solidarity with
the victims of Peshawar and expressed an unshakable,
collective resolve to confront terrorists sent a powerful
message that schools could not be forced to close
down in fear, nor would children be cowed by such
cowardly attacks. These children - in my country and
beyond - have been inspired by the power of Malala
Yousafzai, Pakistan's Nobel Prize winner, who took a
bullet in her head rather than submit to the terrorists"
dictates or agenda. Her act of extraordinary courage
became a symbol of resistance to the evil designs of
violent groups.

Pakistan has embarked upon an effective law
enforcement campaign, which includes what we call
Zarb-e-Azb, a military campaign in our tribal area, to
take out terrorists, dismantle their networks and halt
the flow of finances to them from inside and outside
the country. We have learned by doing. That is why
Pakistan recognizes that while the use of force may be
necessary it is not sufficient to effectively eradicate
the menace. Non-kinetic measures such as developing
a counter-narrative to defeat the terrorists' twisted
ideology, are just as important, if not more so.

Pakistan is implementing a comprehensive national
plan of action to address this very complex and
imposing challenge. It involves police and security
actions, building resilience in local communities
against radicalization as well as political, economic,
social and financial measures.

Preventing the recruitment and indoctrination of
children by extremist and militant organizations is
a priority area for us, as is focusing on education to
promote tolerance and harmony. Key steps that we have
taken include the registration and regulation of religious
seminaries, curbs on hate material and literature,
and the introduction of a modern school curriculums.
But even as Pakistan executes its campaign against
terrorists and acts to protect its children, sharing best
practices and experience gained by different countries
can help strengthen our collective response to keep our
citizens and our children safe from the violent actions
of armed groups.

Finally, I would wish to underscore that the legal
parameters of the Council mandate must be respected.
Our focus should remain on situations of armed conflict
and those threatening international peace and security.

