I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on addressing the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for their insightful briefings. My delegation associates itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 27). Allow me to make a few additional observations. It is crucial that the Security Council, as the primary organ responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, continue to attach the highest importance to the issue of counter-terrorism in all its aspects, including the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, whether transnational or domestic. The Slovak Republic condemns all forms and manifestations of terrorism and is engaged in counter-terrorism, both individually and as a part of the international community. We reiterate the universal obligation to respond to the global threat of terrorism. For that response to be effective, it needs to be based on the analysis of the modus operandi of terrorists, which includes their cooperation with criminal groups and networks with view to enabling, inter alia, the funding or the travel of terrorists. Slovakia shares the concerns expressed in resolution 2482 (2019), whereby "terrorists can benefit from organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, as a source of financing or logistical support". This fact has been systematically reflected in Slovakia's national approach to addressing security threats, including those potentially stemming from the malicious nexus between terrorism and organized crime. Slovakia has taken both programmatic and institutional measures. In 2017, the Counter-Terrorism Unit was established directly within the National Crime Agency (NAKA). This institutional set-up, facilitated through the integrated structure of NAKA, allows for very close cooperation between various specialized departments of the Slovak Police Force, namely, organized crime, financial crime, corruption, drug-related crime, firearms trafficking, et cetera, and for their necessary day-to-day interaction. The Counter-Terrorism Unit acts as both a prevention and a response body when dealing with acts of terrorism. Among other things, it focuses on collecting evidence and exposing criminal acts related to terrorism, as well as assessing terrorist threats on the territory of Slovakia. Another important institutional tool with direct relevance to disrupting linkages between terrorism and crime is the Financial Intelligence Unit of Slovakia. This body assumes the task of the central national bureau in the area of preventing and detecting money laundering and terrorist financing. Last but not least, an important part of the institutional framework is the National Security Analytical Centre of Slovakia, whose daily operation provides a broad participatory and information-exchange basis for more than half a dozen selected national agencies principally responsible for countering serious security threats to Slovakia and its citizens, including threats arising from terrorism. As for the programmatic element of Slovakia's national approach to linkages between terrorism and organized crime, the following documents and _ their periodical reviews are worth mentioning. The National Action Plan on the Fight against Terrorism (2019-2022) constitutes a strategic document, which also seeks to create conditions for the subsequent fulfilment of international obligations, including bilateral and multilateral agreements, Security Council resolutions and decisions of the European Union agencies related to countering terrorism. Further relevant documents are the National Action Plan on the Fight against Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing and Financing of Spread of Weapons of Mass Destruction (2019-2022) and the Strategic Principles of the Fight against the Legalization of the Proceeds of Crime, the Fight against Terrorism and Financing of the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (2019-2024). To conclude, Slovakia believes that a robust framework, its rigorous implementation and effective international cooperation can significantly contribute to preventing and countering the scourge of terrorism.
