Ms. Sison (United States ofAmerica): As Ijust said
prior to the voting, it is not everyday that the Security
Council considers an issue as horrific and shocking
to our collective conscience as the use of chemical
weapons against civilians. Today is an important date on
the calendar. It is United Nations Day, on which we the
peoples of the United Nations commit to unite - as the
preamble of the Charter of the United Nations states - to
maintaining international peace and security. We all
know that there has long been an international norm
against the use of chemical weapons because their cruel
and indiscriminate nature are such that their use is
never justified. In one of its rare moments of unity, the
Council appropriately condemned chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. We even collaborated on establishing
an independent, impartial body to investigate confirmed
cases of chemical-weapon use. That body is comprised
of internationally recognized independent experts. It
employs professional, scientific means of investigating
attacks and identifying those responsible, and yet that
body is under attack by the Syrian regime's allies.

The question that we must ask ourselves is whether
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) is being
attacked because it has failed in its job to determine
the truth in Syria, or because its conclusions have been
politically inconvenient for some Council members. We
just voted on a short, simple draft resolution to extend
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
We mandated that technical body to investigate
chemical-weapon attacks on the innocent men women
and children of Syria. Made up of experts from the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the JIM. has the simple
task of finding out who ordered and carried out the use
of those weapons in Syria. The United States and 10
other members of the Council voted in favour of the
draft resolution today, as it is clear to us that there is
more work to be done and more chemical-weapon
attacks to investigate.

The JIM. has been successful in its work, and we
want that vital work to continue without interruption in
its operations. We want to know the truth about those
attacks regardless of where it takes us. The United
States deeply regrets that one member of the Council
vetoed the text, thereby putting political considerations
over the misery of Syrian civilians who have suffered
and died from the use of chemical weapons. The
reasons offered this morning fool no one. We reject
the cynicism, and we reaffirm our confidence in the
technical experts - men and women - who come from
many regions, backgrounds and perspectives. They
knew their work would be attacked by Syria's allies,
yet they have carried out their mandate effectively
and responsibly.

Claims of JIM. partiality just do not stand up
to scrutiny, when we consider that all parties have
acknowledged that sarin gas was used in Khan
Shaykhun, and, as reported by the OPCW, once again
this week the Syrian regime itself provided the JIM
with samples of evidence that support that conclusion.
The JIM. has even gone so far as to visit Syria several
times to further its investigation, which we had hoped
would satisfy the inappropriate demands of some
members of the Council. But it appears that it will
never be enough for some Council members. We are
not deceived or deterred, however, and we call on all
members of the Council to join us in rejecting such
attacks on the JIM. Such attacks are not intended to get
us closer to the truth, they are intended to hide the truth.
They are not designed to get us closer to accountability
for chemical-weapon use in Syria, they are designed to
shield the perpetrators of some of the worst war crimes
of our century.

Fortunately, the Council will have more chances to
show that it values the truth and to show its solidarity
with the Syrian people. The JIM's mandate expires on
16 November, in almost three weeks from now. That
investigative body should be a great symbol of what the
Council can do when we work together. It is a symbol
of our commitment to justice and accountability, and it
represents hope for thousands of suffering and grieving
Syrian civilians. We therefore call on all Council
members not to turn their backs on this hope, and
to preserve the Council's unity in the face of Syrian
chemical-weapon attacks. We call on the Security
Council to take up this vital matter once again and
vote to extend, at that time, the mandate of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism.

