Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation wishes to join other
delegations in welcoming you, Sir, to the presidency of
the Security Council at this first meeting of the month.

Not long ago Secretary-General Kofi Annan, with
the broad support of the international community, made
a successful Visit to Iraq and signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Government of Iraq, thus defusing
the weapons-inspection crisis. Peace-loving people all
over the world were overjoyed and encouraged by this
event. China greatly appreciates the wise decision made
by the Secretary-General at the critical juncture between
war and peace and supports his diplomatic efforts. We
also view positively the flexibility and wisdom
demonstrated by the various parties in bringing about this
successful result.

We believe that the Memorandum of Understanding
has resolved the question of access for the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and at the same time
responded to Iraq's legitimate concerns over sovereignty,
dignity and security, in full accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. This is a major breakthrough
for the inspection work of UNSCOM. and will definitely
help UNSCOM. complete the task entrusted to it by the
Security Council at an early date.

 

The situation in the Gulf region is complex and
sensitive. If it is dealt with appropriately there will be
peace. Any imprudence, however, may trigger a war, which
is in no one's interest. Resolving peacefully the problems
that have arisen during the inspection process is the general
demand of the majority of the United Nations Member
States and is in the fundamental interest of the people of
the various countries in the Gulf region. The Security
Council must bear this in mind while dealing with this
major issue. China has always maintained that
international disputes should be resolved through peaceful
means in accordance with the United Nations Charter and
the basic norms of international relations. We are not in
favour of resorting to or threatening to use force, because
this would not favour an appropriate solution to these
problems. It would only cause heavy civilian casualties and
possibly even more severe consequences.

The successful visit by the Secretary-General has once
again proved that political and diplomatic efforts and
patient dialogue are the only way to dispel mistrust and find
an appropriate solution. We sincerely hope that under the
present circumstances the parties concerned will create a
favourable atmosphere for an early and comprehensive
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and
refrain from any action that might worsen the situation.

The draft resolution before us is intended to support
the good offices of the Secretary-General and to endorse
the Memorandum of Understanding. It also makes it clear
that the Security Council will act to lift the sanctions as
Iraq implements the resolution. That reflects our Views, and
the Chinese delegation will therefore join the consensus on
the draft resolution before the Council.

I wish also to note that during the Council's many
consultations the Chinese delegation repeatedly and
unambiguously demanded that the draft resolution should
contain no automatic authorization of the use of force
against Iraq. This evening we listened very carefully to the
explanations offered by the sponsors of the draft resolution,
but these did not eliminate our misgivings about possible
abuse of the draft resolution. I wish therefore to stress that
the adoption of this draft resolution will in no way mean
that the Security Council is automatically authorizing any
State to use force against Iraq. The Council cannot and
should not prejudge whether Iraq will violate its resolutions;
even less should the Council predetermine the course of
future action. The Security Council can make judgements
and decisions only on the basis of prevailing circumstances.

It has been China's consistent position that Iraq must
implement in full the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and must cooperate fully with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM). At the same time, Iraq
is a sovereign State, and its sovereignty, dignity and
legitimate security concerns should also be respected.

The Security Council should make a timely and
objective assessment of Iraq's implementation of its
resolutions. UNSCOM. has made considerable headway in
its inspections and in the destruction of Iraq's weapons.
We hope that, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and with the understanding reached
with Iraq, UNSCOM. will implement the proposals put
forward at its emergency session and will complete its
task of verification and the destruction of Iraq's weapons
of mass destruction at an early date, so that steps can be
taken to lift the sanctions against Iraq at the earliest
possible date.

