Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciations to you, Mr. President,
and to the Russian presidency for holding today's
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan for his
statement and to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to him for his services to his country and wish him
success in his new assignment. I would also like to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom and Mr. Yury Fedotov for
their valuable briefings.

Iran continues its full support for the promotion of
security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan, inasmuch as we
consider security in Afghanistan to be vital for the
security of our own borders and the region. Because
the assumption of full leadership is indeed a major
step towards establishing peace and prosperity in the
country, Iran continues to fully support the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan and remains
confident that it is well positioned and possesses the
necessary capacities to address the political, economic
and security challenges it faces.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan (S/2015/684) indicates that, although the
overall number of attacks shows a very slight decrease
as compared to 2014, the sustained conflict has grown
in both intensity and geographic scope. There was a
visible spike in terrorist attacks in Kabul following
the confirmation of the death of Taliban leader Mullah
Omar. The deterioration of the security situation,
especially in the north and west of Afghanistan, is
a matter of concern. We condemn all violent attacks
committed by the Taliban and all other terrorist groups,
as well as any cooperation with them, since we believe
cooperation would encourage them in their odious
behaviour, and would therefore be counterproductive to
the establishment of peace in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan should become the object of
regional and international cooperation, rather than of
competition, so that peace, security and development
can be established and strengthened in the region. With
the increasing prominence of Daesh and its affiliate in
Afghanistan, along with the vast spectrum of terrorist
and extremist groups, as the Secretary-General's
report suggests, international and regional Powers
have a greater responsibility to the National Unity
Government and can reap enormous benefits from
assisting it, especially in its fight against terrorism. Iran
welcomes the statement by President Ghani concerning
the signing of the joint comprehensive plan of action
between Iran and its negotiating parties. We appreciate
his characterization of the plan as an opportunity to
strengthen peace, stability and economic cooperation
in the region.

With respect to bilateral cooperation, we see the
expansion of our political and economic ties with
neighbouring Afghanistan as a priority. Iran stands
ready to increase its bilateral cooperation, particularly
on security matters, counter-narcotics efforts,
development projects and economic cooperation in the
fields of infrastructure and agriculture, as well as in
efforts to find durable solutions for Afghan refugees.

There is great potential to be explored in the fields
of trade and transit. We expect the tripartite agreement
between India, Afghanistan and Iran on the Chahbahar
port facilities to be finalized by the end of September.
Access to that port would be very beneficial for
Afghanistan as a land-locked country. The completion
of the two ongoing railroad projects from Iran to the
Afghan cities of Harat and Farah is also an important
step in the enhancement of the economic activities
between the two countries and within the region.

With regard to counter-narcotics efforts, we are
particularly concerned about reports indicating that
opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan has shown an
increase in recent years. That increase is primarily due
to the prevailing insecurity and poverty. It represents
a real threat to the region and beyond and should be
addressed by the international community in a very
serious and comprehensive manner. In that context,
we welcome the initiatives taken by the countries of
the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran.

Strong support and commitment from international
donors, the Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime are essential to deter the
menace of drug cultivation and drug trafficking.
Narcotics are not only a social health challenge but
also, and more important, a major source of income
for extremist and terrorist groups. Therefore, the
international community should especially appreciate
and support the triangular initiative of Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan on cooperation in countering narcotics. It
is a useful initiative that will benefit Afghanistan as
well as transit and destination countries, and must be
supported by the international community.

Hundreds of thousands of Afghan refugees continue
to live in Iran. We continue to participate in the work of
the Tripartite Review Commission in order to plan for
the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual repatriation
of Afghan refugees and the continued management
of the refugee population in Iran. The decrease in
voluntary repatriation underlines the importance of
meeting the reasonable needs of repatriated refugees
in Afghanistan so that that trend can be reversed, and
underscores the need to mobilize more international
support for that purpose. We also continue to support
hundreds of thousands of Afghan students, from
primary to university education, pending their eventual
repatriation.

We support UNAMA, as well as United Nations
agencies, in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
robust regional engagement on issues such as border
security, immigration, the return of refugees and drug
control measures. The role of UNAMA should be
further streamlined, taking into account the work of the
Tripartite Review Commission, which is made up of the
Government, as the main partner, and the international
donor community, UNAMA and the United Nations.

