Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Uruguay for taking the initiative to hold
today's open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and specifically on the protection of
civilians and medical care in armed conflict. China
welcomes Foreign Minister Mr. Nin Novoa for coming
to New York to preside over today's meeting. I wish
to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
China has listened carefully to the statements made
respectively by Ms. Beerli, Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and the
representative of non-governmental organizations.

At present, the security situation around the world
remains grim. Hot spot issues in some areas gone
unresolved for far too long, which have resulted in
continuous armed conflict. The situation has put the
growing insecurity of local civilians and their medical
care into sharper focus. As such, this issue has attracted
much attention from the international community.
China supports the international community in taking
robust actions to provide safety and security to civilians,
medical workers and their facilities.
First, focus must be placed on conflict prevention
and resolution so as to eliminate the root causes that
jeopardize the safety of civilians, medical workers
and their facilities in the first place. Countries must
foster a sense of community and shared future and
promote a paradigm of global governance based on
joint consultations and contributions and shared
benefits in order to build a peaceful and a stable
international environment.

Secretary-General Guterres has been actively
campaigning for initiatives on conflict prevention and
sustainable peace, which in our view is a valuable attempt
to achieve the aforementioned goal. The international
community should, working with one mind, implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
tackle the deep-rooted causes of conflict. At the same
time, it is necessary to advocate a culture of peace
and the promote national reconciliation. As the core
of the collective security mechanism, the Security
Council should effectively shoulder its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security by
working to promote dialogue and negotiation and
sustaining efforts to find political solutions to hot spot
issues, so as to keep civilians in armed conflict out of
harm's way.

Secondly, the Government and the parties to a
conflict are duty-bound to protect the civilians. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility when it
comes to the protection of their civilians. Parties to
conflict must respect international humanitarian law
and implement all relevant resolutions of the Council,
including resolution 2286 (2016); honour their obligation
to protect civilians, medical workers and their facilities;
and ensure that there is humanitarian access.

With regard to the victims of armed conflict, it is
incumbent on the Government and the communities
concerned to protect their legal rights and dignity
and help them to reintegrate into their communities.
With regard to cases of violations of international
humanitarian law in armed conflict, such as human
rights violations, threats to and attacks on health-care
personnel and facilities, national Governments must
take action to investigate and punish the perpetrators

Thirdly, it is necessary to adopt a holistic approach
and a working synergy. The civilian protection mandate
embedded within United Nations peacekeeping
operations, being an important means to protect
civilians as it is, must strictly abide by the Council's
mandate and should not be seen as a replacement for
the responsibility and obligation to protect civilians
that fall to our national Governments and the parties to
the conflict. When designing a protection of civilians
mandate, the Council should take into account to the
overall condition and requirement of the host country
and the capacity and the conditions of the peacekeeping
missions so as to ensure that the relevant mandate is
clear, practical and feasible.

Peacekeepers who commit sexual exploitation and
abuse must be firmly punished. Regional organizations,
such as the African Union, and international
humanitarian agencies have comparative advantages
and a unique role, which must be fully utilized. Efforts
must also be made to enhance information exchanges
a policy alignment so as to help affected countries
enhance their ability to protect civilians. In this
connection, it is also important to have an effective
strategy to cope with the refugee situation, help host
countries resettle refugees and resolutely stamp down
on criminal activities against refugees.

Fourthly, we must do a good job of providing
humanitarian assistance in armed conflict. China hereby
pays tribute to all medical workers and humanitarian
relief agencies for their humanitarian spirit in healing
the wounded and rescuing the dying in armed conflict.
We hope that, in carrying out their noble mission, they
will abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, observe the guiding principles
of United Nations humanitarian assistance, respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the host country,
make a special effort to win the understanding and trust
of the parties concerned and avoid being themselves
involved in the conflict. Such an approach is conducive
to the safety and security of medical personnel, their
facilities and the humanitarian workers operating in
armed conflict. The United Nations should play its
coordinating role, keep channels open with all parties to
the conflict and strengthen its supervision of h workers
and others involved so as to create conditions for timely
and safe humanitarian access.

