Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank Alvaro
de Soto for his comprehensive briefing and insightful
comments. My delegation - myself in particular,
because of my longstanding friendship with
Mr. De Soto - was very pleased at his appointment as
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
which was a clear recognition of his diplomatic skill
and capacity.

I also express our appreciation for the holding of
this public meeting in response to the request made by
the Arab Group.

The peoples of Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories now face a critical moment that
has the true potential to overcome the deadlock and the
paralysis that have characterized the peace process in
recent years. As our delegation sees it, the Israeli
withdrawal from Gaza and the northern West Bank is a
first, yet are important, step towards the end of the
occupation and the embodiment of the vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, by means of a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement to the conflict. It is therefore
essential that it be successful.

In that context, the Israeli Government should be
encouraged to persevere in its efforts towards
disengagement in accordance with the proposed
timetable. Coordination with the Palestinian Authority,
so that the operation can be undertaken in a smooth
and orderly manner, is of crucial importance. Actions
taken in that regard in recent weeks should be
commended, and my delegation believes that they must
be intensified in the days to come. At the same time,
facilitation efforts undertaken by international partners
and neighbouring States are to be praised.

Our Government noted with satisfaction the most
recent statement by the Quartet principals in London,
in which they emphasized the urgent need for Israel
and the Palestinians to work directly and cooperatively
with each other, with the assistance of James
Wolfensohn, the Quartet's Special Envoy for Gaza
Disengagement. The Quartet also stressed that the
coordinated support of the international donor
community is crucial for the success of
Mr. Wolfensohn's mission, and it urged Arab States to
engage fully in that regard.

The complex, sensitive character of the Israeli
withdrawal requires that calm and stability prevail on
the ground to the greatest extent possible. My
delegation believes that the recent escalation of
violence in the area runs counter to the interests of
both sides and that the parties must do their utmost to
ensure restraint and must abide by the understandings
achieved at Sharm el-Sheikh, with a view to
maintaining the ceasefire.

The practice of extrajudicial killings by Israeli
forces, resumed in recent days, must be halted. My
delegation also followed with deep concern the
intensification of rocket and mortar attacks by
Palestinian armed groups against Israeli targets,
including civilians. One of those attacks resulted in the
death of an Israeli girl of Brazilian origin, a sad fact
that our people received with profound regret. My
delegation also condemns the terrorist attack that took
place in Netanya some days ago. In that context, my
Government viewed positively the news that the
commitment to the ceasefire made by Palestinian
factions will be honoured. Brazil believes that, at this
stage, all Palestinians should be focused on supporting
and providing leverage to the Palestinian Authority in
its undertakings.

Confidence-building is a core element at the
present juncture. My delegation is therefore alarmed at
news of increasing settlement activities in the West
Bank and, even worse, Israel's revision of the route of
the wall and the acceleration of its construction around
Jerusalem. Those measures deeply affect efforts to
promote trust between the two Governments and
between their peoples. They also have a very negative
impact on the prospects for a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the conflict, as they affect
core final status issues.

The construction of the wall around Jerusalem is
likely to affect the daily lives of 55,000 people, as the
Special Coordinator mentioned this morning.
Moreover, it also prejudges the resolution of a dispute
over an issue that has been central since the creation of
the partition plan and which has been subject to many
resolutions of the United Nations, by both the Security
Council and the General Assembly. I recall that any
solution on the status of Jerusalem should take into
account the legitimate concerns of both sides and
include internationally guaranteed provisions to ensure
freedom of religion and of conscience for all its
inhabitants, as well as permanent, free and unhindered
access to all Jerusalem's holy sites by people of all
religions and nationalities. Israel should be encouraged
to reverse its decision on that matter, as well as to
comply with the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice in all activities related to the wall.

Brazil is deeply alarmed at the dire humanitarian
and economic situation in the occupied territories. In
that context, my delegation commends the endeavours
undertaken by Special Envoy Wolfensohn to address
that situation and alleviate the plight of the Palestinian
people. My Government is willing to contribute to
those efforts, in particular by providing assistance and
expertise for the establishment of social programmes
on the ground. The Brazilian authorities are deeply
interested in exploring modalities of cooperation in
that regard.

Most of all, however, my delegation stresses the
importance of Israel facing up to its responsibilities in
that field by easing constraints on the flow of goods
and people in and out of Gaza and the West Bank and
between them.

With respect to the situation in Lebanon, my
delegation is pleased at the designation of the new
Government. Brazil is certain that the new authorities
will work in the interest, and for the benefit, of all
Lebanese people. For its part, the international
community should be supportive of the Government's
efforts. Actions that could have a negative impact on
Lebanese unity and stability must be avoided.

With respect to the situation along the Blue Line,
my delegation reiterates its call on both sides for
restraint and full compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In the coming days, the Council
will consider the Secretary-General's report on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/2005/460). Brazil favours the renewal of
the Force's mandate for a further six-month period,
taking into account the prevailing tensions in the area
and the request made by the Lebanese Government in
that regard.

Finally, I wish to reaffirm our commitment to a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East that takes into
account the need to address all aspects of the conflict.

