Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui for her comprehensive briefing and
her dedicated efforts on the ground. We also thank
Ambassador Mansour for his briefing on the activities
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Moreover, we thank Ms. Justine Masika
Bihamba for sharing her perspective.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a
critical juncture, and it is important that the Council
have the opportunity to follow up developments with
regard to preparations for the December elections.
We welcome the progress made in preparing for the
elections with the support of subregional, regional and
international partners. The Government and all other
national stakeholders must continue their efforts to
create conditions that are conducive to holding credible
and peaceful elections, in line with the 31 December
2016 agreement.

We note that the independent auditing report issued
by the International Organization of la Francophonie
(OIF) on the voter register confirmed that it was
"inclusive, exhaustive and updated, but needed some
improvement. We hope that that will help reinforce
confidence-building measures. It is also encouraging
that the presidential majority welcomed the conclusion
of the OIF report. We hope the publishing of the voters'
list by the Independent National Electoral Commission
will help to overcome the doubts surrounding
voter participation.

The coming months will be of critical importance
for final preparations ahead of the 2018 elections. It is
absolutely necessary that all Congolese parties make
the necessary compromises with a view to preserving
continuous dialogue and the spirit of consensus as the
only way to conduct peaceful elections. In that regard,
it was necessary that the Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council send a clear and unified
message to the Congolese political actors last week
through the joint communique adopted at the end of
their annual consultation. We believethat the elements
of the communique provide a useful framework on
how we should continue to handle the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the months
leading up to elections in December.

Enhancing the coordination of the United
Nations, the African Union (AU), the Southern Africa
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and other international
partners is necessary to ensure more coherent and
effective support to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially at this critical juncture. In that
context, although the planned visit by the Secretary-
General and the AU Commission Chairperson to
Kinshasa was delayed, we very much hope that it will
happen next month. The idea of having the Security
Council visit the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which is now being proposed to happen in October, is
also very welcome. The participation of the AU Peace
and Security Council in that visit, in line with the
agreement reached last week, will send the right signals,
and we hope that all the necessary arrangements will be
made to make this happen.
We appreciate the considerable technical and
logistical support provided by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for the preparation
of the elections in conformity with the electoral
calendar. The role of MONUSCO in support of the
electoral process continues to be very important, and we
fully support all the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and the United
Nations team on the ground.

The deployment of the additional rapidly deployable
battalions, to be based in the troubled Kasai and
Tanganyika regions, will be important for strengthening
efforts aimed at containing violence in rural hotspots,
which may affect the process of elections. In that spirit,
we appreciate that the Secretary-General proposed the
option of deploying individual police officers, while
remaining within the authorized police strength of
MONUSCO, which can contribute to the early warning
efforts, prevention, mitigation and reduction of
potential tensions during the conduct of elections. Such
initiative will be effective if implemented together with
the national police and local communities.

Finally, we would like to welcome the official
announcement of the end of the Ebola outbreak in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance
with the World Health Organization guidelines, and
we echo the statement issued by the African Union
today commending the Congolese Government for its
swift and effective response allowing a coordinated
and efficient intervention of all concerned partners to
swiftly contain the outbreak.

