Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish at the outset to welcome you, Sir, and to thank
you for your presence today to preside over this
important Security Council debate. Let me also thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his statement.

My thanks go too to the Permanent
Representative of Spain, Ambassador Inocencio Arias;
we are sorry that he is leaving us. During his tenure, he
made an enormous contribution to the work of
combating terrorism. His wisdom and his sense of
humour have left a deep impression upon us all.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
among the essential tools available to the Security
Council to carry out its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Today,
United Nations peacekeepers are actively carrying out
their respective mandates on virtually every continent.
To people in conflict zones, Blue Helmets are the
embodiment of stability and a symbol of hope. Great
importance is attached to their presence, and all sides
welcome them.

Peacekeeping operations are not only a salient
feature of the United Nations; they are also a priority
issue in the work of the Security Council. By further
strengthening peacekeeping operations we can help
enhance the authority of the Council and the
effectiveness of the collective security machinery,
augment the role and impact of the United Nations and
promote multilateralism. Thus, today's open debate on
the question of peacekeeping operations is especially
important.

There has been notable progress as a result of
reforms that the United Nations has carried out in
recent years with respect to peacekeeping operations,
in accordance with the recommendations of the report
(S/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. At
present, peacekeeping operations are characterized by
two prominent features: complex mandates rather than
the traditional mono-dimensional mandate; and a surge
in the demand for peacekeeping. New developments
place higher demands on the Secretariat and pose
greater challenges for Member States. The smooth and
orderly execution of a peacekeeping operation requires
the careful practical planning of all elements of the
operation and a clear-cut strategy.

On the other hand, bearing in mind the need for
maintaining long-term global and regional stability, all
nations should provide peacekeeping operations with
timely and adequate political support, financial and
human resources and equipment to create the
conditions necessary for peacekeeping operations to be
able to fulfil their mandates.

Experience demonstrates that a successful
peacekeeping operation enjoying broad support can be
carried out only by strictly complying with the
purposes of the Charter and the recognized principles
of peacekeeping operations. At the same time, guided
by a spirit to adapt to the times, it is also necessary to
actively explore ways and means to further improve the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. We favour
bringing fully into play the role of the Security Council
Working Group on peacekeeping operations and
enhancing communication and coordination among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and Member States.

It is equally important to further strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and to encourage the latter to make a
greater contribution to peacekeeping activities. The
international community should also continue to assist
them, particularly the African regional and subregional
organizations, to strengthen their peacekeeping
capacities.

It must be pointed out that peacekeeping
operations should by no means be relied on as the only
means for conflict resolution. Greater attention should
be given to addressing the root causes of conflicts,
particularly issues such as economic development and
capacity- and institution-building.

Relevant United Nations departments, bodies and
agencies, international financial institutions and
relevant regional organizations should give full play to
their initiatives and respective advantages and adopt all
those strategies. Only through those efforts will the
countries concerned be able to put an end to conflicts
once and for all and achieve lasting peace and stability.

China is a staunch supporter of and participant in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. China has
dispatched engineering, transport and medical
contingents respectively to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Liberia and a 100- to 125-member
civilian police contingent to Haiti to support the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. That represents
some concrete action by China in support of the noble
cause of international peacekeeping. Along with other
countries, we will make our own contribution to
strengthening the role of the United Nations and to
maintaining world peace.

Finally, I also wish to take this opportunity to pay
a high tribute to those who have lost their lives in
serving United Nations peacekeeping operations and to
extend my best regards to all serving United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

