Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
thank the delegation of South Africa for the initiative,
taken on behalf of the non-aligned States, to hold this
public meeting on the question of Iraq.

In accordance with your recommendation, Sir, I
shall limit myself to associating myself with the
gratitude expressed and the compliments paid by
Ambassador Kumalo to your predecessor, Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sabliere.
We followed with interest the presentation of the
reports by Mr. Hans Blix, the Executive Chairman of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We have taken due note of the progress that
has been achieved in the inspections. Together with the
members of the Security Council, we have taken note
also of the measures undertaken by the Iraqi authorities
to implement the provisions of resolution 1441 (2002).
Mr. Blix's statement contained encouraging indications
regarding the desired results through the continued
work of the inspectors in a serious manner and in a
favourable climate.

The Kingdom of Morocco, which desires to see
peace prevail in the region and this crisis overcome by
peaceful means in order to avert more tragedies in the
region, believes that the progress achieved is
encouraging. The Kingdom of Morocco urges Iraq to
demonstrate continued constructive cooperation with
the United Nations inspectors in implementation of
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002).

To achieve the desired goal, efforts must
continue. A favourable climate must prevail and
sufficient and necessary means must be provided to
facilitate the work of the inspectors and enable them to
discharge their duties with the greatest possible
efficiency.

The Middle East region cannot tolerate fresh
agonies or the ravages of a new war. Indeed, it badly
needs to see hotbeds of tension extinguished and peace
and security reign throughout the region.

The Kingdom of Morocco, which has always
made the settlement of disputes through peaceful
means a basic principle underlying its regional and
international relations, sincerely hopes that this
meeting will result in the elaboration of an approach
that will spare the brotherly Iraq people suffering and
the ravages of war and preserve its national unity and
territorial integrity within the framework of
international legality.

All of this will serve to strengthen the credibility
of the Security Council as the organ entrusted with the
maintenance of collective security and will allow it to
achieve the lofty and ultimate objective for which the
United Nations was created: to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.

