Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
In recent days there have been frequent incidents of
violence in the Middle East. The continued escalation
of the conflict between Palestine and Israel has not
only inflicted more death and casualties on innocent
civilians, it also threatens to plunge the region into
even greater calamity at any moment. China opposes
the Israeli military attacks and its economic blockade
against Palestine, as well as its actions to jeopardize
the security of the lives and property of Palestinian
civilians. China also opposes all acts of violence
against innocent civilians.
The continued escalation of the violence between
Palestine and Israel has long since demonstrated
clearly that the approach of stopping violence with
violence leads nowhere and that peace talks represent
the only hope for the eventual realization of peace. The
Chinese Government has repeatedly pointed out
recently that maintaining the authority of the
Palestinian National Authority, headed by Mr. Arafat,
will be conducive to easing the current tension in the
Middle East and to promoting the resumption of peace
talks between Israel and Palestine. To isolate Arafat
and to restrict his freedom is unwise and will, in fact,
backfire.

China has always maintained that the key to a
resolution of the question of the Middle East lies in the
termination of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories and in the restoration of the Palestinian
people's legitimate national rights on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of
land for peace. At the same time, the security of Israel
should also be guaranteed.

In his briefing to the Security Council on 21
February, Secretary-General Annan made a number of
important points. Among other things, he said that the
lack of mutual confidence between the two sides makes
the role of a third party essential and that there needs to
be new thinking and imaginative ideas for the

resolution of the violent conflict between Palestine and
Israel. He also said that security has to be addressed
alongside key political issues - particularly the
question of land - and the economic and social issues,
including the increasingly critical desperate situation
of the Palestinians.

Just as the Secretary-General pointed out, under
the current circumstances there is great need for the
Security Council and the international community to
increase their attention and input vis-a-vis the Middle
East. The Security Council should play its due role in
easing the situation in the Middle East and in resuming
the Middle East peace talks. We hope that Council
members will make efforts in a constructive spirit so
that the Council will contribute to easing tension in the
Middle East and ending the violent conflict between
Palestine and Israel.

