Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita, His
Excellency Foreign Minister Barry, African Union
High Representative Buyoya, European Union Special
Representative Losada Fernandez and Executive
Director Fedotov for their respective briefings. I
commend Foreign Minister Barry for coming to New
York to brief the Security Council.

At present, the situation in the Sahel region as a
whole is stable despite multiple challenges. In order
to achieve stability and development in the Sahel,
the international community must take an integrated
approach and work in many areas from politics to
security to development. It is necessary to continue
supporting the countries of the region, including the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), so that they can
address regional security challenges in an independent
manner. I wish to highlight the following priority areas.

First, it is important to advance the political
settlement of regional hot-button issues. In order
to bring about peace and stability in the Sahel, it is
imperative to move the peace process forward in the
countries concerned. Military means alone cannot
solve regional security issues. It is essential to continue
supporting the various Malian parties in carrying out
inclusive dialogue and consultations and expediting
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. It is imperative to focus on
tackling problems beyond the region, such as the
Libyan crisis, in order to mitigate their negative impact
on the Sahel.

Secondly, it necessary to step up support for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The countries of the G-5
Joint Force had to overcome many difficulties, such
as the deteriorating security situation and the lack
of operational capacity and equipment shortages,
when it resumed operations earlier this year, thereby
demonstrating the determination of the countries
of the region to step up the development of the Joint
Force. The international community should provide
continuing support for the Joint Force. In accordance
with the relevant agreements, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali should continue to provide the Joint Force with a
support package.
Thirdly, it is essential to take stock of economic
and social development and tackle the root causes of
conflicts. The Sahel faces many problems, ranging
from poverty to unemployment to the deterioration of
the environment. The international community should
help the countries of the Sahel take on the development
challenges and tap into their own potential. It is
necessary to help them formulate a Priority Investment
Programme, support Secretary-General Guterres in
implementing the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and its support plan and assist the Sahel in
achieving sustainable development.

Fourthly, we must attach importance to the role
of regional mechanisms, support African countries
in finding African solutions to African problems,
encourage the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and other regional and subregional
organizations to take the lead in addressing issues
related to the Sahel, and assist the G-5 Sahel Permanent
Secretariat in its capacity-building efforts to secure as
soon as possible the ability to coordinate international
community support for the Joint Force. China supports
the G-5 Sahel in assuming ownership of its security
responsibilities in responding to regional security
challenges, and we support the United Nations in its
efforts aimed at providing necessary financial support
for the Joint Force.

China has been actively implementing the China-
Africa peace and security measures announced by
Chinese President Xi Jinping at the Beijing Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. Out of the
assistance package to the AU, a total of 300 million
yuan has been disbursed in order to support counter-
terrorism actions in the Sahel and the development
of the Joint Force. In addition, a further $1.5 million
in cash assistance will be provided to the G-5 Sahel
Permanent Secretariat. Clearly demonstrating China's
resolute support for peace and security in Africa, such
measures will play an important role in maintaining
peace and security both in the Sahel and in Africa as
a whole.

China is ready to work with the international
community to do its part in enabling the Sahel and the
African continent to achieve stability and prosperity.

