Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Chile's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you for convening
this meeting on the situation in the Middle East and
the question of Palestine. As we begin this new year,
I would also like to congratulate the new members of
the Council - Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain
and Venezuela - and wish them every success, as well
as to congratulate their predecessors - Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda - on their efforts over the past two years.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Saudi Arabia, on behalf
of the Islamic Organization of Cooperation, and of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

During the briefing of the Council on 15 December
last year, it was said that 2014 had been a disastrous
year for the peace process in the Middle East. In the
words of Mr. Serry, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East, "I feel that 2014 changed the course ofthe
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and that the future is more
uncertain than ever" (S/PV. 7339, p. 5). And this came
at a time when in January of last year we were hoping
that 2014 would be the year when hope returned that
we might reach a comprehensive and lasting solutions
to the conflict, in line with the vision of two States
based on international law and the international terms
of reference, including the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid
framework and the principle of land for peace. That
hope was reinforced with the proclamation of 2014 as
the International Year of the Palestinian People.

However, in 2014 the peace negotiations came to
a halt, despite the efforts of the United States between
July 2013 and April 2014. In July and August 2014 we
witnessed the destructive aggression of the occupying
Power in the Gaza Strip, which resulted in more than
2,000 casualties including more than 400 children, as
well as the wholesale destruction of infrastructure and
economic and humanitarian damage on an enormous
scale. We also saw a return to violence and tension
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, owing
to the occupation forces' continued construction of
settlements and the Israeli colonists' violations of
Muslim and Christian holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, by preventing people who wished to pray from
entering them, a flagrant violation of international law
and an act of aggression against the religious feelings of
Muslims around the world.

Furthermore, the Security Council, the body
charged with maintaining international peace and
security, has been unable to live up to its responsibilities
with regard to the Palestinian question. On 30 December
it was unable to adopt a draft resolution (S/2014/9l6)
introduced by Jordan, our brother nation, on behalf of
the Arab Group, designed to establish a firm timetable
for the negotiations on putting an end to the Israeli
occupation and realize the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people to live in dignity and freedom
in a viable sovereign State within established and
recognized borders, living peacefully alongside other
countries in the region.

The Palestinian people have been living under the
yoke of occupation for more than 48 years and have had
to deal with many violations and acts of aggression.
That has not deterred them from their commitment over
the past 25 years to negotiating within the framework
of the relevant resolutions of international law and
choosing peace, so that the rights their people have been
deprived of can be restored to them, something that was
demonstrated in particular by Palestine's accession to a
number of international treaties.

In the face of all this, the Israeli side has continued
to impose the status quo. The occupying Power has
expanded its settlement and occupation activities,
increased its aggression against Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza and their religious sites. It has
blocked any attempt to launch serious peace initiatives,
particularly those of the United States, begun in July
2013. The Israeli Government has illegally blocked
Palestine's tax income, which represents more than
70 per cent of the Palestinian Government's revenues.
We would like to reiterate the call to the entire
international community, including the interested
parties and the Security Council, to put an end to
Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territory and to its
illegal practices against the Palestinian people and their
financial resources.

It is high time for changes to be made in how we
deal with the Palestinian question in the light of a two-
State solution. The continuing practices will exacerbate
extremism. We therefore demand that the unjust
blockade of Gaza be lifted and that humanitarian aid be
allowed to enter in order to provide essential assistance
to those living in the Gaza Strip in the wake of the
Israeli aggression. We also reaffirm the importance
of fulfilling the commitments made at the donor
conference in Cairo on reconstructing Gaza as soon as

possible. Ajust and comprehensive peace process in the
Middle East can be achieved only through Israel's retreat
from all the occupied territories, both in Palestine and
the Syrian Golan, as well as the remaining occupied
territory in southern Lebanon.

In conclusion, I would like to express our deep
concern about the deterioration of the situation in Syria,
our brother State, and its grave repercussions for Syria,
its future, and for the entire region. In that regard, I
would like to reaffirm Tunisia's hope that Mr. De
Mistura's efforts will result in a political solution that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people to peace and
democracy and that at the same time preserves Syria's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and social cohesion.

