Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the Kingdom of Belgium for assuming the presidency for the month of February and, again, we thank Viet Nam for its excellent presidency in January. We extend our thanks to the presidency for convening this timely briefing on small arms and light weapons. We also thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Mr. Damien Spleeters for their briefings. I would like to begin by underscoring the great importance that we attach to the issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and ammunition. The widespread availability, excessive accumulation and misuse of such weapons constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security, foment armed violence and undermine respect for human rights. Likewise, it contributes to transnational organized crime and terrorism, and poses an obstacle to the achievement of sustainable development. In that regard, we are steadfast in our commitment to the international instruments that call for combating that scourge, including the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the International Tracing Instrument and the Arms Trade Treaty. We hope that they will become universal and be fully implemented, and that there will be harmonization among them. Despite the strides that have been made, States continue to face difficulties in achieving effective arms control. That is why closer cooperation and international and regional assistance must be stepped up in the areas of financing, capacity-building, transfer of technology and equipment, as well as in the exchangeof experiences and best practices, taking into account the needs of the host State. Similarly, it is imperative to reinforce policies on the management and security of weapon and ammunition stockpiles and the destruction of surpluses, as well as on the tracing and marking processes, border control and the development of a robust legal framework. The wide availability of arms directly impacts the forms and intensity of gender-based violence, including sexual violence, within and beyond conflicts, and puts women and girls at a much greater risk of violence and insecurity. Increased efforts to mainstream gender perspectives into international arms control frameworks are therefore imperative. We must continue to promote gender equality and the meaningful participation of women in decision-making and planning activities to combat the illicit arms trade. Equally important is respect for arms embargoes. Their violation by States themselves, with the continued supply of arms to the various parties to a given conflict, including armed groups, leads to the perpetuation of such embargoes and, in many cases, to the illicit diversion of arms to terrorist groups. Libya is a perfect example of that. Moreover and given the new means of manufacture, design and technology of weapons, we support engaging in discussions in that regard, including on standards for marking and tracing, as well as transfers via the dark web and the conversion and reactivation of weapons, by adopting a comprehensive approach and analysing the impact of such developments on the fight against illicit trafficking. On another note, we commend the approach to arms control integrated into the mandates of various peace missions and the support that the United Nations provides to the national authorities of Mali, the Central African Republic, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the areas of arms and ammunition management. We emphasize that, owing to the key role played by small arms and light weapons in armed conflicts and the fact that they are the main cause of death in conflicts and in acts of violence in general, we believe that this issue must be discussed more often in the Security Council. Furthermore, we believe that we can make greater efforts to achieve concrete results, such as updating resolution 2220 (2015). Since its adoption, new methodologies for the manufacture, design and transfer of arms have emerged, as have other needs resulting from the specific circumstances facing States. Resolution 2220 (2015) therefore should be updated to face and meet the new realities and challenges of today's international environment.
