Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium fully supports the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and I wish to make
the following remarks in my national capacity.

At the outset, I welcome the outstanding background
work carried out by the delegation of Spain during the
comprehensive review process of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Twelve years after the adoption
of that resolution, we must face reality. For the first
time, non-State actors have used weapons of mass
destruction, in Syria and Iraq. What must we do with
this reality?

In the immediate term, we must improve the
implementation of relevant provisions and commitments,
including through greater international cooperation. In
this regard, Belgium welcomes the unanimous support
of the Security Council for resolution 2325 (2016),
which it adopted today.

First of all, with respect to chemical weapons, the
implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons needs to be improved. To date, only
118 States parties have sufficient national legislation in
this area. We must therefore pay greater attention to
making sure that all States abide by their obligations.
We must also unequivocally condemn any views of
weapons of mass destruction regardless of where or by
whomever they are used. For that reason, the Security
Council must be unanimous in its condemnation of any
use of chemical weapons in Syria, whether by Da'esh
or by the Syrian regime. The use of chemical weapons
cannot go unpunished, and concerted international
action in that regard is important.

Secondly, with respect to the nuclear aspect, it is of
paramount importance to secure the existing sensitive
material and to reduce its quantity. On its part, Belgium
has considerably reduced the quantity of sensitive
nuclear material in its territory. We have created a new
specialized police unit at the federal level in order to
ensure a permanent armed response capacity at our
nuclear sites. Until it is fully rolled out, those sites are
currently secured by military units. Our nuclear experts
are at the forefront of international efforts to design
and test various types of fuels that could eventually
replace highly enriched uranium in our reactors used
for cutting-edge research. That is also a contribution to
non-proliferation.

Radioactive sources are also equally vulnerable
and could be diverted for nefarious purposes. We
must therefore support new medical and industrial
technologies that would enable us to significantly replace
or reduce the use of those sources. We will continue to
support the nuclear security work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, including financially.

Thirdly, with regard to biological weapons, we
regret that the eighth Review Conference of the Parties
to the Biological Weapons Convention did not succeed
in making a qualitative leap at the very moment when
we are seeing growing threats. But we must not give up;
the collective and individual challenge before us is too
important. Recent experience has shown that proactive
and creative initiatives can support the aims of the
Convention where diplomatic negotiations are lagging
behind. One example would be peer-review exercises,
a new approach that could help boos confidence in
conformity with the Convention.

In conclusion, initiatives could also be developed at
the industrial and academic levels, including drafting
codes of conduct and boosting biosafety, including by
devising new standards.

