Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): In this first public meeting of the Security
Council under the Philippine presidency, we express
our best wishes for the success and the positive
outcome of the Council's work. We pledge our
delegation's support. As well, we express our esteem
and gratitude for the work done by Ambassador Munir
Akram during the Pakistani presidency of the Council
in May.

We are especially grateful for the presence of
Chairman Bryant and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Klein, at this public meeting,
which is particularly timely because it is taking place
days after the publication of the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (S/2004/430) and a few short weeks before a
Security Council mission is to visit West Africa,
including Liberia. We express our satisfaction at the
words of praise of the Special Representative for
Chairman Bryant. We congratulate the Chairman on
that.

For our part, we wish to make some comments
with respect to the situation in Liberia. First, we
appreciate the efforts made to date by the National
Transitional Government to implement the necessary
political, economic and social reforms, to which
Chairman Bryant referred in his extensive briefing. We
encourage him to continue working actively along
those lines, with the support of the international
community. It is gratifying that the Cabinet of the
National Transitional Government meets regularly and
that most government posts have been filled.

We believe that the fundamental priority at the
moment is to make progress in the overall security
situation, which, in our view, is comprised of three
main elements. First is the full deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in the
entire country. The second element is the satisfactory
continuation and conclusion of the process of
demobilization, disarmament, reintegration and
rehabilitation of ex-combatants. We have been
reminded of some of the consequences if that crucial
process were to fail. Third is reform of State security
institutions.

With respect to the full deployment of UNMIL in
terms of both the overall staffing level and the
Mission's presence throughout the national territory,
we note and welcome the fact that the deployment
process is scheduled to be completed at the end of this
month.

With respect to the process of demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation, we
welcome the progress made since its resumption in
mid-April. Nevertheless, it is worrisome that, as has
been highlighted, the number of heavy weapons
surrendered so far is still below what was expected and
that, therefore, there continue to be large quantities of
those weapons hidden, which could be used in the
future to destabilize the fragile security situation of the
country.

With respect to the reform of the State security
institutions, we note with satisfaction the start, in early
May, of the process to recruit new members of the
police force. We also take note of the efforts to
restructure the armed forces, which are becoming ever
more urgent as the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation moves
forward.

With respect to the regional approach, we are
pleased to note that, on 29 April, another meeting took
place in Dakar between the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), the United Nations Mission in Cote
d'Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, organized by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. The future
formulation by the three missions of joint plans and
modalities aimed at ensuring more effective control of
the common borders is an important initiative, which
we welcome.

Lastly, despite the evident achievements that have
been made thus far, major challenges to the peace
process in Liberia remain, as has been noted. These
include ensuring the success of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
programme, to which I referred earlier; stabilizing the
security situation; extending State authority throughout
the entire country; and, above all, preparing for the
elections that are scheduled to take place in October
2005 and that should go ahead as planned, with no
delay. In this context, we take note of the appeal made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Council and to the international community. We
would also like to refer to transparent management of
economic resources and to improvement in the
humanitarian and human rights situation - areas
where progress has occurred.

All of these issues constitute complex challenges
that require the resolute commitment of the
Transitional Government, supported by the
international community. We encourage the
Transitional Government and UNMIL to continue their
efforts in those fields and assure them of Spain's
support as they traverse the path ahead of them.

