Mr. Holliday (United States of America):
Ambassador Munoz, I would like to thank you for
organizing this meeting today and for your effort in
drafting a presidential statement on this very important
issue. I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Abe for his comments outlining the Secretary-
General's report.

The United States recognizes the serious
consequences of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, especially in areas of conflict where the
problem is most acute. The widespread proliferation of
these illicit arms exacerbates conflict, hinders
economic and social development, fuels crime and
terrorism, and contributes to the continued
destabilization of war-torn societies.

The United States believes that a practical,
results-oriented approach to the problem of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons is best. Each
country must begin its efforts at the national level by
adopting strict export and import controls, strong arms
brokering laws, ensuring the security of small arms and
light weapons stockpiles held for national defence, and
disposing of excess weapons.

The United States was pleased to participate in
the successful Biennial Meeting of States held in July
2003 to review progress in fulfilling the
recommendations adopted in the 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We commend the excellent stewardship of
Ambassador Kuniko Inoguchi of Japan, who chaired
the Biennial Meeting. The vast majority of
participating States provided national reports on the
status of their efforts to fulfil the recommendations
included in the Programme of Action, greatly aiding
efforts to understand and diagnose the problems
associated with that illicit trade and helping us to
effectively address those problems. We commend those
States that provided national reports to the United
Nations Department for Disarmament Affairs for the
Biennial Meeting and encourage all those who did not
provide reports to do so in the near future.

The United States welcomes the Secretary-
General's report and appreciates its recommendations.
Many of those recommendations are aimed squarely at
the immediate problems of illicit arms trafficking in
regions of conflict, such as enforcement of Security
Council embargoes, efforts to improve the
effectiveness of export controls and, specifically, the
use of end-user certificates, better controls over the
activities of arms brokers and support for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts in post-conflict
environments. With regard to the last item, we
commend the work of the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts in expanding the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms to include man-portable
air defense systems (MANPADS) and voluntary
reporting on small arms and light weapons. The United
States and many other countries, as my Spanish
colleague mentioned, are deeply concerned with the
grave threat to civil aviation posed by the proliferation
of MANPADS to terrorist groups and their State
sponsors. We call on all Member States to provide full
and accurate reporting of MANPADS transfers in their
annual submissions to the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and encourage the adoption of the
MANPADS guidelines developed last year by the G8
and the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for
Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and
Technologies.

The United States continues to seek partnerships
with countries requiring assistance in the areas of small
arms and light weapons destruction, physical security
and management of stockpiles, export controls and law
enforcement training. Given our acute concern over the
proliferation of MANPADS to terrorist groups, we have
recently expanded our assistance programmes to
safeguard and eliminate those dangerous weapons.

Since the inception of our small arms and light
weapons destruction program in 2000, we have
provided assistance for the destruction of nearly
700,000 weapons and over 75 million rounds of
ammunition in 13 countries. In addition to those
bilateral efforts, we continue to actively participate in
regional and international efforts such as the Inter-
American Drug Abuse Control Commission's Group of
Experts, which successfully developed a model arms
brokering regulations programme for the countries of
the Organization of American States.

The United States has demonstrated a
commitment to finding practical and effective ways of
curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons such as our own strict control regime for
small arms and light weapons and the significant
technical and financial support we provide to other
States. We very much look forward to working with
other States to eliminate the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and its harmful consequences
around the world.

