Mr. Fedotov: This debate is taking place just a
few days before world leaders are to start discussing a
visionary and transformative development agenda that
links peace and security to sustainable development
and highlights the centrality of the rule of law and
accountable institutions. The situation in Afghanistan
makes the need for such an integrated approach
abundantly clear.

The recently held meeting just mentioned by my
colleague Nicholas Haysom highlighted the need for
effective measures to counter the narcotics trade, which
is undermining the country's development and fuelling
terrorism. Last year, Afghanistan accounted for an
estimated 85 per cent of global opium production,
and 77 per cent of global heroin production. Opium
cultivation and processing remains one ofAfghanistan's
leading economic activities, with the gross value
of the opiate economy estimated in $2.84 billion in
2014. Accounting for some 13 per cent of the national
gross domestic product, the export value of opiates
considerably exceeded the value of the export of any
licit good and service.

Illicit drugs are supporting instability, insurgency,
corruption and organized crime, while weakening
State institutions and Afghanistan's overall ability to
promote peace and good governance. Resolution 2210
(2015) stresses the importance of addressing mutually
reinforcing, cross-cutting issues of counter-narcotics,
anti-corruption and accountability.

Since I reported to the Council in December
2014 (see S/PV.7347), we have in fact seen efforts by
the new Government to address opium production
and trafficking, corruption and economic crime. In
the face of those severe challenges. Afghanistan has
sought to strengthen the effectiveness of the country's
institutions, and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) has endeavoured to support those
steps.

Our work is undertaken in close coordination
with United Nations system partners, especially the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. In
June, UNODC and the Ministry of Counter Narcotics
launched the Afghanistan Drug Reporting System.
The system provides access to the most up-to-date
data on all available narcotics-related indicators in the
country, including on eradication, cultivation, drug
prices, treatment capacity, alternative livelihoods and
seizures, to inform analysis, policy development and
evaluation. That has helped to further reinforce the
Ministry's leadership and coordination role in national
counter-narcotics efforts.

Such efforts cannot be limited to law enforcement
alone. In response, the Ministry has launched a national
mobilization against narcotics to involve communities,
civil society, the media and development agencies.
UNODC supports that initiative, as well as the
development of the new Afghan national drug control
action plan, which will be finalized soon.

The Afghan Government has made advancing
relationships with its neighbours a priority, and
UNODC has continued to promote effective counter-
narcotics cooperation in the region and beyond. The
triangular initiative involving Afghanistan, Iran and
Pakistan, as well as the initiative with Afghanistan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and other initiatives, have
served as important platforms for regional cooperation.
UNODC is also planning a high-level meeting with
partners of Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, to
be held in December in Vienna prior to the Paris Pact
policy consultative group meeting.

Operationally, we are coordinating interventions
through our Afghanistan country programme, the
regional programme for Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries and the programme for Central Asia, as well
as the global container control programme, the maritime
crime programme and the networking the networks
initiative. Through the latter, UNODC is helping to
develop interregional platforms for practical, real-time
cooperation among law enforcement coordination
centres, financial intelligence units and networks of
prosecutors, so as to enable the exchange of information
and criminal intelligence as well as the coordination of
multilateral operations.

We are working with the relevant Afghan agencies
on the cross-cutting issue of illicit financial flows. That
is critical for building confidence, creating a safe and
sound financial sector capable of supporting private
sector-led growth, as well as enhancing Afghanistan's
ability to address fraud and corruption. Our experts on
countering money laundering and terrorist financing are

providing technical assistance on the ground. UNODC
supports Afghanistan in its stated priority of rooting out
corruption by helping to review the relevant legislation
and revise the national anti-corruption strategy. We are
also supporting Afghanistan in the implementation of
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.

Nevertheless, the situation remains undeniably
difficult. The increase in Afghan opiate production
over recent years has been accompanied by a sharp
increase in local consumption. Supporting and
expanding evidence-based prevention and treatment
services in Afghanistan, including for HIV, remains a
major challenge.

We similarly face difficulties with implementing
alternative livelihoods initiatives. Although the land
area under opium cultivation in Afghanistan is just 3 per
cent of the total agricultural land under cultivation,
there are pockets where opium plays a major role in
the rural economy. Opium accounted for an average
of 12 per cent of all farmers' incomes in the southern
provinces last year, and accounted for almost 30 per
cent of the total area of agricultural land in Helmand
province. Approached holistically as part of broader
efforts to create economic opportunity and modernize
the agricultural sector, alternative development has the
potential to break this vicious cycle.

Nevertheless, widespread international political
support for alternative development has not been
matched by funding. Overall gross disbursements of
alternative development funds from member countries
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe accounted for just 0.1 per cent of global
development assistance in 2013.

We will present the full results of the 2015
Afghanistan opium survey shortly, as our report is
being finalized. Today I can confirm that the figures
available at this stage clearly indicate a decrease in
cultivation, especially in critical provinces. While that
trend may partially reflect global heroin market self-
regulation, it is nevertheless positive news, particularly
in View of the results of last year's survey, which
reported a sharp increase in opium poppy cultivation
and heroin production in Afghanistan. Moreover,
our data indicate that there has been an increase this
year in the eradication of opium poppy. For example,
eradication in Helmand increased from 787 hectares in
2014 to 1,747 hectares in 2015.

It is important that we acknowledge the positive steps
that have been taken. We must endeavour to sustain and
strengthen hard-won progress where it has been made.
If we want to achieve sustainable progress, we need the
steadfast commitment and engagement of the Afghan
authorities and the international community. That also
means that, in the face of budgetary constraints and
competing global demands, Afghanistan's partners
provide the resources needed to deliver meaningful,
integrated and targeted support. We cannot afford to
do less.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Tanin for all his efforts and to welcome
him to the United Nations family.

