Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing this morning.

We meet here as ominous developments have
taken place in the Middle East. The atmosphere has
once again become toxic. Israel has halted peace talks.
Apparently, that ends United States Secretary of State
John Kerry's nine-month peace initiative. Israel is
pondering economic sanctions against Palestine. That
would definitely worsen the economic plight of the
Palestinian people. Palestine has announced that it is
considering all options to respond to the Israeli decision
to sever contact for talks. Palestinians have decided to
give priority to reconciliation and national unity. This
hiatus should not be treated as irreversible or a point
of no return. It should be seen as a pause and a time
for introspection. Talks, we would like to believe, are
halted, not abandoned.

We welcome the Palestinian initiative to forge
national unity. The talks between Palestine and Israel
are also a priority because without the peace process
there will be no lasting peace and stability. We agree
with Secretary Kerry's conclusion that leaders have to
make the compromises to forge ahead. The difficult
issues of final border arrangements, settlements and
release of prisoners will not be resolved away from the
negotiating table. That is the inexorable logic of the
two-State solution.

Pakistan calls for urgent steps to resuscitate and
renew the stalled peace talks. The considerable time
and political capital invested in the process should
not be frittered away. The cost of failure is huge. The
flare-up in Gaza last month and again last week gave a
glimpse of what a complete break-down might lead to.
That said, dialogue for the sake of dialogue, without
the political will and commitment to make difficult
choices, is neither desirable nor conducive to peace in
the region.

Pakistan condemns the storming of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound by Israeli extremists. The annexation
of Palestinian lands by the Israeli occupation forces is
illegal. The debate in the Israeli Knesset on annexing
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and provocative actions, such as
the disruption of Easter celebrations, undermine peace,
heighten tensions and further destabilize the region.
Pakistan supports continued supervision by the
Islamic Waqf of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in
occupied East Jerusalem, with a special role assigned
to Jordan. We call for a moratorium on settlements, the
release of detainees, a recommitment to meaningful and
substantive dialogue, and the lifting of the blockade in
Gaza. It is important that tensions be reduced and that
minimal trust be built for the early resumption of talks.

Peace, security, stability and sustainable economic
development in the Middle East depend directly on the
creation of an independent, viable and contiguous State
of Palestine, based on pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by side with Israel,
and with both sides recognizing each other's legitimate
rights. Israel must also withdraw from all Arab
territories, including Lebanon and the Syrian Golan.

Let me now turn to Syria. We welcome the progress
made so far in removing and destroying chemical
weapons in Syria and appreciate the cooperation
extended by the Syrian Government to the joint mission
of the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. We back Ms. Sigrid
Kaag's call for the removal of all chemical weapons
from Syria. While we share her concern over reports
about the use of chlorine gas as a weapon, the best
course of action is to investigate the reports about the
use of toxic chemicals to establish the facts beyond a
shadow of a doubt.

Let us not forget that every day conventional
weapons cause far more casualties than chemical
weapons. Killings are increasing and the number
of refugees and displaced persons is going up. The
Secretary-General has informed us that combatants
in Syria are not heeding this body's decision to give
humanitarian aid unfettered access. As a result, some
300,000 Syrians trapped in conflict zones continue to
be deprived of basic food and medicine. Worst of all,
the Geneva talks are in a state of limbo.

We call on all parties to the conflict in Syria,
and on nations that have special relations with them,
to come back to the negotiating table to find a long-
term political solution that respects the aspirations of
all Syrians. We also call on the parties to honour the
decisions taken by the Council in its resolution 2139
(2014) on humanitarian access. Syria should not be
pushed to the back burner because of other pressing
issues.

Finally, we condemn terrorist attacks in Syria,
including those that took place today. We offer our
deepest condolences to the people and families of the
victims in Syria.
