Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
important debate and to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I also
wish to thank the delegation of Uganda for the skill
and effectiveness with which it presided over our work
last month.

I welcome the broad participation in this meeting,
particularly on the part of the major troop-contributing
countries, and the presence of the force commanders in
the field. I also thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra and General Agwai for
their very clear briefings. I also associate myself with
the statement to be made shortly by my Swedish
colleague on behalf of the European Union.

Much has changed since the beginning of United
Nations peacekeeping and the establishment of the
earliest forces, such as United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization and the First United Nations
Emergency Force. The goals remain the same,
however. Unfortunately, many of the structural
difficulties also remain the same. Some of those
difficulties have even increased due to the number and
scope of United Nations operations.

The Security Council, which shoulders the
primary responsibility for peace and security, must
always strive to make responsible decisions that reflect
the desired goals and enable their effective fulfilment
as quickly as possible and in acceptable human and
financial conditions.

In any crisis situation, the operations we launch -
after having done our utmost to avoid doing so through
preventive action - must be carefully thought out and
constructed in the context of a comprehensive strategy
taking into account the specific nature of each crisis
and the complexities of its management, root causes
and settlement. Peacekeeping operations must be
structured around precise, clear and hierarchical
mandates and be sustainable in the long term. To that
end, they must enjoy the support of all Council
members and draw on adapted and sufficient financial,
human and technical resources. They must also be
supported by all the other peacekeeping components of
the system, be it the troop-contributing countries, the
primary financers of United Nations budgets and the
organs and agencies that, in the field or at
Headquarters, have a key role to play in ensuring the
consistency and effectiveness of our actions.

While most challenges are recurrent, many
solutions are equally so. As has already been
mentioned, a rereading of the Brahimi report, the
"Peace Operations 2010" report (A/60/696) or
statements released by the Council since 1994 shows

them to be as relevant as ever. Although no past
attempt at reform has been sufficient in and of itself,
all such attempts have been useful milestones in the
development of peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations record is impressive. Allow me to say -
solemnly, humbly and with restraint - that we can be
collectively proud of that record. Together, we have
learned from our failures and the tragedies of the past.
In short, we have assumed our responsibilities.

In that respect, I reiterate our admiration of and
gratitude to all United Nations personnel, particularly
all those civilian and military staff members who risk
their lives in the field every day.

Along with you, Sir, in January we launched a
common initiative to enhance the effectiveness of the
Security Council in peacekeeping. As we engage in our
first stocktaking, I would underscore two sources of
satisfaction.

First, we feel that the F rench-British initiative has
led to intense activity that we believe to have proven
extremely fruitful already. Reports, debates, seminars
and statements have abounded in recent months. The
unalloyed enthusiasm and earnest that have been
expressed have been commensurate with the stakes. We
must draw on the initial conclusions of this work so
that we can transcend rhetoric and change our working
methods as soon as possible.

The second source of satisfaction in recent
months is the fact that we have begun to change our
practices in a concrete way. We have set up quarterly
meetings with the Secretariat to take stock of the
overall difficulties encountered in peacekeeping. We
have enhanced our dialogue with the troop-contributing
countries, thanks in particular to the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations chaired by Japan. We have
begun to extend the so-called political/military
meetings operation by operation, and we have launched
the slow process of updating planning documents and
of extending the establishment of the benchmarks
necessary to ensure genuine follow-up for operations.
Many of these elements can be put in place with
ease; others with more difficulty. But changes are
occurring, and for that I would like to congratulate and
thank all our counterparts in the Secretariat,
particularly the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support, which have been able to
adapt to the new way of working, which we consider to
be the most effective, and to the new relationships that

the Security Council seeks to establish with all actors
in the system.

Much remains to be done, however. We are
preparing to adopt a statement that underscores the
challenges we face, of which I would like to highlight a
few. We need to further strengthen our strategic follow-
up of operations, while considering, inter alia, specific
ways of increasing the Council's military expertise. We
also need to ensure that the Secretariat can plan and
undertake operations in an increasingly effective
manner, particularly through adapted rules of
engagement.

We also need to deepen our thinking, particularly
through an open dialogue with troop-contributing
countries, non-governmental organizations and United
Nations specialized agencies on such sensitive issues
as the protection of civilians, combating violence
against women, especially sexual abuse, and
preventing the recruitment of child soldiers. We
recognize that if Blue Helmets are to be effective, they
must be able to take robust action, while taking into
account the risks to which such actions may sometimes
expose civilians.

We also need to enhance our work on resources
and budget performance, while ensuring that, when the
Council takes its decisions, it has a clear understanding
of their operational and financial impact. We must
continue to work to expand available capacities and
regularly review the strategy, balance, composition and
size of ongoing operations.

Lastly, we must enhance our capacity to
implement complex mandates. It is essential to
strengthen the interaction of the Security Council and
the Secretariat on questions concerning the police,
judicial and rule of law components of operations. That
will require us to prepare exit strategies as soon as we
begin to draft mandates, in particular with respect to
the economic, social and political recovery and
reconstruction of societies, which have often been
devastated by conflict. We know well that, if we wish
to establish lasting economic development, only the
rule of law and the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedom can ensure a permanent return to
peace.

We must work to ensure better integration of
these various components in New York, Geneva and
the field. From that standpoint, the implementation of
the conclusions on system-wide coherence is

fundamental. To accomplish all this, it is clear that the
Council should rely more on the Peacebuilding
Commission in its central component and its country-
specific configurations, with the specific aim of
serving as a focal point and venue for discussion
among all actors involved - the authorities of the
countries in conflict, members of the Council and the
General Assembly, troop-contributing and donor States,
senior officials of funds and programmes, and agency
representatives.

The momentum is under way. Our next meeting is
set for the end of 2009. Until then, the Council may
rest assured that France will spare no effort to ensure
that we make progress in the implementation of our
road map.

