Mr. Brown (Liberia): I thank the Security Council
for this opportunity to participate in the briefing.

Essentially, the defining question of the current
engagement of the Council is how and, importantly,
when can a transition from full peacekeeping operations
occur so that Liberia's progress and the success
achieved at such high costs in lives and treasure are not
unnecessarily risked and regrettably undermined. As
to the important question of how, a number of measures
have been recommended by the Secretary-General in
defining the possible mandate of a successor mission.
The Liberian Government finds those measures to be
largely favourable. In response to the critical question
of when, the Liberian Government is proposing an
extension through a period of one year. Only one more
year to continue the phased withdrawal. One more year
to enable our recovering and reforming institutions
to continue to stand up as United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) draws down. One more year of
the presence of UNMIL, which represents to many
Liberians a brand of confidence that would assist in
mitigating, if not deterring, the real risk of a disruption
during the country's most sensitive political period.
Only one more year of working together in what for
Liberia is a successful partnership to properly prepare
for a successor mission and a democratically elected
Government to continue the useful partnership and
build upon the progress we have already made.

We understand the many concerns associated with
our request for an extension. There are concerns about
increasing dependencies by national institutions on the
international community. There are concerns that a
request for an extension may become recurring. There
are concerns that the resources contributed to UNMIL
are needed elsewhere, including in more troubled
spots in Africa and around the world. Those truly are
reasonable concerns.

The failure of the Liberian State, which necessitated
the deployment of UNMIL, also occasioned the greatest
collapse in the productive capacity of any nation since
the Second World War * an estimated collapse of
more than 90 per cent. Corroded over time, national
institutions were not simply defaced and rendered
dysfunctional, they were effectively eviscerated.
Dwindling public confidence was altogether lost, and
hope in a democratic future was non-existent.

Of course we have come a long way, thanks
to the continued support of those present. That
notwithstanding, we intend to meet our target of an
8,000-strong police force, fully deployed all across
the country from its current strength of 5,100, and to
ensure a continuous commitment of the police and all
other security institutions to training, including on the
important element of safeguarding human rights and
improved professional standards. The nearly 2,600
immigration officers will be further strengthened with
the completion of training facilities in northern Liberia
with a training capacity of 1,000 officers. And we
are proud that our military is growing in professional
competence with support especially from the United
States and other friendly Governments, and with
mentoring from Economic Community of West African
States. Access to justice, which was non-existent in
many parts of the country, is improving. Our security
institutions are demonstrating signs of increasing
readiness to stand up as UNMIL stands down.

To have UNMIL, such a confidence brand, walk
with Liberia for only one more year through this last
mile is an added guarantee and priceless insurance,
which completes the United Nations Mission of keeping
the peace not only by the separation of belligerents,
but, importantly, also through a more meaningful
transformation of Liberia from a failed State to a
thriving democracy.

Indeed resources are finite. And yes, there are
growing needs in other parts of the world, including
on the African continent, for the resources of UNMIL.
We continue to consider the situation seriously and
take the needed steps within the limits of our means
to be removed from a dependence on UNMIL. And the
truth also is that the lack of resources, or the growing
need in other parts of the world for the resources of
UNMIL, must necessarily compel all of us - the
Liberian Government and the Security Council - to
bring this successful Mission to an end in a way that
may not require a return to the Security Council, nor
will the Security Council perceive a reason to redeploy
peacekeeping resources to Liberia in the foreseeable
future. In that regard, the potential risks, especially
pertaining to the conduct of unprecedented elections,
to which the recent assessment report (S/2016/968) of
the Secretary-General refers and the Peace Building
Commission alludes, should be avoided.

Whatever decision the Council takes, the truth
is that today Liberia is a better country - a more
peaceful and secure nation. We intend to keep it that
way. Again, we are grateful to the Security Council,
the other agencies of the United Nations as well as
our many bilateral and multilateral partners for their
continued support. We know that, because of their
priceless investments in Liberia's peace and security,
today Liberians are increasingly hopeful and imbued
with a growing desire and a more realistic impulse,
at home and across the diaspora, to be the builders of
our future and the masters of our destiny. We know we
were brought to our knees by the prolonged tragedies of
self-implosion. But no nation has been more desperate
to recover. Again, we were recently ravaged by Ebola,
and are currently shackled by an economy under severe
stress. But the resiliency of our Liberian character - our
will to overcome - must never be taken for granted.

Even so, Liberia cannot afford another major shock
to our recovery. We simply cannot afford to ignore
the possibility, however remote, of another risk to our
ongoing recovery efforts. One more year is all that we
believe we will need to deter the looming risk: one more
year to afford a new Administration of the Liberian
Government the security it would need to continue the
recovery and reform processes without the baggage of
an inherited sense of insecurity.

We are really at the end of a long walk together
through UNMIL. We know it has been difficult, but
it has been worthwhile. It has lifted spirits, rekindled
hope and brought a country back from the depths of
its own self-destruction. That may not have been the
mandate per se, but no one can deny that this United
Nations Mission has been successful. Let us now end it
as sustainably, as responsibly and as successfully as we
know we possibly can.

