Mr. Tiirk: I would like to start by expressing our
appreciation to members of the Security Council for
this very constructive and rich discussion, which
clearly expresses support for the efforts of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
the Secretary-General. We are particularly pleased by
the views expressed by the Ambassador of Papua New
Guinea, who gave us a very detailed presentation of his
Government's efforts, which are essential for the
success of this final phase of our joint effort. We are
equally pleased to hear renewed expressions of
commitment of the Government's of New Zealand,
Japan, Australia, Fiji and others in the region to
support the process in its final stage.

We shall convey all these expressions of support
and specific ideas for further work to Mr. Sinclair and
UNPOB. This is certainly something that belongs to
the most important aspects of his current work, which
requires the support of the international community.
That support was expressed in a unified and strong way
today, and we are very grateful for that.

This is the final phase of the process that was
started with the Lincoln Agreement and given a firm
framework in the Bougainville Peace Agreement of
2001. The discussion today has clearly shown the
centrality of the task of weapons disposal at the present
stage. I should like to say that the weapons disposal has
two aspects. One is technical - the disposal and
containment of weapons themselves - and the other is
political - the need for extensive consultations,
establishing a sense of security, promoting
reconciliation and creating an atmosphere conducive to
further weapons disposal. We thus have mutually
re-enforcing activities that are now being intensified.

These two aspects are also relevant to the process
of verification of weapons disposal, which consists of
declarations - and those declarations of the completed
stage II of weapons disposal have started to be made -
and consultations with community leaders, which are
equally important.

We believe that the approach which is currently
in place, namely the approach which is based on the
district-by-district process - the bottom-up approach
that the Ambassador of Papua New Guinea
mentioned - something that promises further success,
and we hope that that success will be achieved.

I have noted the remarks made by participants in
this discussion regarding the role of Mr. Francis Ona
and his group, as well as the view very broadly shared
in the Security Council that this group should not be
allowed to derail the process of normalization, and
especially the constitutional process. We shall convey
that broadly expressed view to Mr. Sinclair and invite
him to take it into account in his further consultations
with the parties in Bougainville.

Questions were asked regarding the thinking for
the period after the withdrawal of the Peace Monitoring
Group. I am very pleased to hear from the
representatives of the Governments constituting the
Peace Monitoring Group about their own ideas in that
regard and the fact that they remain committed and will
find new forms of support which will be adjusted to the
expected needs of the time in assisting the process to
move forward. There are various specific ideas that are
being discussed and which will be developed further as
the time of withdrawal approaches, including the
possibility of establishing a trust fund to finance the
extra activities and expertise that will be required, and
which will go beyond what the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) can provide. Such
specific ideas, of course, will have to be further
discussed. We shall report on them to the Security
Council in due course.

Finally, we are very pleased to hear renewed
commitments regarding the future sustainable
development of Bougainville, which is becoming a
more and more important aspect as the process of
disarmament and demobilization and reintegration
continues. You yourself, Mr. President, have spoken of
the need to pay particular attention to the question of
further support by the donors and to development
aspects. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) is already fully engaged. The mission that
recently visited the island has come with additional
ideas, which will be discussed, and the office of the
UNDP in the island is in daily contact with UNPOB
regarding various activities for post-conflict
stabilization.

We have also noted the wish of Council members
to present in due course specific, further information
about the process of disarmament and other related
aspects. We shall certainly brief the Council in due
course about specific timetables, benchmarks and
levels of achievement. We hope that the process which
is now under way will be completed successfully.

