Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): The progress report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
brings much good and encouraging news about the
ongoing political process in East Timor. It also brings
to the attention of the international community the need
for consistent and concerted action to ensure a
successful transfer of authority from UNTAET to the
new executive authority which will be set up after the
election. We commend the Secretary-General for his
report. We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, for his lucid
and comprehensive briefing. We join other delegations
in expressing our appreciation for his formidable and
most constructive work in East Timor. We are also
grateful for the briefing given to us this morning by
Mr. Ramos-Horta, member of the Transitional Cabinet
of East Timor responsible for Foreign Affairs.

The political development in East Timor seems to
be moving in the right direction, and the dream of
independence culminating in statehood for East Timor
is now only a matter of time. In the light of the
progressive infrastructural development that has taken
place during the past six months, and in view of the
strong commitment of both UNTAET and the East
Timorese to nation-building, we feel confident that the
forthcoming elections scheduled for 30 days from now
will proceed peacefully. We note with satisfaction that
the majority of parties have signed the pact of national
unity to carry out a peaceful political campaign and to
accept the outcome of the elections.

We are also pleased to note that the district
constitutional commissions are conducting hearings on
systems of government, basic rights and other issues
related to the constitution. It is important that the
population at large, especially civil society, be made to
feel that it is part of this important political process.
We hope that these consultations will lead to the
preparation of a constitution tailored to the needs and
legitimate aspirations of the East Timorese people.

We also welcome the news that various sectors of
the economy have generally seen improvements.
However, appropriate funding and proper planning are
still needed to ensure continued progress and
sustainability. The pressing issues of security,
resettlement of returnees and law and order need to be
addressed urgently. We urge the international
community to continue and to increase its assistance in
these areas.

My delegation appreciates the setting up of the
Working Group on the Post-UNTAET Planning in East
Timor, together with an Integrated Mission Task Force
in New York on the modality of international support
that would be required in East Timor after
independence. We believe that the Working Group
should take into consideration the findings of the inter-
agency security assessment team and, in the light of its
recommendations, suggest an appropriate plan of
action.

The positive developments in East Timor could
not have been possible without the active cooperation
of the Government of Indonesia. We urge the new
leadership in Indonesia to pursue its efforts to
implement all the measures called for by the Council in
its resolution 1319 (2000). We also appeal to the
Government of Indonesia to fully respect the
memorandum of understanding on cooperation in legal,
judicial and human rights matters, concluded on
6 April 2000 with UNTAET, especially section 9,
which provides for the transfer of persons for purposes
of prosecution.

The task lying ahead is not easy, but it is not
unattainable either. Bearing in mind the inexperience of
the various new departments, we cannot, at this stage,
afford an exit without strategy. The strategy is clear.
We need to prepare the East Timorese people to take
the responsibility for and the destiny of their newly
born State in their own hands. This can be possible
only if the Timorization process is accelerated in all
sectors, through capacity-building in specific sectors of
public finance, public administration, policing and
maintenance of law and order.

A sound and representative legislative system, an
effective and efficient administrative body and an
independent judiciary are fundamentals for a sustained
democratic society and political stability.

It is therefore extremely important to lay the
foundation for and to consolidate the democratic
institutions, which will ensure good governance and
rule of law, respect for human rights and an
independent judiciary in East Timor. It is equally
important that a massive campaign be undertaken to
educate the population at large as to their civic duties
and obligations and also their rights in a free and
democratic society.

Mauritius supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to adjust the international presence
in East Timor, bearing in mind the situation on the
ground in the period following elections, and we
reaffirm the need for a substantial international
presence in the country after independence as
recommended in resolution 1338 (2001).

The people of East Timor are on the eve of a new
era in the life of their country. It is extremely important
that they put aside all their differences and work
together in a spirit of national reconciliation in the
process of rebuilding their nation and shaping their
economy. Likewise, it is vital for the international
community to extend all the necessary assistance to the
country and its new administration.

