Ms. Jakubone (Lithuania): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of Latvia,
Estonia and my own country, Lithuania. We align
ourselves with the statement to be delivered on behalf
of the European Union and its member States.

We thank Japan for organizing this open debate,
which provides an important opportunity to better
understand the complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
his statement.

The global security environment has indeed changed
dramatically in recent years. Some would even argue
that the world is entering one of the most dangerous
chapters in decades. From the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism to transnational organized crime,
from climate change to energy and cybersecurity, our
collective inability to prevent and resolve conflicts is
giving rise to new threats and emergencies. Shocking
abuses of human rights, including Violations of women's
rights and the use of rape as a tool of war, exacerbate
existing instabilities and fuel new conflicts.

The sharp rise in military conflicts ranging from
those in Syria, Yemen, Libya and the Sahel to Russian
aggression in Ukraine is outstripping our ability to
cope with the consequences. Some of these conflicts
share the features of hybrid and proxy wars, and this is
what makes them intrinsically contemporary.
The complex and constantly changing nature of
non-conventional threats to international peace and
security demands innovative responses and action from
the international community. In this regard, we call
on all States to support the United Nations peace and
security reform, which aims to create a modernized
United Nations that is capable of addressing the
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security and acting more effectively in the
area of prevention.

While today's subject is vast and the issues are
many, let me focus on two priority issues for the Baltic
States: hybrid threats and cybersecurity.

From the weaponization of information and social
media to economic pressures and energy blackmail, to
crippling cyberattacks and conventional threats, hybrid
warfare is on the rise. Concerns regarding Russia's
interference in national election processes are not
limited to European countries alone. The multifaceted
nature of hybrid threats also encompasses the politically
motivated exploitation of critical infrastructure or even
the development of unsafe nuclear power plants on the
border with another country.

Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, being at the forefront
of hybrid threats, have undertaken a series of actions
both individually and collectively. Enhancing societal
resilience to hybrid threats is a priority for our nations.
The Baltic States strongly believe that increased
societal awareness, resilience-building and media
and information literacy can contribute to increased
preparedness to tackle hybrid threats. To this end, we
have initiated programmes aimed at helping society to
recognize propaganda and information warfare. We
are also strengthening our strategic communications
capabilities and working closely with the relevant
strategic communication units of the European Union
and NATO.

With regard to cyberthreats to international
peace and security, cyberspace constitutes a
complex environment ranging from Internet and
mobile communications to the security of critical
infrastructure. Today we accept that cyber has become
an integral part of a modern conflict landscape.
Increased cybercrime and politically motivated attacks
on electronic services mean that cybersecurity is more
important than ever before. In 2007, when Estonia
faced a series of cyberattacks - one of the earliest
Internet-era examples of cyberconflict - that was
not yet common knowledge. Those attacks brought
about an increased awareness of the need to improve
cybersecurity measures throughout the world.

Latvia and Lithuania have also experienced
politically motivated cyberattacks. We know from
experience that building partnerships is essential for
enhancing cyberresilience. Challenges in cyberspace
can be addressed only through an inclusive,
multi-stakeholder approach. Closer cooperation of the
public and private sectors as well as civil society is
Vital. All interested parties must make a joint effort to
ensure the security and resilience of the information and
communications infrastructure, focusing on prevention
and preparedness in order to develop effective and
coordinated mechanisms for reacting to increasingly
more complex cyberattacks and cybercrimes.

We believe that regional and subregional cooperation
is key to strengthening cybersecurity in critical
infrastructure. Our three countries have taken serious
steps to strengthen cybersecurity. Furthermore,
Lithuania has submitted an initiative to develop mutual
assistance in cybersecurity and cyber rapid-response
teams within the European Union's Permanent
Structured Cooperation on Security and Defence.

The complexity of hybrid and cyber threats clearly
calls for more complex and innovative responses from
the international community. The very nature of hybrid
threats makes clear that conventional security is not
enough: human, societal, environmental and energy
security are equally important in order to maintain
peace and security in the contemporary world. Hybrid
and cyberthreats are not going anywhere. They are
here to stay as part of modern warfare. We therefore
encourage countries to share best practices and lessons
learned in tackling such threats, both regionally
and internationally.

In conclusion, the Baltic States remain committed
to broadening their understanding of complex drivers
and threats to global security, and to working to find
relevant and effective responses to challenges to
international peace and security.

