Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on Germany's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month, a month in which we will
consider issues of vital importance to the international
community. We would also like to express our high
appreciation to Ambassador De La Sabliere and the
French delegation for the exemplary manner in which
France conducted the presidency of the Council last
month.

As we consider the results of the Berlin
conference, we would first like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his very
comprehensive, cogent and persuasive briefing to the
Council this morning. We would also like to thank the
German Government for hosting last week's
conference, together with Afghanistan, Japan and the
United Nations. Your own statement to the Council,
Sir, has outlined the major achievements at Berlin. The
Foreign Minister of Pakistan participated actively in
the Berlin conference, and we are most satisfied with
its outcome.

Pakistan has an abiding interest in the early return
of peace and stability in Afghanistan. We are linked to
Afghanistan by history, geography and faith, and we
believe that we share a common destiny. We therefore
fully subscribe to the aspirations of the Afghan
Government and President Karzai for peace, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan and its neighbourhood.

The Berlin conference reaffirmed the
commitment of participants to rebuilding and
reforming the political, social and economic structures
of Afghanistan, with the aim of creating lasting peace,
stability and economic development and with a view to
offering all Afghans, in an equitable manner, tangible
prospects for a brighter future. The process that was
initiated at Bonn will now continue beyond the present
transition process in Afghanistan through to a lasting
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community.

While security is ultimately the responsibility of
the Afghans themselves, it cannot be achieved in the
immediate future without the active military and
political support of the international community. We
therefore endorse the commitment in the Berlin
declaration to the continuation of international military
assistance until such time as the new Afghan security
forces are sufficiently constituted and operational. We
are also pleased with the decision by NATO, as
mentioned in the Berlin declaration, to expand the
mission of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) by establishing additional provincial
reconstruction teams. We endorse providing additional
such teams. However, we continue to encourage a
larger presence of, and direct role for, ISAF in
Afghanistan's security.

The Berlin declaration also stresses the need
vigorously to implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
with the completion of its first phase by the end of June
2004. The work plan of the Afghan Government,
endorsed by the Berlin conference, also provides the
concrete steps that the Afghan Government will have to
take not only with respect to DDR but also in terms of
reforms in the Afghan national army and police and
reforms in the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of
Defence and the National Directorate for Security that
ensure national representation. Along with progress in
extending the authority of the Afghan central
Government, these are measures which deserve the
continued involvement and support of the international
community.

The Berlin declaration identifies drug production
and trafficking as a serious threat to the rule of law and
development in Afghanistan as well as to international
security. The conference endorsed the concrete steps
that the Afghan Government plans to take as part of its
work plan for implementing its national drug control
strategy. We also attach importance to the
comprehensive Declaration on Counter-Narcotics
signed in Berlin by Afghanistan and its six immediate
neighbours. As one of the signatories, Pakistan looks
forward to working with our partners to strengthen our
collective efforts to control the drug menace. The drug
problem in Afghanistan is not only an Afghan problem;
it affects us all. It is therefore imperative that the
Afghans and the international community - in the
words of the Berlin declaration - "do everything -
including the development of economic alternatives -
to reduce and eventually eliminate this threat".

Pakistan has welcomed the decision by President
Karzai to hold presidential and parliamentary elections
in September this year. In its work plan the Afghan
Government has welcomed the support of the
Governments of Pakistan and Iran to allow the
participation of refugees in their countries in the
elections. Pakistan has allocated $5 million for that
purpose and is extending full cooperation to the
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in this regard. We hope that the
registration of voters will accurately reflect the ethnic
and regional balance of Afghanistan's population and
its ethnic mosaic. That is essential to the legitimacy
and credibility of the entire election process.

Peace will not come to Afghanistan without
development. This must remain the focus of the
international community. We welcome the pledges
made at Berlin for $8.2 billion in reconstruction
assistance to Afghanistan over a three-year period.
Afghanistan is a landlocked country, but it can also
emerge as a transit route linking South Asia and
Central Asia. It is therefore essential for Afghanistan's
economic recovery and development to integrate this
country with its two neighbouring regions. In that
regard, we encourage the international community to
support the construction of roads, as well as gas and oil
pipelines and other trade links connecting Afghanistan
with those two regions. Regional economic integration
would mutually benefit Afghanistan and all its
neighbours.

Pakistan has always supported, and continues to
support and participate in, President Karzai's
endeavour to build State institutions, which are an
essential prerequisite for the success of the political
and reconstruction processes in Afghanistan. Our
participation in Berlin has been a strong testament to
that commitment. We strongly urge the international
community to continue to provide the necessary
assistance to help the Afghan Government meet its
goals, especially those outlined in its work plan.

Finally, we hope that the spirit of Berlin does not
flag or diminish over time. Afghanistan will need
years, if not decades, of political and economic support
and engagement. Berlin is only the beginning of the
post-Bonn process of the international community's
commitment to Afghanistan. We who represent the
international community here must now redouble our
collective efforts and remain committed to peace,
stability, reconstruction and development in
Afghanistan in the long term.

