Mr. McLay (New Zealand): The recent escalation
of violence in Ukraine is a very serious threat to what
were at best, even before that escalation, fragile steps
towards a peace. The Under-Secretary-General's
report that there is a mounting alarm at the situation,
particularly the humanitarian situation, is one with
which we can only agree. New Zealand therefore
continues to be deeply concerned about this conflict,
and particularly its implications for core principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, such as territorial
integrity and the prohibition of the threat or the use of
force. The conflict has so far led to an unacceptable loss
of life, especially that of civilians. More than 1 million
people have been displaced from their homes, and they
now face a very harsh winter.

Examples of the impact of this tragedy on innocent
citizens abound. The destruction within the past
24 hours of a major bridge into Luhansk, while no doubt
a military objective, also impedes desperately needed
humanitarian relief, and that is totally unacceptable.
We urge therefore close cooperation among all relevant
parties, including the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), to provide urgently
needed humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
populations.

It is a particular concern that the conflict continues
despite the clear and unequivocal commitments
recorded in the Minsk protocol and memorandum. We
call on all parties to fully implement their commitments
under those agreements, including an immediate and
full cessation of all hostilities, with a clear definition
of the line of contact between the parties. We also
call for the continued release of detainees. These
conditions must come into effect immediately to allow
the resumption of productive diplomatic discussions,
especially the planned summit-level consultations. And
those consultations are now of great urgency. It should
be clear to all ofus that this crisis cannot be resolved by
the use of force. A sustainable political solution must
be found.

We continue to read with alarm reports indicating
the involvement of Russian troops and materiel in the
conflict, and urge both Russia and the pro-Russian
separatists to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. We also call on Russia to use its
influence, as its representative just told us it has done
before, to ensure that pro-Russian separatists fully
respect the ceasefire.

We welcome the mediating role of the OSCE,
and we encourage it to continue its efforts to end the
fighting. However, we also believe that this Security
Council must live up to its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations. It has already been
pointed out that in 2014, the Council met no fewer than
27 times to discuss the situation in Ukraine; but so far,
we have seen very little impact from all of that high
level attention.

And so it is that at this the 28th meeting New
Zealand affirms that the Council is properly seized
of the matter and calls for a more purposeful Council
engagement with a real focus on supporting efforts to
negotiate a resolution to the conflict. Only then will we
see tangible outcomes for those most affected - the
people of eastern Ukraine.

