Mr. Egeland (spoke in French): Five years ago,
the Security Council adopted resolution 1296 (2000).
Since then, the Council has been increasingly seized by
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Some
measures have been taken to respond to the problems
identified. Several Member States involved in conflicts
have ratified and applied the necessary conventions,
established protection training programmes for their
armies, and developed policies and national legislative
systems. Despite that progress, the challenges
associated with protecting civilians remain numerous
and complex.

(spoke in English)

Not enough progress, in today's fast-changing
environment, has been made to keep pace with the
challenges that civilians face in conflict situations. The
disturbing rise in sectarian violence in Iraq - with
almost daily, deadly suicide bombing attacks in May
and June - starkly illustrate the extreme vulnerability
of civilians targeted in direct terrorist attacks or caught
in crossfire. The number of media-reported civilian
deaths for the first quarter of this year is double that of
last year. As many as 1,000 civilians may have been
killed since April.

The brutal and indiscriminate tactics of terror
continue to be deliberately employed in the world's
most protracted protection crises, where violence has
become deeply entrenched. Continuing hostilities in
Ituri in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
unchallenged use of sexual violence, re-recruitment of
children by the Mayi-Mayi, and continuing attacks
against the United Nations and humanitarian agencies
constitute intractable protection crises that have
demanded more robust peacekeeping. I am alarmed by
deepening xenophobia in the western Cote d'Ivoire,
incited by hate propaganda which fuels increasing
violence. While the number of large-scale attacks on
civilians in the Sudan has decreased, grave protection
concerns persist. Continued attacks on civilians, an
absence of commitment from the Sudanese
Government to protect its civilians, and limited
capacity on the ground compound the challenge of
protection in Darfur.

Imagine the quality of life for those who are
caught in those cycles of violence and living in
constant terror. That has an enduring impact on
individuals and tears the very fabric of society. Such
endemic violence cannot continue. We have a
responsibility to find better solutions to those
intractable situations.

Maoist insurgency and stringent Government
response have led to a rapid deterioration of the
situation in Nepal, plunging the country into deep
crisis. According to Government sources, 659 civilians
have been killed in the past six months and summary
executions, extrajudicial killings, illegal detentions and
disappearances have significantly increased. Prompt
action is essential to prevent that emergent protection
crisis from becoming entrenched. I welcome the
increased human rights monitoring undertaken by our
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

I previously presented to the Security Council a
lO-point plan as a means to accelerate action. The plan
remains valid today. Let me here highlight some key
areas where the need to take action is particularly
urgent to ensure better protection for civilians trapped
in conflict.

My first concern is the frequency and scale of
deliberate displacement both within and across borders.
Up to 90 per cent of the entire population in the
districts of Gulu, Pader and Kitgum in Northern
Uganda now live in camps. In Darfur, attacks against
villages continue and displacement is still a tactic of
war. Continuous attacks on civilians in Colombia have
contributed to the displacement of an estimated 700
people a day in recent months.

Millions of internally displaced persons,
subjected to violence and abuse, and with no real place
of safety, invariably live in deplorable conditions in
camps. The combined effect of insecurity, inadequate
resources, weak Government capacity and limited
strategic response has created a crisis of displacement
in Liberia, where both camp conditions and support for
return and reintegration are grossly inadequate. In
Nepal, stringent criteria for registration of the
internally displaced has resulted in most of the
estimated 200,000 who have fled their homes not being
formally recognized as displaced and not able to access
assistance. Providing effective protection from
violence and appropriate material support to the
displaced remains an unresolved challenge.

We must do more to prevent and end
displacement as quickly as possible. Whereas progress
has been made in refugee return, we are not equally
expedient in promoting return of the internally
displaced. We must provide better physical security.
Humanitarian presence is not enough. The creation of a
secure environment for displaced populations should
be a primary objective of peacekeeping operations. We
need strategic deployment around camps to provide
area security for the displaced; and we need it in areas
of unrest to prevent new displacement and in areas of
origin to facilitate voluntary and safe return. Both
peacekeeping missions and regional organizations have
an important role to play. In Darfur, the African Union
provides a prime example of the positive impact even a
relatively small security presence can bring. The
provision of protection against violence needs to be
incorporated into the concept of peacekeeping
operations and clear guidance developed. The needs of
displaced people must also be met in a more
sustainable manner.

Under the leadership of the Secretary-General's
reform process, a series of steps will be proposed to
provide greater clarity on the roles and responsibilities
of humanitarian agencies to ensure more effective and
accountable action on behalf of the displaced. There
must be better recognition of the status and the needs
of those who are displaced, requiring greater awareness
of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.

The recurrent brutal use of sexual violence is
arguably one of the worst global protection challenges
due to its scale, prevalence and profound impact. Often
ostracized by their communities, survivors have to
battle with the physical injuries, trauma and stigma of
such violence for the rest of their lives. Although we
repeatedly condemn such violence, it persists virtually
unchallenged. Far from making general progress, in too
many places we have regressed. We have information
about more and more women being attacked, and
younger and younger children are becoming victims of
these atrocities.

I could provide a devastating catalogue of
violations, but let me highlight just two cases where
sexual violence is at its worst. In North Kivu, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a local non-
governmental organization just reported more than
2,000 cases of gender-based violence for the month of
April alone. An estimated 50 per cent of those acts
were committed against minors. The United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) estimates that there are at least
25,000 cases of sexual violence a year in North Kivu
alone - just one region of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The cultural breakdown and the
disintegration of the line of command in the armed
forces has resulted in a culture of violence in which
sexual violence has become endemic. If this is not
stopped, such violence will have terrible long-term
ramifications for Congolese society, threatening future
peace and stability. The United Nations has recognized
this as one of our highest priorities. More forceful
action should have been taken earlier. The disarmament
of militias is necessary but not sufficient action.
MONUC will now focus on re-establishing an effective
chain of command and control of the regular military
forces to make them more accountable for their
behaviour.

Women and girls are also at great risk in Darfur,
where rape is systematically used as a weapon of
warfare, with villages terrorized and victims targeted
as they collect firewood. Medecins sans Frontieres has
reported treating 500 survivors of sexual violence in
just four months. We believe that this represents only a
fraction of the total number of victims. The impact of
those abhorrent acts is compounded by the failure of
the Sudanese Government to acknowledge the
magnitude of the problem. Not only are the Sudanese
authorities failing to provide effective physical
protection, they are inhibiting access to treatment.
Victims are publicly castigated, and some have been
imprisoned. Unmarried pregnant women have been
treated as criminals, arrested and subjected to brutal
treatment by police, thus becoming victims yet again.
Both survivors of sexual violence and non-
governmental organization staff providing assistance
are being harassed and intimidated by the authorities.
This must stop.

We must redouble our efforts to bring such
atrocities to a halt. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) will have a significant impact once it has
demonstrated that such crimes will not go unpunished.
However, the endemic nature of the problem will be
effectively addressed only through the restoration of
effective national judicial systems and a political
commitment at the local level to bring perpetrators to
account.

Peacekeeping operations also make a difference.
Sexual violence is used as a weapon of war and
demands an immediate response through the provision
of more effective protection from violence in areas
where women and children are most at risk.

Child abductions, the recruitment and use of child

soldiers, and the denial of access to vital services have
a profound impact on children. Although these issues
have been raised many times before, children continue
to be appallingly exploited and abused in conflict
situations. Raids on camps and villages and abductions
of children for recruitment purposes have multiplied
once again in northern Uganda in recent months. In
Liberia, re-recruitment of former child combatants is
fuelling ongoing conflict in Cote d'Ivoire, pointing to a
basic failure in reintegration efforts. It is critical that
we invest more in getting reintegration right. A less
visible but equally profound protection concern for all
children affected by conflict is lack of access to the
most basic services, such as education and health care.
Without adequate protection, children are at risk
of recruitment, trafficking and other forms of
exploitation and abuse. We must develop more
effective approaches to protect children affected by
conflict. A first point of strengthened action is to
provide more effective community- based reintegration
support that facilitates the return of all children to
normal civilian life. Special provisions must be made
for former child combatants, child mothers, abductees
and all other children associated with armed groups to
break cycles of violence and stop situations of
exploitation and abuse.

The reintegration needs of children must also be
more explicitly addressed in the peace process. All
parties should be made aware of their responsibilities
to protect children, including a commitment to stop
their re-recruitment. The needs of children demand that
we place the delivery of basic services, especially
education, at the heart of reintegration efforts.
Education is critical in providing a normalizing
environment that offers real alternatives to violence,
laying the foundation for a child's future.

Humanitarian access and the interrelated issue of
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
continue to be prominent concerns. Blatant attacks on
humanitarian staff continue to jeopardize our ability to
operate in areas where humanitarian assistance is most
needed. Since my December briefing, 13 humanitarian
staff have been killed or kidnapped in multiple
incidents targeting international agencies in
Afghanistan. Similarly, in Darfur at least five
humanitarian staff have been killed and scores
detained. We cannot tolerate the targeting by armed
groups of impartial humanitarian workers. Nor can we
accept the disturbing trend of humanitarian staff being
kidnapped for ransom and commercial gain, as we have
seen in Afghanistan and other countries. Stronger
action must be taken for their safety. The entire
delivery of relief services to millions in need is at
stake.

A key objective of peacekeeping missions should
be the creation of secure environments to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, safeguard
humanitarian staff and protect essential services.
Protection concerns should be incorporated into
concepts of operations so that the provision of area
security can be better linked to humanitarian priorities.
I welcome the more robust peacekeeping being
developed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where MONUC is using the protection of civilians
agenda as an overall concept to guide operations. We
need to develop appropriate guidance which maximizes
the capacity to provide physical protection while
upholding humanitarian principles and safeguarding
humanitarian space.

As I have underscored before, tackling impunity
lies at the heart of these protection concerns. To date,
other collective efforts to bring perpetrators of violence
against civilians to account have been glaringly
inadequate. The International Criminal Court (ICC),
however, promises to usher in a new era of greater
accountability, and I applaud the Security Council for
supporting that important endeavour. Investigations
and the process of indictments in Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Darfur should
signal a climate in which impunity will no longer be
tolerated. It is important that the proceedings of the
ICC create greater awareness amongst all warring
factions of their respective culpability and of the fact
that they are not beyond the law. At the same time, we
must remain aware of the potential impact of such legal
action on humanitarian operations, including the
potential for reprisals against humanitarian staff.

For real progress to be made, impunity must also
be tackled at the local level. The ICC will never
obviate the need for local justice. It is critical that
efforts be made to support national capacity to protect
through local law enforcement, judicial systems and
security sector reform. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Liberia, for example, the missions are
working to support local justice systems. In this regard,
the increasing attention of the Security Council to rule
of law issues, particularly through the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, is welcome. At the same
time, such capacity to support the establishment of the
rule of law and local judicial structures needs to be
developed in a more systematic and sustainable manner
across the United Nations system.

As I have outlined, peacekeeping operations are
critical to establishing secure conditions which provide
protection from violence. That objective should be
explicitly articulated in all peacekeeping mandates. It
is essential to define the protection responsibilities of
peacekeeping operations and to develop appropriate
guidance and doctrine to support that role. It is
important to ensure that humanitarian space is
appropriately preserved and human rights and
humanitarian principles upheld.

Similarly, the African Union in Darfur clearly
illustrated the critical role that regional and
intergovernmental organizations have to play in terms
of strengthening protection response. It is important
that they engage more proactively as protection
partners, develop common approaches and incorporate
internationally agreed standards in their operations. My
Office has developed a work plan which will seek to
support regional organizations in taking this forward.
The work plan will be presented at the forthcoming
sixth high-level meeting between the Secretary-
General and heads of regional and other
intergovernmental organizations, at which the
protection of civilians in armed conflict will be a key
agenda item. It is critical that the international
community support regional organizations in this
regard.

There are areas where action can be strengthened
immediately for civilians in the crossfire. If our
humanitarian appeals received more predictable
funding, action would immediately be strengthened for
the vulnerable, and peace and security would be
advanced in many local communities. We still are
badly underfunded in some of the worst protection
crises. In Sudan, only 33 per cent of overall funding
requirements have been received, with just 5 per cent
of specific protection activities funded. Similarly, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo only 35 per cent
of requirements have so far been met, with just 1 per
cent of the specific protection activities covered. The
situation is still worse in Cote d'Ivoire, where civilians
are abused, killed and raped every day, and where we
still have only 30 per cent of overall funds and where
we have received no funding for the protection projects
in the appeal. How can we possibly expect to enhance
protection and address the root causes of conflict if we
do not have the means to do so? Earlier this month I
sent a list of the most underfunded emergencies and
protection crises in Africa to the Group of Eight
countries in preparation for their summit and asked for
their leadership and support. I will do the same with
the European Union. I hope for a positive response.
Some of the countries where protection is most needed
are countries where protection cannot effectively be
delivered, due to the lack of resources and support.

Humanitarian action alone cannot resolve
protection challenges. What is needed is a holistic
response that brings the political, security and
humanitarian agendas together. We must ensure that
one aspect of support is not implemented at the
expense of another. If regional organizations are to take
on more prominent roles in providing regional security,
they must be appropriately resourced. Similarly, if
States are to properly fulfil their responsibilities they
must be appropriately supported by the international
community.

Finally, we need to develop more systematic
reporting to the Security Council to facilitate its
deliberations and ensure that protection concerns are
more fully reflected in its proceedings. Under the
guidance of the Executive Committee on Humanitarian
Affairs, efforts are focused on establishing criteria and
indicators, not to create extensive lists of violations but
to generate current overviews and trend analysis to
better inform the Council and strengthen decision-
making and response at the field level. The reporting
mechanism will focus on the following areas of
concern: general protection violations, including
killing, mutilations and abductions; humanitarian
access; protection of women and children, including
incidents of sexual violence and recruitment;
protection of displaced populations; safety and security
of humanitarian personnel; compliance with
international norms and humanitarian principles;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programming and mine action; and underfunded and
neglected emergencies. Work to advance this initiative
will now focus on developing appropriate
methodologies for gathering this information. I will
provide an update on this initiative in my next briefing.

I have outlined key protection challenges and
highlighted where greater practical action must be
taken. These actions must be taken now if we are to
resolve protracted protection crises and to prevent
emerging situations from becoming entrenched.
Undoubtedly, progress has been made in some
situations, where we have seen changes on the ground.
But it is not enough. There are gaps in our response
which I believe the Security Council can and must
address for a better future. My hope is that by the end
of the year, with strengthened commitment from
Member States, reinforced by the Millennium Summit
Declaration, we will have a stronger basis for common
action.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
other Council members for your continued interest and
concern and for keeping the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on the Council's agenda.

