Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the three Chairs and express my
appreciation for their briefings.

Since our last public meeting on 20 July
(S/PV.5229), we have had no respite from acts of
terror, which have been committed one after another, in
Egypt, Iraq, Turkey, Sri Lanka and Bali, Indonesia. My
delegation would like to express its sincere
condolences to the victims and their families and its
hopes for early recovery for those who suffered injuries
in those attacks. Terrorism must never be condoned,
and my Government strongly condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations.

In adopting the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), Member States
debated for long hours over the counter-terrorism
measures to be pursued by the United Nations.
Although those negotiations were difficult, they are
now being followed up by negotiations on the draft
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism
in hopes of reaching an agreement. We believe it is
essential that the Security Council also continue to
develop an effective counter-terrorism policy by
deepening the cooperation among the counter-
terrorism-related committees.

There are three points I would like to focus on
today that may help to ensure further effectiveness in
the work of the three Committees.

First, as I emphasized on the occasion of the last
briefings, there can be no question about the
importance of establishing counter-terrorism
prevention measures. From that perspective, it is worth
mentioning that Council resolution 1617 (2005),
adopted on 29 July, strongly urges all Member States to
implement the Financial Action Task Force's (FATF)
Forty Recommendations on Money Laundering and the
FATF Nine Special Recommendations on Terrorist
Financing. On the basis of resolution 1617 (2005), we
also have seen progress in cooperation between
Interpol and the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee, with the General Assembly of Interpol
recently approving this matter. We expect that
information accumulated by Interpol can thus be
further utilized in order to prevent terrorist activities.
In addition, resolution 1617 (2005) encourages further
improvement in the Consolidated List of the Sanctions
Committee. It is therefore vital to ensure that the List
be utilized effectively within each Member State. We
also find it of great significance that Council resolution
1624 (2005), aiming at the prevention of incitement to
terrorist acts - an area not covered previously - was
adopted by the leaders at the Security Council summit
last month.

Secondly, in order to build the counter-terrorism
capacity of Member States, it is crucial to accelerate
the efforts to strengthen the role of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). We need to devise ways
to facilitate the provision of technical assistance
requested by Member States through the CTC to build
their counter-terrorism capacity. At present, with the
assessment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the CT C is working to
identify the technical assistance needs of Member
States, and we expect that the information on those
needs will be relayed to the donor community in a
systematic manner so as to ensure that technical
assistance is actually provided to the States requiring
it.

Specifically, we believe assistance could be
provided more efficiently if the CTC, with its
information-gathering and analytical capacity, could
provide additional information on what kinds of
assistance donors should focus on in those cases in
which donor States and organizations are currently
identifying needs through individual efforts. Japan
would like the CTC to devise ways and means to make
the CTC analysis clearer to the donor community so
that coordination between donors and recipients can be
closer and thus strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States. In this
connection, establishing a structure for closer contact
with the Counter-Terrorism Action Group and
international, regional and sub-regional organizations
would be an effective step. We also expect that during
the visits to States, contacts with regional organizations
and others in addition to the Governments will be
enhanced.

Thirdly, in the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
examination of national reports is in the final stage,
and we welcome the fact that second reports are being
submitted by some Member States. It is our view that
from this point forward the Committee should focus
more on the issue of technical assistance. The mandate
of the Committee is expected to expire at the end of
April next year, but many tasks still remain to be
accomplished by the Committee. It is critical that we
have an efficient work programme, bearing in mind the
limited time remaining.

We need to enrich the activities of the three
Committees, and from that standpoint, in addition to
the experts working for the 1540 Committee, we
welcome that the experts and new members of both the
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee and the CTED are now operating
in full force, and we look forward to their active role.

My Government will continue to extend its full
cooperation for the work of the three Committees so
that the Security Council will be able to further
strengthen its activities in the fight against terrorism.

