Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Special Representative

ll-33372
Lamberto Zannier for his work. We also thank the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for its work, including its promotion
of closer relations among communities and of
interreligious contact as a strategy for long-term
security. I also thank Mr. Jeremie and Mr. Hoxhaj for
their statements, and I congratulate Mr. Hoxhaj on his
appointment.

Colombia sees the dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade as an encouraging step towards finding
lasting solutions to their joint issues, and we welcome
the role of the Mission in facilitating interaction. We
therefore welcome the progress on technical issues in
bilateral talks held in Brussels, such as property law,
telecommunications, regional trade and freedom of
movement. In this context, we consider the Security
Council's proactive support for the dialogue to be
constructive, in the belief that such dialogue is the
basis for any lasting resolution of the differences
between Serbia and Kosovo.

We reiterate our concern about the complaints of
inhuman treatment of persons and illicit trafficking in
human organs, and we agree with those speakers who
have affirmed that a thorough, impartial and
independent investigation into the grave accusations is
essential. In this context, we call for the investigation
into the alleged crimes to begin as soon as possible.
Likewise, we believe that if such investigations are to
succeed, they must include an adequate witness
protection programme and the cooperation of all
parties involved.

The Secretary-General's report on UNMIK
(S/2011/281) notes that, during the reporting period, a
number of people, including public officeholders, were
arrested by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) for alleged war crimes. In such
circumstances, my delegation believes it necessary to
call for the cooperation of all parties involved and all
the accused at all stages of inquiry, not only to bring
investigations to a close and to punish the guilty, but
also to strengthen legal institutions and respect for the
rule of law.

We support a regional approach to addressing
problems between the parties, and especially urge the
involvement of the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
reconciling Pristina and Belgrade. Colombia supports
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo aimed at promoting a favourable
political, social and economic atmosphere in that
country, leading to peace and stability in the Balkans
sufficient to hold peaceful and transparent presidential
elections in the fall of 2012.

