Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I thank all
the briefers for their important briefings today. As this
is the last time during its term on the Security Council
that Bolivia will be speaking in an open meeting on the
subject that brings us together, I reaffirm my country's
commitment to the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

On behalf of my delegation, I underscore the major
democratic commitment that the people of Afghanistan
have shown in holding the 20 October parliamentary
elections, in which the people participated in a
disciplined manner. Despite several incidents that
could have affected security, they did not prevent
Afghan women and men from going to the polls, as
planned by the Independent Election Commission. We
are pleased to note that, according to the Independent
Election Commission, during the three days of voting,
4,812 polling stations opened and received an estimated
4.2 million voters. Turnout was highest in the provincial
capitals. We stress in particular that, according to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1092), 30 per
cent of the voters were women.

Without any doubt, the history that is being
rewritten by the people of Afghanistan is marked to a
large extent by their willingness to build a democratic
and secure State fully linked to its neighbours, the
region of Central Asia and the rest of the world for
the sake of its development. We believe, however,
that, in order to achieve that goal, there needs to be a
greater inclusion of women in decision-making at the
Government level and in the economy of Afghanistan.
In that regard, we are optimistic about the clear sign
of democratic commitment shown by Afghan citizens,
especially given that next year - more precisely on
19 April 2019 - presidential elections are scheduled to
be held. We hope that the violent actions and terrorist
attacks that blur the arduous path leading towards a
consolidated democracy in Afghanistan will end.
We would be remiss if we did not express our deep
concern about the high number of civilian deaths this
year, the large majority of which resulted from terrorist
attacks. The statistics provided by the UNAMA report
on the protection of civilians show that there is a clear
intention on the part extremist armed groups to target
civilians in highly populated areas. We regret that there
were 8,050 civilian casualties between January and
September, which resulted in 2,798 deaths and 5,252
injured. In that regard, we categorically reject the
violent acts perpetrated by extremist armed groups,
which, through the use of improvised explosive
devices, have led to 1,065 deaths and 2,569 injured. We
were saddened that the violence, particularly during
the 20 October parliamentary elections, resulted in
approximately 425 civilian casualties - the greatest
number of casualties in a single day for 2018. In that
regard, we join the Secretary-General in his call on all
parties to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
and to stop such attacks directed against civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

Bolivia welcomed the outcome of the Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan held on 27 and
28 November, which was organized by the Government
of Afghanistan and the United Nations. It renewed the
partnership and cooperation between the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community to
achieve Afghan peace, prosperity and self-reliance. We
also express our satisfaction with the communique that
resulted from the Geneva Conference and acknowledged
and reaffirmed the participants' commitment to an
Afghan-led and -owned peace process with the full and
meaningful participation of women.

Lastly, Bolivia stresses that there is no military
solution to the situation in Afghanistan. We will add
our support to any initiative aimed at fostering an
inclusive dialogue that is framed within respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of that country.

