The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing. We welcome
Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali, to
today's meeting.

We support Bamako's efforts to normalize the
situation in Mali. We note that in the past few months
the process of implementing the 2015 Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has somewhat
accelerated. The mixed patrols have finally been
deployed to Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu and the processes
for the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants are continuing.
There have been no significant violations in the
preparations for the upcoming 29 July presidential
elections. In that regard, we urge all Malian stakeholders
to refrain from provocative action and work together in
order to ensure that they go off peacefully.

However, there are still many reasons to be
concerned. The geographic scope of terrorist and
extremist activity has significantly expanded and
we are seeing inter-ethnic clashes. The authorities'
presence in many areas of central and northern Mali
is still extremely limited, and unfortunately people's
basic social needs there are not being met, while the
humanitarian situation in the country is close to the
crisis levels of 2012. In such circumstances there is
nothing for the local young people to do besides joining
the ranks of terrorist or criminal groups.

We have carefully read the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in Mali (S/2018/541) and the
independent strategic review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). In general, we agree with their
views and conclusions. Given the fact that in five years
the crisis in Mali has not been resolved despite the
peacekeeping presence there, we have to reconsider the
current approach. We agree with the strategic review's
assessment that it is unlikely that the situation in the
country can be normalized by military means alone.
We must focus on political mechanisms that can be
developed and implemented by the Malians themselves.
The only way to resolve the country's numerous
complex issues is for its citizens themselves to play a
direct leading role in the processes, which of course
need international and regional support. If it is backed
by the Malians themselves, we believe the strategic
review's idea of a pact for peace could be a basis for
making progress.

We also support the Secretary-General's proposal
to review the priority areas of MINUSMA's work
with a view to ensuring that it can fulfil its political
tasks. First, however, the process should be gradual,
and secondly, it should not interfere with the Mission's
task of protecting the civilian population and helping
to re-establish the national security forces. The issue
of supplying the Mission with material and technical
resources, including helicopters, is also very urgent,
and we ask the countries that have made respective
commitments to fulfil them as soon as possible.

It will be difficult to achieve a settlement in Mali
without normalizing the situation in the region as a
whole, while the situation in the country is a significant
factor for security in Africa in general. We support
the concrete steps taken by the Group of Five for the
Sahel to establish their Joint Force in order to combat
terrorism and organized crime, and we hope it will be
fully deployed as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali.

