Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
the situation in the Middle East. This meeting once
again demonstrates our joint commitment to addressing
a very important issue of international peace and
security, namely the question of Palestine. I also wish
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement.

The Middle East peace process began 17 years
ago in Madrid on the basis of United Nations
resolutions and the principle of land for peace. It was
launched officially between the Palestinian and Israeli
parties 15 years ago in Washington, with the signing of
the Oslo Accords, and was revitalized once again with
so much hope and so many expectations last November
in Annapolis.
Over the last two decades or so, we have seen so
much hope and so many expectations, but also so much
frustration and despair. In the meantime, the

Palestinians continue to live with so much suffering
under the illegal occupation of Israel.

The Middle East peace process now again faces
renewed opportunities and challenges. At this critical
juncture, my delegation is particularly heartened by the
current surge in diplomacy for a peaceful settlement of
the question of Palestine. It is amply demonstrated by
the continued commitments of both Israel and Palestine
to negotiations on final status issues guided by the
Annapolis Joint Understanding and the Road Map. We
are also witness to the strong support of the
international community at a series of international
conferences in Paris, Bethlehem, London and Berlin
for the development of a viable Palestinian State.

It is also worth noting the tangible progress
reached between Israel and relevant parties on matters
of mutual concerns, the homegrown efforts undertaken
by the Palestinian Authority to proceed with
preparations for its statehood, and the proactive
mediation efforts of the Quartet, the Leagues of Arab
States and regional countries.

There are various favourable developments in the
region as well, such as the indirect talks between Syria
and Israel, promising steps in the Lebanese-Israeli
dialogue and the normalization of relations between
Lebanon and Syria, as well as growing stability in
Lebanon since the signing of the Doha Agreement.

There are, therefore, enough reasons to be
hopeful that these positive developments could
eventually crystallize into an enabling environment of
mutual trust and peaceful coexistence, in which all
nations in the region could share the peace dividends.
It would also enable the vision of an independent and
viable State of Palestine side by side in harmony with
its neighbours to be materialized.

My delegation remains cognizant of the fact that
such progress, although doubly prized in light of the
difficult situation in the past two years, may have little
effect unless it is further consolidated into concrete
determination and the commitment of Israel and
Palestine to satisfactorily and peacefully address issues
of common interests across various political, security,
socio-economic, human rights and humanitarian
domains. We are fully convinced that all the parties
concerned must combine efforts and exert genuine
political will to keep the peace process on track and
avoid repeating past scenarios where attempts would
boost optimism only to lead to another crushing
letdown.

At this defining moment when the prospects for a
regional peace are growing and hopes for a peaceful
settlement of the Israel-Palestine conflict have
re-emerged, we urge all parties to exercise utmost
restraint and refrain from any step or statement which
may undermine the peace process and prejudice the
final status negotiations.

Further concerted efforts should be made to
achieve more tangible improvements on the ground on
the basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the principle
of land for peace, the Madrid terms of reference
adopted at the Peace Conference on the Middle East,
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map to Mideast
Peace and the Annapolis outcome.

We support the efforts of the United Nations, the
Quartet, the League of Arab States, regional countries
and the international community to help realize the
two-State vision and to reach a just and comprehensive
solution in the Middle East. In this connection, we
welcome the meeting of the Quartet and the League of
Arab States held yesterday on the compound of the
United Nations. We hope that the coming meeting of
the Quartet in Moscow will provide greater impetus to
move the Middle East peace process further ahead on
all tracks.

In conclusion, my country wishes to reaffirm its
unwavering support for a just and comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and for the
realization by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, including their right to self-
determination and sovereignty in an independent and
sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

