Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month. You are the pride of Africa, Sir, and we are very
honoured indeed to have you as the President of the
Council for this month. Allow me also to present my
deep gratitude for the exceptional gesture made by the
members of the Council of giving me the privilege of
speaking before them.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Council for the opportunity to
contribute to the debate on this issue of crucial
importance to Rwanda. My delegation wishes to thank
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their reports on the completion strategies of their
respective Tribunals (see S/2011/316 and S/2011/317).

I take this opportunity to congratulate Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan for her election as President of
the ICTR and wish her every success in presiding over
that Tribunal, which was established by the Council to
render justice to humanity. I also pay tribute to Judge
Dennis Byron for the tremendous job he has done over
the last four years, during which many trials were
concluded, and wish him to continue on his path as
ICTR Vice-President.

We recognize and commend the Government of
Serbia for the recent arrest of ICTY fugitive Ratko
Mladic'. We also recognize and commend in particular
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, together with the ICTR tracking unit, for the
arrest of ICTR fugitive Bernard Munyagishari. Rwanda
continues to urge all other Governments to fulfil their
obligations to cooperate with the two Tribunals in
arresting the remaining international fugitives,
especially Felicien Kabuga and Protais Mpiranya, and
to facilitate their prosecution.
The Government of the Republic of Rwanda has
consistently extended its cooperation and support to
enable the ICTR to effectively execute the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council. Rwanda
continues to facilitate unfettered access to witnesses
for both the defence and the prosecution and is
assisting in the movement of witnesses to and from the
Tribunal's seat in Arusha, Tanzania. Rwanda also
continues to ensure the security of witnesses through
the Rwanda Witness Protection Service that was
established with the support of the Office of the ICTR
Prosecutor.

My Government continues to support
investigations initiated by both the prosecution and the
defence without prejudice to either, and we continue to
provide the necessary documents for the conduct of the
trials. Rwanda continues to operate a detention facility
that meets the standards set by the Tribunal and which
currently houses convicts who were transferred from
the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

The Government of Rwanda has stated on
different occasions its position on the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as
established under resolution 1966 (2010). Our
preference was the full closure of the International
Tribunals and the transfer of the remaining cases to
national jurisdictions, especially those of the concerned
countries, through implementation of the completion
strategy for the Tribunals as called for in Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
Nevertheless, I reiterate the pledge of our Government
to fully cooperate with the International Residual
Mechanism.

While the Government of Rwanda will support
the work of the Residual Mechanism, just as it has
supported the ICTR over the years, we also expect the
judges and staff of the Residual Mechanism to
cooperate with the Government of Rwanda and to
honour its enumerated legal obligations and other
agreements.

We recognize that provisions in the ICTR rules of
procedure and evidence grant the President of the
Tribunal the prerogative to transfer genocide convicts
to prisons in a number of countries that have
agreements with the United Nations for the
enforcement of ICTR sentences. We remind the
Security Council that rule 103 of the rules of procedure
also requires the ICTR to notify the Government of
Rwanda prior to a decision on the place of
imprisonment. In the past, the Tribunal has not
honoured this explicit written requirement to notify us
before undertaking any such transfer of convicts. We
learned about those transfers well after they had been
effected and the convicts resettled in countries distant
from the scene of the crimes.

The Rwanda delegation seizes this opportunity to
urge in the most forceful and professional manner that
every effort be taken to ensure that all of the remaining
trials of ICTR indictees be completed before the four-
year period given to the Residual Mechanism to
discharge its mandate has elapsed. In our view, it
would be inappropriate for the international community
to entertain costly and unjustified requests to extend
operation of a residual court beyond 30 June 2016 with
the intention of delivering justice for genocide crimes
committed in Rwanda in 1994.

We also insistently urge the Security Council to
obtain from the Prosecutor and the President of the
ICTR an official report on the status of the
prosecutions of the two cases that were transferred to
France for trial in November 2007. We note that, under
rule 11 bis of its rules of procedure, the Tribunal has
the right and the duty to revoke those referrals to the
French courts, if they continue to delay prosecution of
Father Wenceslas Munyeshyaka and Laurent
Bucyibaruta.

The Government of Rwanda reiterates its request
that the archives and records of the ICTR be
transferred to Rwanda upon the completion of the
Tribunal's mandate. Rwanda desires to host the
archives to ensure their accessibility to genocide
survivors, the families of those who were killed,
researchers and the broader international community.
In addition, many original documents that originated
from Rwanda remain the property of the lending
institutions and individuals. The archives of the
Tribunal should be transferred to Rwanda because, for
us, those records constitute an integral part of our
history, are vital to the preservation of the memory of
the genocide and will play a critical role in educating
future generations to guard against genocide denial and
revisionism. Locating the archives in Rwanda as part
of a larger information and genocide research centre
would be an appropriate tribute to the victims of the
1994 genocide of the Tutsi in Rwanda. The archives
and research centre, to be co-managed by the United
Nations, would also serve as a regional resource for
achieving the mission of the United Nations system to
promote peace and to ensure the prevention of
genocide.

Allow me now to address an issue of the utmost
concern to my Government, namely, the ongoing
scourge of genocide denial by some in the academic
and legal professions, including ICTR defence lawyers.
Some of these defence attorneys are leading an
international campaign to misrepresent, misinterpret
and openly deny that, in 1994, there was a genocide
perpetrated against the Tutsi in Rwanda - a genocide
recognized by the Council in its establishment of the
ICTR and reaffirmed in 2006 by the Appeals Chamber
of the same Tribunal as a notorious fact of common
knowledge, of which the Trial Chambers must take
judicial notice.

Such attempts to revise history and deny the
legally acknowledged genocide perpetrated against the
Tutsi are, in our view, not only morally reprehensible
but also a violation of the ethics and rules of
professional conduct for attorneys. We note with keen
interest the provision in article 29 of the statute of the
Residual Mechanism requiring defence counsel to
"respect the laws and regulations" of the countries to
which they are admitted to perform official duties
while representing their clients who have been indicted
by United Nations Tribunals or by the Residual
Mechanism. It is our expectation that the rules being
promulgated for the residual court will include
provisions similar to those in the ICTR rules of
procedure outlining the obligations of defence counsel
and the sanctions to be imposed when they engage in
impermissible conduct.

The Government of Rwanda will of course
continue to ensure that, without prejudice or favour,
any individual who engages in revisionism or denial of
the 1994 genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi be
brought to justice in accordance with the Rwandan
Constitution and other legal instruments.

Allow me here to repeat once again that,
notwithstanding the commendable job that the staff of
the Tribunals and the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs have done, there remain some critical,
unresolved residual issues that are not addressed by the
statute for the Residual Mechanism or by the
accompanying transitional arrangements. We recognize
that the ad hoc Tribunals are transitional justice works-
in-progress - indeed, work that has been in progress
for 17 years, in the case of the ICTR. But this
transition must end at some appointed time. The
Residual Mechanism appears to prolong the transition,
rather than provide an avenue for the international
community to hand over the long-term duty for
prosecuting genocide suspects to permanent courts in
national jurisdictions. Rwanda is willing to assist the
Council to find acceptable solutions to the difficult
residual functions that are not yet resolved.

I assure the Council that we are ready, willing
and able to receive cases referred for trial in Rwanda;
to receive convicts to serve their prison terms in
Rwanda; to provide resettlement and a transition to
national community life for acquitted persons and
convicts who have finished serving their sentences; and
to collaborate with the Tribunal in establishing
information and documentation centres to make the
records and archives of the ICTR widely available to
the public.

In conclusion, thank you again, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to contribute to this dialogue and to
reiterate my Government's continued commitment to
supporting the work of the ICTR and the new Residual
Mechanism.

