The United Arab Emirates thanks the Russian Federation for convening this year's annual open debate on women and peace and security, which continues to be one of our priority topics. We thank the Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2020/946) on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We are observing the twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) today under exceptional circumstances as the world is currently unified in halting the spread and overcoming the consequences of the global coronavirus disease pandemic. These past months have once again demonstrated the detrimental effects of crises on women and girls worldwide, at the same time highlighting how crucial their positive contributions in such contexts are, as they make up the majority of front-line workers. Over the past two decades, the women and peace and security agenda has been pivotal in recognizing the disproportionate effects of conflicts on women and girls, but it has particularly contributed to their recognition as active agents and the meaningful role that they play when it comes to conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict recovery processes. While it is our duty to protect the progress made and to ensure that gains will not be lost and inequalities further deepened, the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda is a key priority for the United Arab Emirates and will remain as such during its recently announced candidacy for an elected seat on the Security Council for the 2022-2023 term, with its focus on the full and effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent nine resolutions. The United Arab Emirates firmly believes that women's active engagement is a peace and security imperative, and 20 years after the inception of the women and peace and security agenda, we can no longer allow for women and women's issues to be sidelined. As we strongly believe that multilateral efforts are essential to achieving this goal, the United Arab Emirates and the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security will launch, as a result of our panel series on the role of women in post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding throughout the past year, a United Nations action plan that will outline concrete priority actions and reforms, encouraging Member States and United Nations agencies to introduce and extend measures that ensure post-conflict activities are gender-mainstreamed. The number and influence of women uniformed personnel are an essential part of building sustainable peace, yet numbers of female peacekeepers remain persistently low. Through the Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak Women, Peace and Security Initiative, the United Arab Emirates, in cooperation with UN-Women, has enabled the successful graduation of over 300 women from Asia, Africa and the Middle East to facilitate their effective contribution to peacekeeping, conflict resolution and all aspects of building peace. The third round of trainings will commence next year. Through this, the United Arab Emirates anticipates contributing to closing the gaps related to gender-responsive security sector reform and therefore calls on all Member States to identify and address barriers that women peacekeepers face. While the focus on promoting women's participation is essential, we cannot dismiss the fact that the number of cases of sexual and gender-based violence remains unwaveringly high and continues to increase. The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns these crimes, as they pose a serious threat to peace and security, and holding perpetrators accountable is a critical component of preventing and deterring these crimes. Funding allocated to sexual and gender-based violence is still far from covering the actual needs and the United Arab Emirates continues to contribute to international efforts in this regard. Only last month, as a follow-up to last year's Oslo conference, the United Arab Emirates reiterated its support through additional financial contributions to the Gender Standby Capacity and Protection Standby Capacity Projects, as well as to Nadia's Initiative. We call on all Member States to ensure their foreign aid specifically targets such indispensable programmes and to closely work together with United Nations entities and other organizations with a view to ending sexual and gender-based violence. It is without question that, for our shared ambition in preventing conflicts and achieving safer and more peaceful societies, we must deliver on the commitments made since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The United Arab Emirates will remain a committed partner, together with other Member States, United Nations agencies and civil society, to facilitate enabling environments for women and girls, in all parts of the world, for them to realize their full, equal and meaningful participation.
