Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), for the
presentation of the Committee's 90-day report and
for his able leadershp at the helm of the Committee.
Rwanda recognizes the efforts of the Committee and
its Panel of Experts in helping Member States and other
entities to comply with their obligations in accordance
with resolution 1737 (2006) and other relevant
resolutions. We particularly welcome the Chair's report
on guidance to Member States, which covers a range
of issues regarding the sanctions regime. We believe
that such communication between the Committee and
Member States or other interested entities will enhance
compliance with the Iranian sanctions regime.

We urge the Government of Iran to cooperate with
the Committee and its Panel of Experts in order to
clarify the issue of the interdiction in the Red Sea by a
Member State of a cargo of conventional arms that were
allegedly loaded onto a vessel in the Iranian port of
Bandar Abbas. Such cooperation will be important in
preventing the Committee and the Panel from reaching
arbitrary conclusions and should be carried out in line
with Iran's demonstrated willingness to cooperate
with international actors so as to settle the outstanding
issues with regard to its nuclear programme.

Rwanda commends Iran and the P5+l for the
important ground covered in the ongoing negotiations
towards a final comprehensive nuclear deal. We
commend the parties for finding value and diplomacy
and for seeking peaceful political solutions. However
strenuous it may seem, that was evident in July,
when the parties agreed to extend the period of the
negotiations for another four months to give themselves
more time to close the underlying gaps. We look
forward to the resumption of talks next week in New
York. Meanwhile, in the light of the recent report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, we call on the
Government of Iran to enhance its cooperation with the
Agency regarding its nuclear programme.

In conclusion, we consider the efforts of the 1737
(2006) Committee and its Panel of Experts an integral
part of the initiatives to find a solution to the standoff
between Iran and the international community on Iran's
nuclear programme. While recalling that the sanctions
regime remains in force until the settlement of the
crisis, we call on the Committee to always be ready
to take actions that would support the success of the
talks between Iran and P5+1 and other similar peaceful
initiatives.

