Mr. Pascoe: Let me start today with the rapidly
deteriorating situation in Syria. The Syrian
Government has manifestly failed to carry out its
responsibility to protect its people. On the contrary, it
has subjected residents in several cities to
indiscriminate bombardment by tank and rocket fire,
killing its own people in ways reminiscent of the Hama
massacre perpetrated by the Syrian Government in
1982. Unfortunately, the international community has
also failed in its duty to stop the carnage. Actions and
inaction to date have seemed to encourage the regime
in its belief that it has impunity to carry on the wanton
destruction of its own civilians.

The disproportionate use of force and military
aggression against the civilian population by the
authorities has driven the largely peaceful opposition
forces to resort to armed resistance, although to date
the opposition's firepower appears to be minimal as
compared to the heavy weapons being used by the
Syrian army. Extremists have also used the situation to
carry out terrorist activities, in particular in Damascus
and Aleppo. While we cannot give exact casualty
figures, there are credible reports that the death toll
now often exceeds 100 civilians per day, including
many women and children. The total number of people
killed so far is certainly well more than 7,500.

The displacement of civilians within and outside
Syria has continued. Approximately 25,000 refugees
are now registered with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
neighbouring countries. Between 100,000 and 200,000
people are internally displaced. The humanitarian
2

consequences of the violence have become severe. In
towns affected by sustained fighting, such as Homs,
Hama and Dar'a, water and electricity have been cut
off. Access to medical care and basic food and fuel are
critically needed.

On 26 February, Government security forces
launched a merciless bombardment of residential areas
in Homs. We are now into the fourth week of the
terrible attacks on major neighbourhoods in that city.
The situation for the people trapped inside those
neighbourhoods is increasingly dire. According to
human rights organizations, more than 5,000 civilians
have been prevented from fleeing by Government
forces. On 21 February, American reporter Marie
Colvin and French photographer Remi Ochlik were
among the victims in Horns. As the Secretary-General
has said, their deaths further shed light on the horrors
being inflicted on the Syrian people each day.

On 12 February, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent were able to make a delivery of some basic
humanitarian assistance to Homs. On 24 February,
some injured women and children were evacuated by
the ICRC from the Bab Amr neighbourhood. The ICRC
and Syrian Arab Red Crescent also successfully
completed a delivery of food and other assistance for
12,000 people in the city of Hama yesterday.

Unfortunately, the ICRC'S repeated calls for a
daily humanitarian pause to allow for the delivery of
emergency aid have not yet been implemented. The
United Nations fully supports the ICRC effort, which
would allow the injured to leave and seek medical
attention and for urgent supplies to be distributed. The
Secretary-General has asked Emergency Relief
Coordinator Valerie Amos to travel to Syria to
negotiate humanitarian access and assess humanitarian
needs. She is in the region and stands ready to go to
Damascus as soon as she is allowed entry into the
country.

The international commission of inquiry for
Syria, in a report (A/HRC/19/69) issued on
22 February, concluded that the Syrian Government
forces have committed widespread, systematic and
gross human rights violations amounting to crimes
against humanity, with the apparent knowledge and
consent of the highest levels of the State. I commend
the report to each of the members of the Council. It
does not make for easy reading, but its implications for
12-24356
our responsibilities is clear. The Human Rights Council
held a debate on this issue today in Geneva.

The League of Arab States has adopted a series of
important decisions calling on the Syrian authorities to
end the killing. On 31 January, the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States and the President of the
League's ministerial committee sought the Security
Council's support for their efforts to end the violence
and seek a political solution. On 16 February, the
General Assembly adopted a ground-breaking
resolution (resolution 66/253) in support of the Arab
League's efforts. As members of the Council well
know, the resolution includes a request for the
Secretary-General and all relevant United Nations
bodies to provide good offices, including through the
appointment of a special envoy, in support of the Arab
League's efforts.

Following intensive consultations, the Secretary-
General and the Arab League Secretary-General
announced on 23 February the appointment of former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan as their Joint Special
Envoy for Syria. He will work to end the violence and
human rights violations and promote a peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis. Mr. Arman will arrive in
New York tomorrow to begin talks with the Secretary-
General. I hope he will have the opportunity to meet
with members of the Council to hear their suggestions
on how to bring this terrible situation to an end.

On 24 February, the Tunisian Government hosted
a meeting of the friends of the Syrian people. The
conference brought together representatives of more
than 65 nations and organizations. It demonstrated
wide international support for the Syrian people and
called on the Syrian Government to halt attacks on
civilians and allow immediate access for vital relief
goods and services. The message to the Syrian
authorities should be clear - the bleeding of Syria
must cease. The conference condemned the Syrian
Government's excessive use of force and demanded the
withdrawal of heavy military equipment from urban
areas to allow a peaceful transition of power.

In his message to the conference, the Secretary-
General stressed the need for a political solution and
highlighted the responsibility of each member of the
international community to help stop the violence. The
Secretary-General again calls on the Government of
Syria to stop the wanton killing of its own people. It
must fulfil its duty to protect them instead. Its failure
12-24356
to do so leaves the international community no option
but to act.

I would like to turn briefly now to the peaceful
transfer of power in Yemen. Special Adviser Jamal
Benomar will brief the Council in detail after he
returns, but I do want to note that the agreement signed
in Riyadh on 23 November 2011 provided for a
detailed road map for a political transition based on a
power-sharing arrangement between the then ruling
party and a coalition of opposition parties. This could
not have been achieved without the members of the
Security Council speaking with one voice and
Mr. Benomar's close cooperation on the ground with
the Gulf Cooperation Council and other actors.

The implementation of this agreement is on track.
Presidential elections with a consensus candidate were
held on 21 February. On 25 February, former Vice-
President Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi was sworn in as
the new President of Yemen. The Secretary-General
called the new President to congratulate him. The next
step is the holding of the national dialogue conference,
followed by a constitution-making process. This will
lead to general elections in two years. Yemen's
transition remains delicate and will require ongoing
facilitation. Special Adviser Benomar will remain
closely engaged with all sides.

Please allow me now to turn to the Middle East
peace process. On 8 February, the Secretary-General
briefed the Council on his trip to Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory and his efforts to
encourage the parties to sustain the talks that started on
3 January in Amman. Unfortunately, these talks have
stalled. Since the last meeting of the negotiators on
25 January, President Abbas has been consulting
internally and with the Arab League. So far, prospects
for the resumption of direct bilateral negotiations
remain dim.

During the Arab Peace Initiative Follow-Up
Committee meeting on 12 February and the meeting of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Executive
Committee on 20 February, the Palestinians reiterated
their position that direct talks should not resume unless
all settlement activity was halted. Israel committed to a
two-State solution based on the 1967 lines and the
release of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Netanyahu continues to
insist that Israel wants to continue the talks, but
without preconditions.
3

We believe that the framework set by the Quartet
in its statement of 23 September 2011, with the aim of
reaching an agreement before the end of the year,
remains relevant. Quartet envoys regularly assess
developments and remain engaged with the parties. I
hope that the parties will use the coming period to
refocus on the need to exchange proposals on territory
and security. In this regard, the Secretary-General fully
supports the efforts initiated by King Abdullah II Bin
Al Hussein of Jordan. There must be improvements on
the ground to complement these efforts.

In another notable development, President
Mahmoud Abbas and Hamas leader Mashal agreed on
5 February to form a transitional Government of
technocrats with Abbas as Prime Minister. President
Abbas has emphasized that this Government would
adhere to his political programme and to all previous
PLO commitments. However, opposition to the
agreement within Hamas in Gaza has so far prevented
concrete results. A date for elections has not been set,
and voter registration in Gaza has yet to be allowed by
the de facto authorities.

As the Secretary-General has repeatedly affirmed,
the United Nations supports Palestinian unity within
the framework of the PLO commitments, the Quartet
principles, and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Reconciliation on this basis and Israeli-Palestinian
peace talks need not be mutually exclusive in any way.

The situation on the ground in both Gaza and the
West Bank remains dangerous and ultimately
unsustainable. Further settlement expansion was
authorized in several locations in the West Bank,
including in two outposts and in the settlement of
Shiloh deep inside the occupied Palestinian territory.
Such steps move us further away from the goal of a
two-State solution and are in violation of Israel's Road
Map obligations. In addition, on 13 February, the
Jerusalem municipality granted permission for a new
archeological visitors' centre in the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem and Israeli police
demolished a structure that had served as a Palestinian
community centre.

Incidents of settler violence against Palestinians
and their property, as well as violence by Palestinians
against settlers, continued in the West Bank.
Demolitions of Palestinian property resulted in 138
people, more than half of them children, being left
homeless in East Jerusalem and Area C. We called for a
halt in those demolitions and for a fair planning and
zoning system to meet Palestinian needs for growth.

On 10 February, Palestinian security forces, for
the first time in 15 years, enforced law and order in the
H2 area of Hebron, which is under full Israeli control.
At the same time, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
conducted 463 operations in the West Bank. Overall,
251 Palestinians, including 11 children, were injured in
the West Bank by the IDF, and 358 were arrested.
Twelve IDF soldiers were injured by Palestinians.

The reporting period also witnessed increased
tensions and violence between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces around holy sites. Clashes erupted in
the compound of the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif
between Israeli police and Palestinians on 19 and
24 February. Renewed clashes erupted on 25 February
as thousands of Palestinians participated in the funeral
in Al-Ram of a Palestinian resident who had died the
previous day after being shot by an IDF soldier. That
series of Violent incidents resulted in a number of
Palestinians, as well as one Israeli police officer, being
injured.

On 24 February, Palestinians also threw stones
towards Rachel's Tomb, a site of Jewish worship in the
West Bank. On 20 February, for the third time this
month graffiti was sprayed on a church in Jerusalem,
including a reference to settler involvement. I call on
all parties to safeguard the peace and sanctity of
religious sites. We also remind both parties that hate
speech from anyone is unacceptable.

On 21 February, following an arrangement with
the Israeli authorities for his release, Palestinian
administrative detainee and Islamic Jihad affiliate
Khader Adnan ended his hunger strike of 66 days. The
holding of another 300 Palestinians under
administrative detention remains a matter of concern.
We believe that the use of administrative detentions
must be exceptional. Those detained must be charged
and face trial with judicial guarantees or released
without delay.

Sixty-one rockets and one mortar shell that were
fired this month from Gaza landed in Israel without
resulting in injuries or damage. This is significantly
more than what we reported last month, underscoring
the continued risk of escalation. The IDF conducted
one incursion and 28 airstrikes into Gaza, resulting in
one Palestinian civilian being killed and 20 injured. We
reiterate our condemnation of indiscriminate rocket
12-24356
attacks out of Gaza against Israel. We also urge Israel
to show maximum restraint. All should fully observe
their obligations regarding the protection of civilians.

On 11 February, Egyptian security forces
operating in the Sinai peninsula announced the seizure
of a number of anti-aircraft missiles, as well as
explosives, which were being readied for transfer to the
Gaza Strip. We welcome those steps and call on others
to intensive their efforts to prevent the illicit trafficking
of arms into Gaza, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).

On 21 and 23 February, IDF soldiers identified
and removed explosive devices on the Israeli-Egyptian
border. On 28 February, the IDF returned fire from
suspected smugglers attempting to infiltrate Israel from
Egypt, killing one of them. We have repeatedly said
that the weapons transfers into Gaza must stop.

Gaza witnessed a severe shortage of electrical
power around 14 February, which had serious
consequences for health, education, water and
sanitation facilities, highlighting that current socio-
economic arrangements in the Gaza Strip are not
sustainable.

The closure regime must be lifted within the
framework of resolution 1860 (2009). In that context,
discussions continue with Israel towards the
liberalization of the entry of construction materials and
the facilitation of exports. Following the Secretary-
General's visit, we are awaiting approvals for urgent
United Nations projects, including three key housing
projects of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

In another development, on 13 February an Israeli
diplomatic vehicle was attacked in India, injuring one
person, while a similar attack was foiled in Georgia
and another attempt was discovered in Thailand. The
Secretary-General has condemned such attacks.

As the Secretary-General has noted, what is
important now is for the parties to engage seriously on
substance. We are concerned that the talks are stalled.
12-24356

We still hope that both leaders will realize that they
must overcome the political impasse and rebuild
confidence and momentum, using the framework
suggested by the Quartet aiming for a negotiated
solution by the end of the year. Time is not on the side
of either party.

Finally, I would like to turn to Lebanon. On
23 February, the Secretary-General renewed the
mandate of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon for three
years from 1 March. Earlier this month, the Trial
Chamber of the Special Tribunal ruled that the four
people accused in the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafiq Hariri would be tried in absentia.

The Syrian crisis remains a cause of tension in
Lebanon. On 10 February, fighting broke out between
Alawite and Sunni communities in the northern town
of Tripoli, against the backdrop of demonstrations
related to the situation in Syria, resulting in three
people being killed and more than 20 injured, including
members of the Lebanese Armed Forces. Order was
restored the following day after the intervention of the
army and local parliamentarians.

The situation along Lebanon's borders with Syria
also remains of concern. The United Nations continues
to monitor the influx of Syrian refugees into northern
Lebanon. We continue to coordinate closely with the
Government on the provision of assistance to the 6,900
refugees registered so far, as well as on matters of
protection and the determination of their status.

The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has remained generally calm. UNIFIL observed
continuing air violations by the Israel Defense Forces,
albeit at somewhat reduced levels.

