The President: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 4313th meeting, I invite the Minister for
Special Affairs of Georgia, His Excellency Mr.
Malkhaz Kakabadze, to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing provided by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, on 24 April 2001, in
accordance with paragraph 16 of its resolution
1339 (2001) of31 January 2001. It welcomes also
the presence of the Minister for Special Affairs of
Georgia at its meeting.

"The Security Council stresses that the
continued lack of progress on key issues of a
comprehensive settlement of the conflict in
Abkhazia, Georgia, is unacceptable. It underlines
the decisive importance of early negotiations on
the core political questions of the conflict. It
strongly supports, in this context, the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to promote the achievement of a
comprehensive political settlement based on the
resolutions of the Security Council, which must
include a settlement of the political status of
Abkhazia within the State of Georgia.

"The Security Council strongly supports, in
particular, the intention of the Special
Representative to submit, in the near future, his
draft paper containing specific proposals to the
parties on the question of the distribution of
constitutional competences between Tbilisi and
Sukhumi. It calls on all those concerned to use
their influence with a View to facilitating this
process.

"The Security Council welcomes the
the

intention of the Special Representative to submit
the draft paper to the parties soon, as a starting
point for negotiation, and not as an attempt to
impose or dictate any possible solution. It calls
upon the parties constructively to accept the
paper in this light and work towards a mutually
acceptable settlement.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter and reaffirms its commitment
to advancing the peace process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.
