Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Safe Schools Declaration.

I should now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

Allow me first to thank the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this timely debate
and the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.

The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465), presented
last week, makes clear that the number of children
affected by armed conflict and the severity of the grave
violations affecting them have increased in the past
year. It is appalling that in 2017 the United Nations
verified more than 21,000 grave violations of children's
rights ranging from the use of children as human bombs
to rape and other forms of sexual violence, and from
juvenile detention to the denial of humanitarian access.

Resolution 1261 (1999) formally acknowledged
that the protection of children in armed conflict
is a fundamental peace and security concern. The
Security Council has also since 2001 tasked specific
peacekeeping missions with undertaking child-
protection efforts. However, the recruitment and use of
children remain prevalent in areas where peacekeeping
operations are deployed.

Children associated with armed forces or armed
groups both witness and commit acts of violence and
are themselves exploited, injured or killed as a result.
Such situations deprive them of their human rights
and educational opportunities. They often suffer
severe physical and emotional consequences that
dramatically impact their personal development and
can have long-term effects on peace and security in the
countries concerned.

We would like to commend Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba for her efforts
to increase engagement with parties to conflict in order
to achieve progress and implement action plans leading
to concrete results, as more than 10,000 children have
been formally released from armed groups and begun
a process of reintegration. We also commend UNICEF
and its partners for having reintegrated more than
12,000 children into their communities.

Romania supports the Secretary-General's peace
agenda and the United Nations demarches to build
sustaining peace. Tackling the root causes of conflict
and ensuring children's access to education are key
factors if we want this approach to succeed. At the
same time, we must keep in mind the best interests of
the child, especially in cases involving former child
soldiers, who require protection and support in order to
reintegrate into their societies.

In this respect, Romania endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration, the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, and the Paris Commitments
and Paris Principles on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups. My country also
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, and we encourage all parties to implement
the provisions of these initiatives. We also reaffirm
our readiness to continue to work closely with United
Nations institutions for the benefit of children.
