Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, let me express my sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this meaningful open
debate on children and armed conflict. I would like
to extend a special welcome to the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. My
delegation is confident that her extensive experience and
in-depth wisdom will contribute greatly to achieving our
noble cause of protecting children in armed conflicts.
My appreciation also goes to the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake; Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve Ladsous; and
President of the International Center for Transitional
Justice, Mr. David Tolbert, for their insightful remarks.

The Republic of Korea highly values the
meaningful progress made over the past couple of
years on a normative framework for the protection of
children in armed conflicts. The most relevant recent
achievements include last year's adoption of resolution
1998 (2011). My delegation notes with satisfaction
that, in accordance with the request of the Security
Council through its resolution 1998 (2011), the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/26l) includes, for the
first time, parties to conflict that engage in attacks on
schools and hospitals.

Despite the progress, however, my delegation
is concerned about the continued plight of children
affected by armed conflict in many parts of the world.
Of particular concern is the growing list of persistent
perpetrators of grave violations against children,
which has doubled since last year. According to the
Secretary-General's report, 32 parties have been listed
as persistent perpetrators. My delegation believes that
decisive and immediate action against them needs to
be taken.

Against this backdrop, my delegation would like to
underline the following four points with regard to the
targeted measures to address the issue of children and
armed conflict.

First, linkages with the Security Council sanctions
regime should be further developed and strengthened.
My delegation is pleased that, in July, the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea expanded
its sanctions designation criteria to include grave
violations against children, which increased the number
of sanctions committees with designation criteria from
two to four. We hope that all other sanctions regimes
will include these designation criteria.

Secondly, the United Nations efforts to mainstream
the protection of children in armed conflict need to be
further strengthened. We share the View contained in
the Secretary-General's report that specific provisions

for the protection of children, including the deployment
of child protection advisers to all relevant missions.

Thirdly, we would like to encourage those parties
listed in the Secretary-General's report that have yet
to conclude action plans to do so as soon as possible.
It is encouraging that the parties to conflict in Nepal
and Sri Lanka were de-listed after their successful
completion of Council-mandated action plans to end
the recruitment and use of children. Additionally, five
more parties entered into similar agreements with the
United Nations in 2011. Through these action plans, my
delegation hopes that perpetrators will be brought to
justice thorough investigation and prosecutions.

Fourthly, my delegation believes that continued
attention needs to be paid to the issue of rape and other
forms of sexual Violence against children in situations
of armed conflict. We have been strongly supportive
of the listing of parties responsible for sexual crimes
against children, pursuant to resolution 1882 (2009).
In this connection, we encourage close cooperation
between the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in order for them to better
address the difficulty in collecting and systematizing
information on sexual violence against children in
conflict situations.

The Republic of Korea hopes that today's open
debate will serve as a valuable occasion to reconfirm
the strong commitment of the international community
to alleviating the suffering of children affected by
armed conflict. In conclusion, my delegation reiterates
its commitment to continued cooperation with the
international community to that end.
