Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and the Chinese presidency for organizing today's
discussion on issues related to strengthening the
principles of multilateralism. The proposed theme is
highly relevant, as it enables us to critically take stock
of the state of international relations and to discuss ways
to overcome the systemic problems it has accumulated.
We thank the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, for
his assessment, and Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President
of the Economic and Social Council, Ms. Al-Thani,
Acting President of the General Assembly, and Judge
Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf for their briefings.

Our world today is undergoing a period of profound
changes that are leading to the creation of a polycentric
international system. Thanks to the global activation
of cross-border economic ties and the acceleration of
scientific and technological progress, new centres of
economic growth and political influence are gaining
traction. They are seeking broader participation in
international affairs and striving to create independent
domestic and foreign policies that correspond to their
national interests and to choose development models
that reflect their national, cultural and religious
identities. Those trends are only going to grow.

In the circumstances, the significance of
multilateral diplomacy mechanisms, the joint quest for
responses to common threats and challenges and the
provision of collective leadership is also growing. The
role of the United Nations and its Security Council as a
central organ for world policy, as well as that of flexible
global governance formats such as the Group of 20, is
increasing, as is the importance of integrated regional
and interregional associations. However, the desire of
most States to strengthen the polycentric foundations of
the global order is clashing with some players' attempts
to preserve their global dominance in order to gain
unilateral advantages. They have no inhibitions about
circumventing the United Nations and the Security
Council and taking a selective approach to meeting
their international legal obligations. They declare
themselves to be multilateral but label those who do
not agree with their policies and methods revisionists
and opponents of multilateralism. In other words, they
recognize multilateralism only on their own conditions.

One need not look far for examples of breaches of
multilateralism. The basic principles of the settlement
in the Middle East, the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, the
commitments under the World Trade Organization and
the multilateral Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the key disarmament agreements for strategic
stability are all under attack, along with many others.
As a result, the international law that the post-war
world order was founded on is being devalued. We
hear statements trumpeted that not only call into
question the legal force of international treaties but
also prioritize narrow, unilateral approaches above
decisions taken within the United Nations framework,
among other things. Within the United Nations,
we have already drawn attention to the fact that our
Western colleagues are relentlessly trying to replace
the primacy of international law in world affairs with
some kind of rules-based order. Those very rules are
devised based on political expediency and are a clear
example of double standards.

A similar approach is being used to impose sanctions
on annoying States, declare trade wars and stoke
tensions in international relations, while the reasons
given for such measures are becoming increasingly far-
fetched, whether for alleged interference in elections
or unsubstantiated accusations of the use of chemical
weapons and other such sins. In order to accuse
somebody of something today, it seems to be considered
sufficient to add the phrase "highly likely". No evidence
is necessary and the accused's views are of no interest
to the accusers. While such methods are not new, they
are now front and centre. But we well remember how
many times false pretexts have been used to justify
interventions and unleash wars. We need only recall
the bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999, the occupation of
Iraq in 2003 under openly lying pretexts whose legacy
continues to be a heavy burden on Iraqis, and the crude
manipulation of the Security Council's mandate in
Libya in 2011, which resulted in destruction and chaos
that still continue. The same methods continue to be
used against Syria today. These unilateral military
actions have plunged the Middle East and North Africa
into chaos and created a breeding ground for rampant
extremism and terrorism.

There are disturbing attempts to drag some countries
into military alliances against the will of their peoples,
while other States are threatened with punishment for
freely choosing their partners and allies. In the Balkans
in particular, the States of the region are being promised
future happiness and insistently dragged into NATO,
with invocations of the inadmissibility of meddling
in their internal affairs actually accompanied by
shameless interference. This kind of bloc mindset only
produces additional threats to international security
and is ruinous for the principles of multilateralism.
We are seeing the space for constructive international
cooperation contracting, confrontations growing,
unpredictability generally increasing, nuclear doctrines
being revised and the threshold for the acceptability of
the use of nuclear weapons lowered, with a significant
rise in the risk of spontaneous conflicts, and of course
all of that affects the activities of the United Nations.

In the next few days we will be commemorating
the 100th anniversary of the end of the First World
War. That was a strange war, which seemed to begin
by itself. Its protagonists and participants could not
even imagine the horrific disaster that would follow or
the fact that the First World War would spawn an even
greater disaster, the Second World War. The situation
today compels us to examine those historical lessons
cautiously and to hope that such scenes of reckless,
unbridled spiralling, catastrophic confrontation will
not be repeated.

In the wake of the Second World War, we founded
this Organization. For the first time in history, the
principles of multilateralism were enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, establishing a workable
mechanism for global governance through the
harmonization of States' positions. The key elements
for a polycentric world order were outlined, along
with the basic principles and norms of international
relations, from the sovereign equality of States and the
prohibition of interference in their internal affairs to
the ban on the use of force in international relations
without the permission of the Security Council or
beyond the limits of self-defence.

We also want to point out that according to
the Charter, the use of sanctions mechanisms is
the exclusive prerogative of the Security Council.
Unilateral restrictions and attempts to apply national
legislation extraterritorially are illegitimate, lead only
to increased confrontations in international affairs and
make the collective quest for solutions to emerging
problems harder. Moreover, as practice has shown, such
measures are ineffective as well as illegal.
In order to avoid further complicating the
international situation, it is important to uphold
international law - the law proper, not some rule or
other - including the Charter, State sovereignty and
respect for one another's cultural and civilizational
specificities - and to strive for cooperation, not
confrontation. We must all acknowledge that our
peoples have the right to independently determine their
own future without outside interference in their internal
affairs. We will see positive results when States unite
their efforts in the interests of mutually beneficial
and respectful cooperation. That is the only approach
that can produce dividends for all the members of the
international community and a fair, democratic and
harmonious world order.

We hope that today's discussions will develop into
a serious conversation about the role of the United
Nations, a crucial and key mechanism for regulating
modern international relations.

