Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like at the outset to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Officeof Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, for their comprehensive briefings. I would like also to thank Ms. Mona Frei for sharing her own experience regarding the suffering of civilians, especially women, in Raqqa, from oppression under the yoke of the terrorist group Da'esh. That is a testament to the need for a participatory approach to counter-terrorism that includes all factions of society, especially women, given their role in building balanced societies capable of achieving peace and stability. Despite the military defeat of Da'esh in Iraq and Syria and the killing of its leader, Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, Da'esh continues to pose a threat to peace and security. That terrorist group has been able to cope with its territorial losses in Syria and Iraq. It is currently attempting to regroup and organize systematic attacks by taking advantage of the deteriorating security and political situations in certain regions. The current situation presents a number of serious challenges related to the fate of foreign terrorist fighters, estimated at around 40,000, according to the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/95). Those fighters pose a threat, given that they are battle-hardened and weapon-trained. In the absence of the necessary measures to ensure the judicial follow up, rehabilitation and reintegration of those returnee fighters, they could join local terrorist groups or sleeper cells, thereby becoming vectors of terrorist and violent ideologies. They represent a direct threat to their countries of origin and neighbouring countries. Da'esh fighters seek to relocate to other conflict zones in the world, which represent breeding grounds for Da'esh offshoots and terrorist groups in general. That would make these conflicts more severe, prolonged, complex and bloody. In that context, Tunisia follows with grave concern the latest reports on the relocation of numerous terrorist fighters from Syria to Libya, which will pose an additional threat to the security not only of Libya but also of neighbouring countries and the Sahel region. Tunisia welcomes the progress made by the United Nations in combating terrorist threats. We call for continued efforts until Da'esh and other terrorist groups are completely eliminated, especially through the implementation of international legal instruments and relevant resolutions. My country welcomes the adoption by the Council last year of resolution 2462 (2019), on combating the financing of terrorism, as well as resolution 2482 (2019), on the links between terrorism and transnational organized crime. In that regard, I would like to make the following points. First, there is a need to intensify bilateral and multilateral cooperation on _ information-sharing, border security and the protection of civil aviation in order to monitor and prevent the relocation of foreign terrorist fighters to conflict zones or other countries. I underscore the need to build the capacities of States and provide them with the resources necessary to protect soft targets, such as public spaces, archaeological and tourist sites, places of worship and sporting and cultural events, which constitute easy targets for terrorist groups, especially lone-wolf attackers. Secondly, my country emphasizes the fact that the phenomenon of terrorism is closely linked to deteriorating political and security situations across the world, especially in the Middle East and Africa. Conflicts, intra-State wars and the availability of weapons contribute to an environment conducive to violence and extremist and criminal groups. Tunisia stresses the need for the Council to play an active and vital role by using all the tools provided to it by the Charter of the United Nations to resolve such conflicts and combat the trafficking of weapons. Thirdly, Tunisia stresses that combating terrorism will not be effective without a comprehensive and participatory approach that is not limited to security solutions but addresses the root causes of terrorism, such as poverty, marginalization and exclusion, which push vulnerable groups, especially young people, towards radicalization. Achieving sustainable development and investing in the stability and prosperity of people are our first line of defence against conflicts, violent and extremist rhetoric. Fourthly, the international community must promote accountability mechanisms to hold to account those who participate in, encourage, finance or support terrorist acts in order to achieve fair accountability, prevent impunity and restore the dignity of the victims of terrorism. Tunisia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2490 (2019) in September 2019, renewing for one year the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). My country looks forward to continued partnership between the Iraqi authorities and the Investigative Team in the area of preserving, storing and maintaining evidence of the horrific terrorist crimes committed bythose terrorist groups, while fully respecting Iraq's sovereignty and jurisdiction over crimes committed on its territory. Tunisia also welcomes the initiative to organize the first meeting of its kind for victims of terrorism, to be held at United Nations Headquarters in June, which will shed light on the rights of the victims and their active role in combating terrorist rhetoric. Fifthly, Tunisia expresses its concern over the increased use of communications technology, in particular social media, to spread terrorist narratives and attract and recruit young people. We welcome the open meeting held by the Counter-Terrorism Committee last month, which focused on various mechanisms and lessons learned in combating the narrative of terrorism, while taking into account freedom of expression and human rights. In conclusion, my country underscores the need for combating terrorism to be based on respecting international human rights law and _ international humanitarian law. We must include all actors, especially civil society, women, young people, the victims of terrorism and the private sector, as key partners in addressing the root causes of terrorism, given their pivotal role in building balanced and cohesive societies that would be the best defence against terrorism.
