Mr. Beasley: I offer very special thanks for the
opportunity to be here with Council today. I also thank
Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock, who are literally
on ground, working all over the world. Mr. Griffiths is
working in a particularly difficult situation in Yemen.
We interface, collaborate and coordinate literally on a
day-to-day basis.

I hope some day I can come here to brief the
Council on some great news with respect to the conflict
ending or well-fed and healthy children. Regrettably,
today is not that day. The humanitarian situation in
Yemen is dire, and despite the immense suffering of the
20 million Yemenis who do not have enough to eat, we
continue to face fierce resistance to simply just doing
ourjob to keep people alive.

Council members may recall that, in November
2017, I spoke out very vocally and critically about
the coalition's blockade of Al-Hudaydah and the lack
of humanitarian funds and support in response to the
consequences of war. At that time, the Houthis told me
how grateful they were that I spoke out. I told them
then: "This has nothing to do with you." I said that
it had everything to do with what was right and with
the World Food Programme's humanitarian obligation
and mandate to do everything within our power to
reach those in need and to be neutral, impartial and
independent. And I told them: "If one day you cross the
line, I will speak out about you. So do what is right."

Today, I am sad to report that the World Food
Programme (WFP) is being prevented from feeding the
hungriest people in Yemen. Food assistance provided by
the United Nations is being diverted in areas controlled
by Ansar Allah at the expense of hungry children,
women and men.

Let me take a step back just a moment to
describe one of our main jobs at the World Food
Programme - that is, to determine who has the
greatest need of our assistance. No matter where we
operate, we must be able to independently identify
and verify those who need assistance. We also have to
put in place monitoring systems to ensure that those
people truly get the food they need. That is another
of our obligations. These systems help to ensure that
others cannot deprive people of the food they need to
stay alive and that our food does not support political
agendas. These systems protect the people we feed and
ensure that basic humanitarian principles are met and
that we are accountable to our donors and the world.

In the past two years, like in the film Groundhog
Day, we have been telling Ansar Allah over and
over that we had concerns about its resistance to our
neutral, independent operations. It was not just a
matter of registration that we were talking about. As
Mr. Lowcock remembers, we were also having trouble
getting equipment imported, getting visas approved for
staff and many other issues. We kept raising these issues
repeatedly, clay in and day out. In December 2017, we
started formal negotiations with the Sana'a authorities
to allow us to identify the hungriest and put them on
a biometric system. Months and months of talks did
not yield any results, and while we kept talking and
talking and talking, in late 2018 we uncovered serious
evidence that food was being diverted and going to the
wrong people.

As I told the Security Council in November last
year (see S/PV.8404), the situation in Yemen was and
is catastrophic. Livelihoods have been destroyed; the
economy is in shambles. We are now feeding more than
10 million people a month. But as the head of the World
Food Programme, I cannot assure the Council that all the
assistance is going to those who need it the most. Why?
Because we are not allowed to operate independently
and because aid is being diverted for profit and/or other
purposes. The bottom line is this - food is being taken
from the mouths of hungry little girls and little boys
who need it just to survive. Let me sight just a few
examples of the evidence we have gathered.

In Sana'a city, a number of beneficiaries told us
that they had not received any food assistance. But the
distribution list contained their thumbprints, as if they
had. Who took their food? We interviewed beneficiaries
at seven centres in Sana'a city. As much as 60 per cent
of beneficiaries confirmed that they had not received
any assistance. Where did their food go?

While we saw an initial improvement in early
2019, through the hard work of Martin Griffiths,
Mark Lowcock, Lisa Grande and others, concerning
information has emerged and continues to emerge.
For example, in Saada, 33 per cent of the respondents
of our survey did not receive food in April 2019. In
just the past 60 days, our hotline and monitoring
system have detected more than 30 cases of possible
misappropriation of food in parts of Yemen controlled
by the authorities in Sana'a. On top of this, in Saada,
overall 79 per cent of third-party monitors and 66 per
cent of WFP staff monitoring visits were blocked. Let me
be clear - diversion, while mostly in areas controlled
by Ansar Allah, is not limited only to Houthi-controlled
areas, but when we face challenges in areas controlled
by the Government, we have received cooperation to
address the issues on an ongoing basis.

Our food assistance is being manipulated, and we
are being blocked from fixing it. If we do nothing, does
that mean we condone it? Are we a party to it? Are we
no longer neutral? Humanity is the reason we are in
Yemen in the first place. It is why the world and many
nations represented in this Chamber today are providing
the World Food Programme with over $150 million per
month to feed hungry Yemenis. When food assistance
goes to the wrong people, when it fails to reach the
neediest, have we failed humankind?

We cannot let this stand. We have tried every
possible option to resolve this issue over the past 18
months. We have been dialoguing and negotiating with
the Ansar Allah leadership to simply let us do our job
and reach the most vulnerable people in Yemen. It is not
any more complicated than that.

I have personally appealed to Abdul-Malik
Al-Houthi, the leader of Ansar Allah. In December and
January, he responded in a most favourable way and
we made some progress. On 28 December 2018 and
15 January of this year, we signed agreements with
the Sana'a authorities on beneficiary registration,
beneficiary targeting and biometrics. It was a
tremendous breakthrough. It seemed as if we might
be able to move forward. But every time we got close
to actually putting those agreements into place, there
would be a new roadblock.

After extensive dialogue, I again wrote to the
authorities, asking not for words but for action. I asked
them to honour the agreements they had signed. I told
them that if we did not receive these assurances, then
we would begin a phased suspension of food assistance,
most likely towards the end of the week. If and when we
do initiate suspension, we will continue our nutrition
programme for malnourished children, pregnant women
and new mothers, and we will also keep pushing and
pushing to get an agreement.

We want to resolve this quickly so that the people
can get the help they need and the help they deserve.
Then we can go back to doing our regular work, which
we do all over the world with more than 80 or 90 million
people in the most difficult places on Earth. And we can
do beneficiary targeting and the biometric registration,
as needed, to make sure that the right beneficiaries get
the support that they need. If not, then we are looking
at expanding the suspension to others areas where the
risk of diversion is high. We do not want to do that; it
goes against every fibre of our being. All we are asking
is to let us do what we do everywhere else, all over
the world. Our humanitarian principles - the very
tool that allows us to do our job in the most complex
places - are compromised if we are not allowed to
independently determine who needs our help the most.
We have the expertise, and, fortunately, we have the
funds to keep suffering Yemenis alive.

Let me be crystal clear here: children are dying
right now as we speak because of that interference and
our lack of access. I believe that there are elements of
the Ansar Allah leadership who want to move forward
and do what is right. I really do believe that. But, like in
every war, there are those who stand to make a profit,
and they will do everything to obstruct and delay. They
know that children are dying. They know that families
are suffering because they are not getting the food that
they need. No one associated with the United Nations
should stand idly by while that happens. It is not just
about Yemen. It is about the integrity of the entire
United Nations and the humanitarian system around the
world. That is what is at stake. We are not giving up.
I still have hope that we will prevail on what is right,
and that the Houthi leadership will do what is good. We
are not asking the Ansar Allah movement for anything
other than to let us do our job.

Let me end with a short story. I do not know how
many of those present saw the 60 Minutes special
expose on starving children about a year and a half ago,
which was very tough and implicated all sides. Scott
Pelley held an extensive interview with many people,
including me personally. At the end, as he was turning
the microphone off, he looked at me. I had known Scott
from the past, from politics. He said,

"Governor, you have got the greatest job on Earth,
keeping people alive".

I said,

"Scott, I do. I really do have the best job on Earth.
But I want to say something to you that you have
not thought of and it is going to bother you. Sadly,
I do not go to bed every night thinking about the
children we saved; I go to bed at night thinking
about the children we could not save. When we do
not have the access or the money that we need, my
team has to choose which children eat and which do
not eat, and which children live and which children
die. Scott, how would you like thatjob?"

Scott looked at me and said,
"Oh, my God, I never thought about that".
I said,

"Scott, unfortunately, I have to think about that
every day and every night.

In Yemen we are fortunate enough to have the
money that we need, we just do not have the access.
We do not make this decision lightly. I am begging the
Houthis and all those concerned to do everything within
their power to let us do what we do best - save lives.

