Mrs. Lucas (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia have aligned themselves with this
statement, with which Norway also associates itself.

Despite the efforts deployed by the international
community for more than eight years now to arrive at a
comprehensive settlement, the peace process in Angola is
continuing to come up against serious difficulties. The
deterioration of the military situation and the ongoing
delays in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol are
such that the Secretary-General states in his report that
the peace process is currently going through its most
difficult stage since the signing of the Lusaka Protocol.

The European Union is extremely concerned by the
persistent tension throughout the country, which threatens
to jeopardize the progress achieved over the last two and
a half years. It strongly urges the Angolan Government
and UNITA in particular to do their utmost to improve
the situation and to refrain from the use of force.

More than six weeks have elapsed since the adoption
of resolution 1118 (1997), and despite frequent reminders,
particularly by way of statements issued by the President
of the Security Council, the European Union and the
observer troika's peace process mediation, UNITA has
still not complied with the demands of the international
community. The information given to the Joint
Commission regarding the strength of UNITA's armed
forces, the extension of State administration and the
activities of radio station VORGAN is neither complete
nor credible, and UNITA is continuing to impede the
smooth conduct of the demobilization programme.
The European Union strongly regrets and considers
unacceptable UNITA's persistent refusal to honour its
obligations. Such stalling casts serious doubt on the
sincerity of its commitment to the peace process and
makes the imposition of further measures by the Security
Council, in accordance with previous resolutions, in
particular resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993, a
necessity.

The European Union urgently appeals to UNITA's
leadership to take advantage of the grace period before
the imposition of stringent measures, as provided for in
the resolution before the Council, to supply in full the
requisite information on its military personnel, to
demobilize all forces, to restore State administration
throughout the country and to transform radio VORGAN
into a non-partisan station. Should UNITA fail to fulfil its
commitments, the measures decided on by the Security
Council will have to be enforced and fully verified.

In view of the security situation, the European Union
also endorses the Secretary-General's proposal that the

 

withdrawal of United Nations military units in Angola be
further delayed and up to 2,650 military personnel left in
the country in order to ensure the completion of the
demobilization process.

In this connection, the European Union shares the
Secretary-General's view that a meeting between President
Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi would help significantly to
improve the political atmosphere and advance the process
of national reconciliation.

Over the last few years, the European Union has
provided substantial resources to help the Angolan people
achieve lasting peace, national reconciliation and Angola's
economic recovery. We are particularly alarmed at the
attacks on personnel of the United Nations and of
international non-governmental organizations. It is
imperative that the freedom of movement, safety and
security of international personnel, their programmes and
their institutions be ensured.

The future of the peace process depends basically on
the Angolan Government and UNITA, both of which must
refrain from any action liable to lead to a resumption of the
fighting. As the situation now stands, the international
community looks above all to UNITA to honour in a
credible and unconditional manner the basic obligations
entailed by the Lusaka Protocol.

The European Union wishes lastly to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Maitre Blondin
Beye, and to the three observer States for their efforts to
bring about a lasting peace in Angola.

