Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (interpretation from French): At
the close of your mandate as President of the Security
Council for the month of November, during which you
have demonstrated your sterling qualities, I wish, Sir, to
congratulate you warmly on behalf of my delegation.

The United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH), which was established for a four-month
period by resolution 1123 (1997) of 30 July 1997, is
coming to an end. The mandate of UNTMIH was to help
the Haitian authorities professionalize the Haitian national
police, and it did an outstanding job and made a
substantial contribution to strengthening an institution that
is of great importance to the progress of democracy in
Haiti.

I take the opportunity presented by his departure to
pay tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Enrique ter Horst, for his effectiveness and
dedication, which contributed to the success of the
Mission. I also thank the commanders of the military
forces and of the civilian police and the entire staff of
UNTMIH for their efforts in support of democracy in
Haiti. We convey our profound gratitude to all the
countries that participated in the Mission or in various
ways facilitated its full success, notably Canada and the
United States, which have made special efforts in that
regard.

When in March 1995 United Nations troops first
arrived in Haiti to take over from the multinational force,
the people and the Government of Haiti were facing an
enormous challenge. We needed to rehabilitate a country
that had been completely devastated, that was in the
throes of an unbridled lack of security and whose
institutions were failing - sometimes, indeed, non-
existent.

Thanks to the climate of peace and security that
United Nations personnel helped to maintain, there was
major progress in many areas. Haiti regained stability.
Once reformed, existing institutions began to work again,
and new institutions were born. We are making progress
towards building a State based on the rule of law. In his
letter dated 29 October 1997 addressed to the Secretary-
General, the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Rene Preval, stressed the decisive role played by the
Organization in the maintenance of stability and security
in our country, and its support for the consolidation of
democracy.

 

With the departure of United Nations military forces,
the Haitian National Police will alone shoulder
responsibility for maintaining order and security. That
institution, born barely two years ago to replace a corrupt,
brutal army, has benefitted from the contribution of United
Nations personnel in the areas of training and
professionalization. Recent progress reports have shown that
the Haitian National Police has made significant progress in
certain decisive areas. But there is concern at the gap
between the professionalization and growing integration of
the police on the one hand and the pace of progress in the
sphere of justice on the other; this can certainly lead to
frustration among the people. The Haitian National Police
needs international assistance to continue its own
institutional development while also doing its job of
maintaining security.

That is why, in his letter, President Preval requested
the assistance of a civilian police mission to help with
police training, which would make it possible for this
institution - indispensable for the establishment of a State
truly based on the rule of law - to experience balanced,
smooth and prompt development.

As everybody knows, not all the problems facing Haiti
have been resolved. The lack of security, linked to banditry
and drug trafficking, continues to claim victims. The
economy has not yet seen the recovery we had hoped for,
and the living conditions of all Haitians have continued to
deteriorate, with absolute poverty gaining ground despite
the Govemment's efforts to remedy the situation.

Here we must stress that the firm determination to
eliminate the vestiges of a regime of terror based on
practices of domination, repression and monopoly that were
at once anachronistic and sophisticated and to build a new
social order cannot be limited to access by the majority to
citizenship through the building and strengthening of
democratic institutions. This endeavour requires that the
population - the majority of which is without the benefits
of twentieth-century progress - enjoy the material and
spiritual conditions that lead to a life of dignity. This is
difficult because of the vast gap between available
resources and the enormous, ever-present demands that are
becoming ever more urgent with the achievement of
political freedoms. Integrated and sustainable development
is an essential element for the stability of our country.

At this stage in our national reconstruction, the Haitian
people continues to count on the support of the international
community, which has already made considerable efforts
for the restoration of democracy to Haiti.

For all these reasons, my delegation would ask the
Security Council to adopt the draft resolution before it
unanimously.

