Lieutenant General Ke'i'ta (spoke in French): I
would first like once again to express our gratitude to
the members of the Security Council for their support,
and our acknowledgement of the sacrifices made by
peacekeeping soldiers.

Iwill only briefly address the three questions asked,
because I believe that the other Force Commanders
have already provided information concerning them.

With regard to the representative of Senegal's
question, the engagement of our helicopters in Bambari
to confront a coalition was due to two basic reasons.
The first concerned the very credibility of our mission.
Would we stand by and watch one coalition attack
another in the second largest city of the country,
thereby allowing chaos and despair to reign over the
civilian population?

The second reason was that, as Bambari is the
second largest city, taking it would have meant the de
facto division of the country in two, because it is the
only remaining city that prevents the Central African
Republic from being divided between the east and
the west.Because of those two fundamental reasons, we
were more or less forced to take decisive steps and the
most suitable way to do that was to use our advantage.
Our advantage over the rebel groups was in the air,
which enabled us to be decisive and at the same time to
ensure that our troops were not too vulnerable. Despite
the fact that we had troops on the ground to handle the
situation, we used the advantage we had, which was key
to our efforts. It stopped the advance of the coalition
into Bambari. We were compelled to use helicopters for
those two reasons.

(spoke in English)

I received another question from the representative
of the United Kingdom on how to mitigate the impact
of red tape on peacekeeping operations. That is a very
important issue but it is beyond the capability of the
Force Commanders. I think that it is up to the Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Affairs
and the troop-contributing countries to agree on the
reason that we send soldiers to current peacekeeping
missions. We have all understood that for 90 per cent
of the current missions, there is no peace to keep. We
therefore send the troops for some other reason, and
that other reason is to protect civilians against armed
individuals who kill civilians. It is therefore obvious
that if the Council sends peacekeepers to deal with
armed groups who kill, then they must be ready to
fight. The peacekeepers cannot be put into that type
of situation and have to deal with red tape and caveats
that render them non-operational. If the missions are
to be fully operational, then risks must be accepted
and caveats removed. Troops must then be given the
ability to meet the protection-of-civilians challenges
they face on the ground. I think that the problem can
be solved at that level. At the moment, as soon as the
troops land on the ground, there is too much red tape
that we cannot circumvent.

The last question came from the representative of
the United States about whether or not I have the right
capability to deal with the worsening situation in the
Central African Republic in order to achieve success
in the country. I am very glad that the representative
of the United States asked that question because the
narrative is that the United States does not want to hear
about additional capability. It wants the peacekeeping
missions to do more with less. We have tried to do
more with less but we have reached our culminating
point. In military operations, when the culminating
point has been reached, we can no longer move
forward and then we lose ground. We have reached that
culminating point. To prevent us from losing ground,
we have requested additional resources. That requires
investment to rightsize the force.

After Bambari, the threat has moved towards the
south east. The south-east of the country was a very
peaceful area throughout the conflict. For more than
three years, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) carried
out activities and the Ugandans, supported by the United
States, dealt with the threat posed by the LRA. But
while the conflict was moving south-east, at the same
time the African Union and the Ugandans, supported
by the Americans, started leaving and a vacuum was
created. In addition, we do not have enough capability
to move and fulfil the protection-of-civilians mandate,
deal with the LRA threat to the civilian population
and try to stabilize the area. Because Bambari was a
success and a turning point, we have to preserve that
achievement so that development investment can be
made. Capability is therefore required just to make
Bambari safe.

At the same time, as the Council knows, we have
a centre of gravity known as Bangui, the capital of the
country. We have to ensure the safety of everyone in
Bangui, from the President to the smallest child. We
have to keep that centre of gravity safe. We need a bit
of investment to preserve the centre of gravity and the
Bombari success, and fill the huge vacuum in the south
east. We can then capitalize on that and make the mission
successful. We ask that that request be considered and
that it be a matter of urgency so that we can control and
improve the situation to achieve success.

