Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to brief the Council on the work
of the Committee pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban. I am also
thankful to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their support of
the work of the 1988 Sanctions Committee.

The 1988 Committee's chief aim is to deter the
Taliban and associates through the use of tools,
such as a global assets freeze, global travel ban and
global arms embargo. At the same time, the 1988
sanctions regime is intended to support the peace
and reconciliation process, including through the use
of the delisting process and the process of granting
exemptions to enable listed persons to engage in peace
and reconciliation negotiations and other approved
activities. The existence of the 1988 sanctions regime
matters to the Taliban. Removal from what the Taliban
call the United Nations blacklist is consistently in the
top three demands of the group.

In 2017, the 1988 Committee has delisted one
reportedly deceased individual at the request of the
Afghan Government. No additional individuals or
entities have been delisted this year, nor have any
individuals or entities been added to the 1988 sanctions
list. The Committee has reason to be optimistic in
the coming months, as there are indications that
the Afghan Government and other members may
request the delisting of several individuals to further
facilitate the peace and reconciliation efforts. In that
context, the delisting of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar earlier
this year by the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, as requested by the
Afghanistan Government, has had a positive impact on
the peace and reconciliation process. Since the delisting,
Mr. Hekmatyar has been participating in the political
process in Afghanistan, strengthening the prospects for
reconciliation of other individuals in the future.

Ever since the death of the previous Taliban leader,
Mullah Mansour, in 2016, the leadership ranks of
the Taliban have continued to face internal friction,
primarily between the pro-Mansour faction and the
new leader Haibatullah Akhundzada, who is not
yet listed. The Monitoring Team's latest report (see S/2017/409), submitted to the Committee in May, noted
that the reasons for dissent are primarily the question
of Haibatullah Akhundzada's ability to lead militarily
and over the distribution of finance, in particular funds
formerly controlled by Mullah Mansour.

But those internal dissensions have not affected the
Taliban's military capabilities. As a result, 2017 has also
been a difficult year in terms of security challenges. As
in previous years, the Taliban have retained the ability
to conduct attacks against Afghan forces, the Afghan
people and the international presence in Afghanistan, in
spite of the sanctions measures. Indeed, the Monitoring
Team's report predicted a very challenging fighting
season, with the Taliban potentially threatening several
provincial capitals, both in the north and the south of the
country. That has been borne out since then, indicating
that despite considerable losses, the fighting strength of
the Taliban has not diminished. Those clashes continue
to be funded mainly by the narcotics economy and the
illegal extraction of natural resources. The situation is
also complicated by the presence of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and foreign terrorist fighters
in Afghanistan.

However, it is important to note that in spite of initial
losses to the Taliban, Afghan Government forces have
managed to maintain control over provinces and district
headquarters that initially came under heavy attack
by the Taliban. That indicates that the Government's
fighting capacity is improving, in no small measure due
to the consistent support and assistance it has received
from the international presence in Afghanistan.

While there are many structures and frameworks
in place for the implementation of the 1988 sanctions
regime, implementation is dependent not only on
internal actors, but also on regional and international
actors. The Committee would therefore like to
encourage Member States to play a more active role
in providing information that would help to keep the
sanctions list as up-to-date as possible.

A worrying development has been the large-scale
increase in opium production in Afghanistan, which
continues to fuel the Taliban's activities. TheAfghanistan
Opium Survey 2017, published in November by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, highlighted an increase of
87 per cent in opium production, rising to 9,000 tons
from its 2016 level of 4,800 tons. That clearly needs to
be addressed, as Taliban involvement in illegal opium
production and trade may have provided the group
with an estimated $400 million in annual income in
2016. Cutting off that financial stream would have a
significant impact on the Taliban's ability to resource
its offensive against the Government of Afghanistan.

The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions
measures also relies on close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and region. One of the
reasons why I travelled to Afghanistan in October as
Chair of the 1988 and 1267 sanctions committees was
to engage directly with interlocutors in the Afghan
Government. I was pleased with the level of engagement
the delegation received while in Kabul, including
meetings with President Ghani, Chief Executive
Abdullah and other senior Government officials. The
meetings in Kabul showed that there is potential for
greater use of the 1988 sanctions regime to deter the
Taliban and support the peace process. Towards that
end, I was briefed on the Government's efforts to
identify Taliban members for potential delisting in the
coming months in order to strengthen the peace and
reconciliation efforts.

At the same time, renewed efforts are also needed
to list individuals and entities associated with the
Taliban who are not yet on the sanctions list but who
carry out activities harmful to the peace and security
of Afghanistan. The legal frameworks are in place
to implement the sanctions measures, but structures
are effective only against listed individuals who are
identifiable. While there are many associates of the
Taliban currently not on the list, some listed individuals
lack sufficient identifiers that would enable the
countermeasures to function more effectively. Those
measures are effective not only within Afghanistan,
but also and particularly against cross-border flows of
money, narcotics, arms and foreign terrorist fighters.
Those are challenges that extend to the wider region,
and the sanctions regime can support the region in
meeting those challenges.
The Committee is keen to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in making wider use of the tools
offered by the 1988 sanctions regime. In that respect,
the Committee awaits the Government's proposals
regarding the sanctions list updates. The Committee
once again urges all Member States to assist in the
sincere implementation of the sanctions measures
to enhance its effectiveness. The Committee looks
forward to continued close engagement with UNAMA,
Afghanistan and regional States under the chairmanship
of Kazakhstan in 2018.

