Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to welcome the participation in this meeting
of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the observer State of Palestine, following the granting
to Palestine of the status of non-member observer State
in November. I also thank Mr. Robert Serry for the
valuable presentation he gave on the developments that
have taken place over the past three months.

(spoke in English)

Important developments have taken place since
the last open meeting (see S/PV.6847) to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, including the issue of
Palestine, three months ago.

First, President Obama was re-elected in the first
week of November. His election renewed the hope for
a fresh and effective engagement by the American
Administration towards the peace process in the Middle
East.

A week after the American elections, there was a
limited escalation in Gaza. Egypt tried to mediate as
soon as the escalation started. But before our efforts
could bear fruit, they were undermined by the wide-scale
Israeli aggression against Gaza that same week. That
prompted us to demand the convening of an urgent
meeting of the Security Council, on 14 November, to
address the deteriorating situation. The Council held a
closed meeting (see S/PV.6863) the same day, but was
unable to take action. Nevertheless, we pursued our
efforts to mediate between Israel and Hamas to stop
the violence. We succeeded in reaching an agreement
to calm down the situation, on 21 November. It included
a number of arrangements aimed at sustaining the
de-escalation. It also included the gradual loosening of
the illegal blockade on Gaza and stopping the hostilities
from both sides.

On 29 November, the General Assembly voted by
an overwhelming majority to grant Palestine the status
of observer State in the General Assembly (resolution 67/19). A total of 138 countries voted in favour and nine
voted against; there were 42 abstentions. All of the
statements made by States during that historic meeting
of the General Assembly (see A/67/PV.44), whether in
favour, against or in abstention, explained that they
had taken their position in order to promote the peace
process in the region.

Before that historic step in the General Assembly,
Israel had promised to retaliate. It did deliver on its
promise. In the period following the adoption of the
resolution), the Israeli Government proceeded with a
settlement frenzy in the occupied territories, especially
Jerusalem. Fourteen members of the Council have
issued separate statements denouncing this policy,
which aims at imposing a fait accompli on the ground.
Israel also seized the tax revenues of the Palestinian
Authority, subjecting it to the threat of a financial
collapse.

The Arab Foreign Ministers have met three times
to address the situation in Palestine since our last
meeting: in November, during the Israeli aggression
against Gaza; in December; and in January. They took
a number of decisions to condemn the settlement frenzy
in the occupied territories and to support the Palestinian
Authority and the reconciliation efforts in Palestine.
They committed to exerting all efforts to give the peace
process a last chance.

Egypt resumed its efforts for reconciliation in
Palestine. This month the President of Egypt received
the President of the State of Palestine. We also received
the leaders of Hamas. Steps are currently being taken
for the purpose of reconciliation.

Finally, the Israeli elections took place yesterday.
The official results are yet to come, but preliminary
results show that the current ruling party is ahead
in the exit polls. During the election campaign, the
Prime Minister of Israel vowed to continue and expand
settlement activity. He reaffirmed on many occasions
that Israel had the right to build in East Jerusalem.

In the middle of these important developments, we
can identify two positive signs. First, the agreement for
the ceasefire in Gaza is still holding. Measures have
been taken on both sides to de-escalate the situation.
Arrangements have been made by Israel to loosen the
blockade, including the expansion of the fishing area
for Palestinians to six miles and limited access for
trucks into Gaza.

Secondly, the process of Palestinian reconciliation
is slowly resuming. We plan to organize a number of
meetings in the near future for the two parties to resolve
their differences.

Before our next meeting, three months from now,
all of the parties, the international community and the
Security Council in particular have to show a concrete
engagement to contain the serious potential implications
of the collapse of the peace process. Inaction is not an
option. Incremental practical steps have to be taken
in order to ensure stability in the region and save the
peace process.

First, the sponsors of the peace process, including
the American Administration, the European Union,
Russia, the United Nations and all the parties have
to recommit to a serious effort to resume the peace
negotiations on the basis ofthe previously agreed terms
of reference, with a view to reaching a final solution
that would include the establishment of a Palestinian
independent State on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

Secondly, all current settlement plans in the
occupied territories have to be frozen. No new plans
should be approved. The Council should consider
taking action in that regard.

Thirdly, reconciliation efforts in Palestine have to
be encouraged in a clear and unequivocal way.

Fourthly, the situation on the ground in Palestine
has to be improved. That applies to both Gaza and
the West Bank. The blockade against Gaza has to be
lifted. The financial embargo against the revenues of
the Palestinian Authority has to end. The daily violence
and abuse against the Palestinians has to stop.

We look forward to the achievement of all, or some,
of those steps in the next three months. Meanwhile,
Egypt will remain committed to working with all
parties towards achieving a just and lasting peace for
all the peoples and States of the region.

