Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (Spoke in French):
I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on the question of the
Security Council's working methods, the fifth such
meeting on this subject and one that the Members of
the United Nations as a whole consider more and more
important. I am also grateful to Ambassador Jose Filipe
Moraes Cabral of Portugal for the outstanding work he
has done as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as
well as for the detailed briefing he has just given us.

The presidential note of 7 February 2006
(S/2006/507), modified by the Security Council on
26 July 2010 (S/2010/507), covers the main topics that
the Informal Working Group has had to discuss and
that are of major interest to the Council. The Group is
working with resolve and determination to achieve good
results, since the question ofthe reform of the Council's
working methods has been a focus of the concerns of
Heads of State and Government since the 2005 World
Summit, at which they actually made a recommendation
on the subject (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Many
efforts have been made since then within the Council
itself, but we must recognize that there is still a long
way to go before we reach the goals that signify greater
transparency and efficiency in the Council's work.
That is why, since the open debate of 30 November
2011 (see S/PV.6672), the Informal Working Group has
focused its action on new issues, while still attempting
to ensure the effective implementation of those it
compiled in presidential note 507.

The consideration of those new issues has resulted
recommendations on various equally important issues.
What emerges is that the good use of conference
resources and a judicious reordering of mandate
renewal periods throughout the year not only save the
Organization money but also reduce the workload for
Council members during certain months of the year.

On other questions such as that of the people we
term penholders, and of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies,
my delegation has always believed that transparency,
inclusivity and flexibility should govern actions in
that regard so as to enable all members to participate
effectively and efficiently in drafting resolutions and
in the process of designating the Chairs of subsidiary
bodies. We hope that the Council will take decisions on
such questions as soon as possible, in order to improve
its work.

The interaction between the Council and other
organs of the United Nations, particularly the General
Assembly, is a question that has always come up
when we discuss the issue of reform. In that regard,
the increasing number of open debates, which allow
non-Council-member States to share common concerns
in a spirit of complementarity and responsibility, is
commendable. Some delegations have proposed, in
that connection, that the documents the Council adopts
at the end of such open debates reflect the positions
expressed in those debates, which would mean delaying
their adoption. While sharing such concerns, we
believe that we should not throw out the baby with the
bathwater, since the adoption of such documents would
be subject to intense negotiations with non-members,
which is not always guaranteed to succeed and could
lead to blockages that would affect the desired result.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
dialogue that has begun between the Council and other
organizations or entities in the area of the maintenance
of international peace and security. Such informal
interactive dialogues, such as those that took place this
year with the delegations of the Economic Community
ofWest African States on Togo's initiative, and with the
African Union on the crises in Mali and Guinea-Bissau,
have the advantage of enabling direct exchanges aimed
at deciding on the best action to undertake. Such
praiseworthy initiatives must be continued, as should
the holding of Arria Formula meetings and meetings
for the exchange of information and Views with
troop - and police-contributing countries.

The meeting held this year between the members
of the Security Council and the heads of peacekeeping
missions around the world was very significant and
should become established practice (see S/PV.6789).

Another topic we continue to follow is cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations. In the context of subsidiarity, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter, such meetings are of
increasing interest at a time when regional organizations
such as the African Union are making greater efforts
to seek solutions to conflicts both within and between
States. We firmly encourage the continuation of that
practice and of exchanges with the Peacebuilding
Commission, which should be held more regularly.

There are many areas where the Security Council
must improve its working methods. They are all equally
important, so I will not list them now. What reassures
us most is that the Council, which is master of its own
agenda, has taken note of the importance of this subject
and is tackling it. A great deal of time will be required
to adopt all the measures needed in that regard, and even
more time to put them into practice. The enthusiasm
characterizing the discussion and adoption of measures
to improve working methods is lacking when it comes
to their implementation. It is in there that more work
needs to be done, because it is useless to decide upon
something without implementing it.

What is certain is that the road ahead is long and
that we need to continue to work together, with external
and internal stakeholders, to reach the laudable goal of
reforming the working methods of the Security Council,

which would enable this principle organ of the United
Nations to be more transparent and credible.

