Let me join colleagues in thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. We appreciate his continued efforts under challenging circumstances. I also take note of the remarks by Ms. Ghazi. Concerning the Syrian issue, it is China's consistent position to support the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. The urgency of finding a political solution to the issue is further highlighted in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We understand that COVID-19 has caused additional difficulties for the process. Meanwhile, it is our firm belief that the political process should not stop under any circumstances. We encourage the Special Envoy to make every effort to promote substantive political dialogue and enhance mutual trust among the parties concerned. We are glad to hear that Constitutional Committee will hold its third round of meetings before the end of August and we are looking forward to more progress at that round of consultations. We also hope the ceasefire appeals by the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy will meet with positive responses. Facing a window of opportunity to promote inclusive dialogue and a political solution, we cannot overstate the importance of the need for the Syrian parties to strengthen consultation within the Constitutional Committee and engage constructively with the Special Envoy. Other relevant parties should also play a positive role in jointly addressing the challenges facing the Syrian people. With regard to the pandemic issue, we note that there are new confirmed cases in Syria. The Syrian Government is taking effective measures to fight against COVID-19. Meanwhile, the international community should intensify cooperation with the people and Government of Syria in combating the virus. China donated medical supplies to the Syrian Ministry of Health earlier this month, and we are ready to continue offering our support and help. At this difficult time, it is imperative that the international community, United Nations agencies and countries of the region cooperate with the Syrian Government in the fight against COVID-19 and ease the suffering of Syrian people. We are deeply concerned by recent reports on the economic situation in Syria. Years of economic blockade have caused tremendous hardships for the Syrian people - in particular, for women and children. The suffering caused by the devaluation of Syrian currency and soaring commodity prices, including for food, falls heavily on civilians across the country. We have heard briefings by the Special Envoy on the poverty and possible famine in the country, and are extremely concerned. We urge the United States to respond actively to the urgent appeals of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy and lift unilateral sanctions immediately. What is even more worrying is that new rounds of sanctions will be imposed against Syria. These sanctions will inevitably further hinder the economic and social development of Syria, as well as the livelihoods of ordinary Syrians. As vulnerable countries like Syria are struggling with the pandemic, imposing more sanctions is simply inhumane, and may cause additional catastrophes. The United Nations, and especially the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, should pay greater attention to the negative impact of sanctions on the humanitarian conditions of the Syrian people. Some countries are talking about human rights. If they do indeed care about the human rights of the Syrian people, they should take real actions to respond to the appeals of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys on the issue of sanctions. We should recognize and acknowledge that relevant parties are making great efforts to maintain a ceasefire and promote stability in Syria. Meanwhile, the international community should remain alert to the fact that terrorists are seeking to take advantage of the current situation, and not allow them so do so. The Security Council should attach importance to this issue and support the Special Envoy's call for effective, cooperative and targeted counter-terrorism efforts. We also call on relevant parties to launch negotiations and take actions on counter-terrorism. The future of Syria must be decided by the Syrians, without foreign interference. It is fundamental to respect and uphold the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. China will continue to support the good offices of the Special Envoy in fulfilling his mandate, endorsed in resolution 2254 (2015).
