Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821),
which focuses on grave Violations. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
experts for their briefing and efforts.

Since the Second World War, humankind has
considered the protection of civilians an utmost priority,
and adopted political commitments and legal instruments
to ensure such protection. Unfortunately, as confirmed
by conflicts that have followed, children remain the
group most vulnerable to armed conflicts. It is difficult
to explain the gap that persists, 70 years later, between
the clarity of the legal obligations of States and the
limitations that still hinder accountability mechanisms.
We therefore echo the Special Representative's call on
all States to prioritize accountability.

The State of Palestine stresses the importance
of ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law - notably, the principles of protection, precaution,
distinction and proportionality f as well as for human
rights and refugee law. It also underlines the importance
of international criminal law in holding perpetrators of
crimes accountable, providing justice to victims and
preventing a recurrence of crimes.

The State of Palestine has joined core human rights
and international humanitarian law conventions and
the International Criminal Court (ICC). The State of
Palestine has also acceded to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict. It has also
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. In line with
its policy of prioritizing the protection of children,
the State of Palestine has submitted a communication
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC on crimes
committed by Israel against Palestinian children,
and has mandated its newly established international
humanitarian law committee to give priority to
violations against children. The State of Palestine calls
for universal acceptance of relevant legal instruments
and commitments, leading to their full implementation.

Children must be protected from killing and
maiming, recruitment and use as soldiers, arrest and
detention, ill treatment, and denial of humanitarian
access. The children of Palestine have been suffering
for decades from a striking deficit ofprotection, despite
our repeated calls for the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population, whose rights are being violated on
a widespread and systematic basis by the prolonged
Israeli military colonial occupation.

Over 2,000 Palestinian children have been killed
since the year 2000 by Israeli occupying forces and
settlers. In 2016 alone, as documented in the Secretary-
General's report, 35 Palestinian children were killed
and 887 injured. Palestinian children, including in
East Jerusalem, are subject to mass arbitrary arrest and
detention, house arrest, incarceration, interrogation,
ill treatment, sexual abuse, torture and solitary
confinement. One hundred and eighty five incidents
of ill treatment of children, boys and girls alike, by
Israeli forces during arrest and detention are identified
in the Secretary-General's report. The international
community should demand the immediate and
permanent release of all children from Israeli captivity.

There can be no justification for the detention
and abuse of children. Moreover, Palestinian children
are the most affected by the Israeli policy of forcible
transfer. Deliberate attacks on schools, closures of
educational institutions, the disruption of access to
education, and restrictions of humanitarian and health-
care access - notably due to the decade-long Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which amounts to collective
punishment - continue unabated.

Palestine reiterates that all those well-documented
Israeli Violations and crimes, including those identified
in the Secretary-General's reports, plead clearly,
according to the established criteria, for the inclusion
of Israel and its settlers on the list of parties that
commit grave Violations affecting children in situations
of armed conflict. The abuse of such inclusions deeply
affects the credibility of the list and makes it vulnerable
to criticism and claims of politicization. It should be
noted that if credibility is undermined for one case,
it is undermined for all cases. Moreover, we repeat
our call on the international community to uphold its
responsibilities and enforce international law with a
View to bringing Israeli violations and occupation to an
end in order to advance peace.

The State of Palestine recognizes and appreciates
the important role played in Palestine by the United
Nations, its agencies, programmes and funds, including
in relation to the matter being addressed today, and
wishes to extend its particular appreciation to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and UNICEF in that regard.

In conclusion, the situation in Palestine demonstrates
the consequences of the abuse of prevention, protection
and accountability, and stresses that it is only by ending

impunity for violations and crimes against children that
we can preserve their lives, their rights and the future
they embody.
