We welcome the initiative of the Republic of the Niger to hold an open debate on the important issue of the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation and peace and security. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. The adverse consequences of climate change and environmental degradation remain of the utmost concern for the European Union (EU) and its member States, as they undermine peace and security, global sustainable development, water security, health, economic prosperity, food security and livelihoods. Climate change is an existential threat to humankind and biodiversity across all countries and regions and requires an urgent collective response. In the Council of the European Union conclusions on climate diplomacy, of January 2020, EU member States once again acknowledged how climate change multiplies threats to international stability and security, affecting in particular those in the most fragile and vulnerable situations. The EU recognizes that the effects of environmental degradation and climate change not only increase the risk of humanitarian crises, displacement and conflict - especially in fragile States - but are also felt most strongly by populations already affected by such crises, including refugees, internally displaced persons, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and other persons in vulnerable situations. That has become particularly clear in conflict zones impacted by droughts and floods, such as the Sahel, north-eastern Nigeria, Somalia, Yemen and South Sudan. Women and girls are disproportionately hit by the effects of climate change and disasters; their inclusion in decision-making processes is key to building inclusive resilience. Protecting the environment, tackling climate change with global action and ensuring the sustainable management of natural resources is a means of fostering peace, security and sustainable livelihoods. The EU is committed to addressing climate change and environmental degradation through an ambitious policy on climate-change mitigation and adaptation, and environmental protection globally, as enshrined in the European Green Deal. Reducing emissions to achieve a climate-neutral EU by 2050, increasing energy sustainability and efficiency, building a resource-efficient and circular economy and reversing biodiversity loss will ultimately increase resilience globally and reduce the risk of conflict over natural resources in future. Following the EU's approach, the mitigation of climate-related risks and the alleviation of environmental stress can be addressed more effectively through global cooperation and multilateral channels, notably through the three Rio Conventions, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Water Convention. Hazards can be prevented from turning into disasters by building resilience and through anticipatory risk-reduction action, early warning and early action. Increasing climate adaptation capacities and disaster risk reduction globally is a priority for the EU, in particular supporting the efforts of least developed countries and small island developing States, which are extremely vulnerable to disasters, climate change, floods and drought, as well as threats to water security. As part of the European Green Deal, the EU is enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change with a new, more ambitious EU strategy on adaptation to climate change, to be adopted early in 2021. The EU's commitment to supporting international climate action will be backed by financial support, with at least 25 per cent of EU development cooperation finance allocated to climate change. The EU humanitarian development and peace nexus approach aims to address the root causes of conflict and forced displacement, including disaster-related displacement, and minimize its impact; strengthening the resilience of individuals and communities lies at the core of EU support. Risk and impact assessments can help better anticipate potential issues related to climate/disasters that could cause displacement. Without opening the application field of some legal instruments such as the 1951 Geneva Convention, the EU supports efforts to consider how existing legal frameworks could be applied more effectively to environmentally related displacement, identify gaps and strengthen guidance in this area. EU humanitarian aid not only helps displaced populations in the aftermath of a disaster but also supports local capacities for risk reduction, preparedness and early action in response to increased risks. In our assessment of conflict risks, we should integrate climate, water and environmental degradation risks as threat multipliers. Climate and protection concerns are increasingly a key consideration in humanitarian interventions. Similarly, climate and environmental actions should be conflict-sensitive. Cooperation will have to increase not only between humanitarian and development actors but also with civil protection, climate science, civil society and the military. It is necessary to ensure effective humanitarian civilian-military coordination when armed forces are called upon to support, as a last resort, disaster management and relief efforts as a result of more frequent and severe weather events. The EU and its member States are also committed to advocating globally for the protection of the natural environment in armed conflict through supporting compliance with international humanitarian law and by taking all appropriate measures to address the protection needs of civilians. The destruction and degradation of the environment, either by its use as a weapon of war or as a result of damage by attacks and conflict-sustaining activities, ultimately hinders the recovery of conflict- affected populations that depend on natural resources for their livelihoods and well- being. It can also lead to irreparable damage to ecosystems, reducing nature's and society's resilience to the adverse consequences of disasters and climate change. In particular, the EU condemns the use of access to water as a weapon. The EU and its member States reiterate their commitment to continuing to take climate and environmental factors and risks, including on water, into account in our strategic engagement with partner countries and to work on preventive measures such as early-warning systems. We continue to encourage the Security Council and the United Nations system as a whole to create a comprehensive information basis for the Council on climate-related security risks; to fully integrate short- and long- term climate and environmental risk factors in the assessment and management of threats to peace and security, at the country, regional and international levels; and to draw on the expertise of the United Nations system as a whole in order to devise operational responses to those threats and strengthen United Nations missions on the ground. Climate- and environment-related security risks should also be consistently considered in conflict-prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies, and the Peacebuilding Commission's advisory role on such risks should be strengthened. The EU appreciates the Recovery and Peace Building Assessment as a valuable partnership framework of the United Nations, the World Bank and the EU, contributing to a shared understanding of the context of conflict, crisis and instability.
