Ms. Schraner Burgener: Since I began my
assignment, nine months ago, I have visited Myanmar
five times and Bangladesh three times and have taken
other tours in the region and beyond. Eighteen months
have now passed since the recent violence in Rakhine
state forced hundreds of thousands of Rohingya and
others to flee their homes, including across the border
into Bangladesh. In the broader context of Myanmar's
democratic transition, military and civilian tensions
persist ahead of general elections next year and the
peace process remains fragile, while the country
struggles with the legacy of decades of rule by the army
and, subsequently, fundamental issues relating to the
protection of human rights.

With regard to Rakhine, in addition to
accountability, I have underlined in my engagements
the following steps needed: ending the violence in
Rakhine, providing unfettered access to affected people,
addressing the root causes and spurring inclusive and
equitable development. I have witnessed at first-hand
in my two visits to Cox's Bazar refugees living in
extremely challenging temporary conditions with little
sign of hope. While Bangladesh and host communities
have been very generous, we cannot expect that to
continue indefinitely. The recently launched United
Nations joint response plan for 2019 to benefit both
refugees and host communities needs urgent funding.
Meanwhile, I am concerned that the heavy fighting with
the Arakan Army will further impact efforts toward the
dignified, voluntary and safe return of refugees.

I have appealed to all sides to ensure the protection
of civilians and to uphold their responsibilities under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. For refugees in Bangladesh, knowing that
the United Nations and its partners are present at their
places of origin will be a positive incentive for them
to return. In developing durable solutions for those
displaced within Myanmar, it is vital that the current
positive efforts by Myanmar to draft a national strategy
on the closure of camps for internally displaced persons
address the underlying issues in Rakhine, including the
question of citizenship and that of restoring freedom
of movement.

Even prior to the fighting with the Arakan Army,
the level of access was a problem. Access in the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
between Myanmar and the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to support the creation of
conditions for the return of refugees from Bangladesh
was insufficient. That must improve in order to address
the fragility of all communities in Rakhine. Any
complementarity, especially at the regional level by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, in support of
the bilateral efforts between Myanmar and Bangladesh
will be crucial.

At the request of both Governments, I will
continue my shuttle diplomacy and to engage all other
regional stakeholders. I will also continue to encourage
Myanmar's greater international cooperation towards
the effective and holistic implementation of all the
recommendations of the Annan Advisory Commission
on Rakhine state. With respect to related key issues, I
am in close contact at the highest levels on the steps that
authorities are taking with a view to transparent and
credible procedures. In my recent visits to Myanmar, I
advocated a zero tolerance for discrimination campaign
from top down. In addition, I will aim to coordinate and
foster greater intercommunal dialogue in Rakhine state
through my office in Naypyidaw.

Accountability is essential for combating impunity
and fostering genuine reconciliation. Myanmar's
independent commission of inquiry has responded
positively to my recommendation that it should engage
with United Nations human rights entities, such as the

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the fact-finding mission. There
needs to be complementarity, including with the most
recent Human Rights Council-mandated independent
investigative mechanism. But national responsibility
and ownership of accountability are also important,
not least from the perspective of the victims in Cox's
Bazar and throughout Myanmar. In line with the Basic
Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy
and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of
International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law, accountability
should not be seen solely in terms of criminal liability.
I therefore encourage various initiatives that give
victims different kinds of voices and support projects
that foster dialogue, as mentioned.

With regard to the peace process, we are Witnessing
in other areas beyond Rakhine, including Kachin and
Shan states, setbacks in the complex peace process.
In those areas too, many affected civilians require
assistance and access there too has been restricted.
Despite some positive steps towards an inclusive and
peaceful solution, such as the 21 December unilateral
ceasefire declaration by the Tatmadaw, tensions have
escalated, including between the Government side and
the signatory groups of the October 2015 nationwide
ceasefire agreement. It is the responsibility of all
parties to exercise restraint and avoid actions that can
reverse the important gains ofthe peace process. I stand
ready to help support that process. Some refugees from
the camps in Thailand recently returned to Myanmar.
It will be important to seize on such important
confidence-building measures and to build momentum.

General activities related to the 2020 elections
could add to the domestic complexities. In such an
environment, State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi is evidently moving ahead carefully on democratic
reform, as highlighted by recent efforts on the
constitutional amendment. It will be paramount that
reform issues address institutionalized discrimination.
I am grateful that the Government of Myanmar agreed
to and facilitated the installation of my small four-staff
Naypyidaw Office in January, helping to reinforce the
constructive cooperation that has been extended to
me so far, as reflected in the access I have been able
to enjoy.

We must collectively continue to build trust and
work in partnership with the Government of Myanmar.
I will continue to speak truth and help build bridges and

greater mutual understanding, including in support of
the United Nations role in upholding international norms
and standards. This requires confidence-building and
regular communication with all leaders. While I share
concern that progress has been slow, my first five visits
to Myanmar have highlighted the enormous challenges
that will require tremendous international support.

