Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I commend you
personally, Mr. President, for having calmly but
persistently nudged your colleagues in the Council to
do something, and to do it immediately, to halt what is
increasingly becoming a dangerous, senseless and
destructive war. I would also like to strongly commend
the Secretary-General for laying before the Council
yesterday comprehensive, bold and far-reaching
proposals to bring about an immediate end to the
carnage.

First and foremost, however, we must work to
achieve an immediate and unequivocal ceasefire. The
elements contained in the Secretary-General's
proposals provide the basis for diplomatic and political
efforts to bringing about a lasting solution to the
hostilities in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We are faced with a tragedy in the Middle East
that threatens the viability and liveability of that region
as we know it. An extensive array of weapons is being
deployed to such an extent as to threaten the lives of
everyone. No one, it appears, is out of range or safe. As
the Secretary-General has said, what is most urgently
required is the immediate cessation of hostilities,
without which relief for survivors - the wounded and
the suffering - cannot be given, or even humanitarian
assistance provided to those in need. Even the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon itself has no freedom
of movement and is running out of basic necessities.
Given those circumstances and dangers, it was
reassuring to hear the Secretary-General proclaim that
we are not going to desert the Lebanese people in their
hour of need.

The Hizbollah abduction of Israeli soldiers was
both reckless and senseless and must be condemned. In
the highly tense climate of the Middle East, that act
was tailor-made to provoke a response from Israel,
which it did. Israel lost no time in describing
Hizbollah's action as an act of war. And what followed
was, indeed, a war. The response was so excessive, so
destructive and so inhumane as to bring into question
the real motives of Israel. Israel declared a unilateral
war on Lebanon, citing the unprovoked action by
Hizbollah as a justification for the relentless and
massive destruction of infrastructure and the collective
punishment of the Lebanese people.

Was the overreaction worth the virtual
obliteration of a nation and its physical infrastructure?
That war is in its tenth day and is continuing as I
speak, causing untold loss and suffering on both sides.
Any country's right to self-defence is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Inherent in this right,
however, is the principle, as well as the responsibility,
of justified response to aggression. Israel's
unchallenged large-scale assault and systematic
destruction, before our very eyes, of a sovereign nation
that is a Member of this Organization cannot be
justified under any pretext as self-defence. The siege of
Lebanon is illegal, unwarranted and reckless. It is
totally unacceptable, unjustified and immoral to bring a
whole country to a halt by subjecting it to a merciless
and relentless pounding and blockade on all sides.

Lebanon has suddenly become a large prison, a
huge humanitarian crisis, with people crying in
desperation, "Where is the international community?
Where is the Security Council?" If the destruction of a

whole sovereign nation matters less than the capture or
death of one or two soldiers, is not this scary for our
civilization? Where is the proportionality? Are we
condoning this bizarre act of impunity, a sort of law of
the jungle that has no parallel in recent memory? Will
we not heed the embattled Lebanese Prime Minister, in
his sheer helplessness, crying that his country has been
torn to shreds and that no Government can survive on
the ruins of a nation? No doubt what has been
unfolding over the past 10 days has created a
dangerous precedent in international governance and in
inter-State relations.

It has been equally dismaying to observe the "no
action" mode pursued by the Security Council and key
players in the international community, many of whom
have assumed the classic pose of the three monkeys
who see no evil, hear no evil and speak no evil. The
world is virtually devoid of leadership, to say the least,
in bringing about the urgently needed immediate
cessation of hostilities. What now exists is a
conundrum in which each side must present a face
more resistant to compromise than the other. The
consequences for the region can only be further
escalation and destruction, moving further and further
away from peace and security for all.

Again, as the Secretary-General notes, whatever
damage Israel's operation may be doing to Hizbollah's
military capabilities, they are doing little or nothing to
decrease popular support for Hizbollah in Lebanon or
the region. Israel's actions are seen there for what they
are: collective punishment of the entire civilian
population of Lebanon. As one analyst has pointed out,
what we are viewing on our television screens day in
and day out is sheer arrogance, a distortion of reality
and a projection of military superiority - all to the
detriment of reaching a comprehensive, genuine and
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
We agree that, in due course, there will be an
urgent need to arrange an international conference on
the situation regarding Lebanon, to assemble an
appropriate peacekeeping force capable of maintaining
peace in the area, and to rapidly put together a donors
conference to secure funding for an urgent aid package
for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and development
of Lebanon. Sadly though, while the Security Council
and key players maintain a resounding silence as the
carnage continues, each passing hour makes progress
towards the realization of such goals much harder.

We all know that, following the kidnapping of an
Israeli soldier in Gaza by Palestinian fighters a few
weeks ago - which we condemned - Israel resorted
to a full-scale war of bombardment that included major
destruction of vital infrastructure, including power
plants, depriving hundreds of thousands of civilians of
electricity and water in the sweltering heat of summer.
The blockade of Gaza - and the indiscriminate,
disproportionate and collective punishment of
Palestinians continue. We urge Israel to lift the siege
and to allow for the flow of humanitarian relief to
affected people.

The Secretary-General's impassioned urging of
Israel yesterday here in the Council to reopen the
closed crossing points - without which, in his words,
"Gaza will continue to be sucked into a downward
spiral of suffering and chaos and the region further
inflamed" (S/PV.5492, p. 4) - must be heeded. As we
all know, until Israel accepts the rights of Palestinians
and refrains from shortcuts and unilateral acts that
prejudice final status issues, and until it negotiates in
good faith, there will be no end in sight, regrettably, to
the vicious cycle of violence. What is required is
boldness, determination and farsightedness on the part
of Israel to use its power towards achieving peace with
its neighbours, in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). That is very long overdue.

Surely, as we all know by now, peace and
security in the Middle East can never be driven by
either sheer power or misplaced pride, but by
pragmatism and realism. Security for all comes not
through unending conflict and warfare but through a
desire for genuine peace that recognizes the existence
and rights of all the peoples in the region.

