Mr. Martins (Angola): Let me also join you,
Mr. President, in reiterating the condolences of the
Council over the occurrence in Ankara this afternoon,
which caused the death of the Russian Ambassador to
Turkey.

We thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa. I would also
like to acknowledge the strong support that we have
received from the Secretariat regarding the work of the
Committee, especially the participation of Mr. James
Sutterlin, who has been Secretary for the Working
Group.

As decided by the Council, the Ad Hoc Working
Group has served as the forum through which the
Security Council has prepared the joint session of the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. The Working Group discussed the
programme, the draft agenda and the joint communique
issued after the informal meeting of the joint session,
which took place on 23 May.

The Group was to address two points on its agenda.
Unfortunately, we could not agree on the inclusion
of specific points raised by the African Union, in
particular the inclusion of the question of the situation
of Western Sahara. During the informal consultations,
the Peace and Security Council expressed its concern
for the rejection of the proposal of items of the African
Union in the agenda. That affected the good work of
the joint session, especially considering that conflicts
in Africa are very much on the agenda of the Security
Council.

Unfortunately, despite our best efforts, the African
Union Peace and Security Council did not until recently
respond to our repeated communications regarding
the latest version of the draft joint communique
discussed in New York on 23 May, which contained
several outstanding issues. These developments are
worrying signs for the future of the Security Council's
engagement with the Peace and Security Council,
which is its main partner in matters related to peace and
security in Africa. As our successor now takes over and
prepares for the eleventh joint session, which will take
place in Addis Ababa, those matters should be carefully
addressed.

The second focus of activity this year was a
meeting on improving the cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
in sustaining peace in Africa. This meeting was based
upon the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016), in which
the Council expressed an intent to regularly request,
deliberate and draw upon the specific strategic and
targeted advice of the Peacebuilding Commission. This
was a remarkable development, as it will definitely
make the Peacebuilding Commission a very important
body in the work of the Council.

The discussion afforded the members of the
Working Group an opportunity to evaluate how we can
enhance the relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, assess how the
Peacebuilding Commission can be more relevant to the
work of the Security Council, taking into account its
bridging role, and contribute to overcoming a problem
that has been detected - the lack of synchronization
or the existence of the silo mentality - which has been
identified as one of the problems affecting the work of
the United Nations.

We recommend that the annual programme of the
Ad Hoc Working Group include peacebuilding and
sustaining peace thematics. We further recommend
that the choice of the thematics be proposed by the
Chair following consultations with relevant structures
of the Secretariat. This is also in line with resolution
2282 (2016).

To conclude, we would like to thank the members
of the Ad Hoc Working Group and the Secretariat for
their invaluable contributions in supporting the work
of the Chair. We also convey our best wishes to our
successor in the chairmanship of the Working Group .

