Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to express
our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate on the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

We would also like to thank the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission's Organizational
Committee, His Excellency Ambassador Yukio Takasu,
representative of Japan, for his sterling work.

We would also like to commend the significant
contribution made by the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations on Burundi, Sierra Leone, Guinea-
Bissau and the Central African Republic as well as the
Chair of the Commission's Working Group on Lessons
Learned.

South Africa welcomes the second report of the
Peacebuilding Commission and applauds the
accomplishments of the Commission during its second
session particularly, the important strides made towards
implementing its mandate and core functions.

We believe a strong Peacebuilding Commission is
crucial for addressing challenges associated with
conflict, instability and underdevelopment. A
successful Commission is important in preventing post-
conflict countries from relapsing into conflict.

Among the successes of the Peacebuilding
Commission has been its continued efforts aimed at
strengthening its relationship and cooperation with
relevant organs and institutions, including the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council.

At the same time, my delegation underlines the
importance of strengthened cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and relevant regional and
subregional organizations. The African Union
continues to play its role in the peacebuilding field,
including through the African Post-Conflict
Reconstruction Policy Framework which places
emphasis on addressing the root causes of conflict.

We are indeed pleased that, as reflected in the
Peacebuilding Commission report, its Organizational
Committee held interactive dialogue with the
Chairperson of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and received a briefing from former President
of Mozambique, Joaquim Chissano during the
reporting period. We look forward to further
interactions of this nature, as they are crucial for
strengthening and promoting cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union.

My delegation also commends the establishment
of regular contacts between the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council on issues relating to the
work of the Commission. In that context, we reaffirm
our continued support for those relationships to be
strengthened.

Now that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture is in place, the challenge is how to

consolidate the achievements made thus far. South
Africa firmly believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission should continue to be driven by Member
States. The Organizational Committee of the
Commission must continue to be the focal point of all
the Commission's activities and decisions, and its
central role should be strengthened.

We are pleased to note that the country-specific
meetings have made a tremendous contribution to the
success of the Commission over the past two years.
Through the work of those configurations, the
Commission significantly contributed to the promotion
and adoption of strategic frameworks for Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone. The establishment of
monitoring and tracking mechanisms to check the
progress of the implementation of the framework is
also essential to the success of peacebuilding efforts on
the ground.

With regard to the country-specific configuration
on the Central African Republic, my delegation is
confident that, under the leadership of the Permanent
Representative of Belgium, the Commission's efforts in
that country will yield positive results.

National ownership of the peacebuilding process
remains fundamental to assisting post-conflict
countries to rebuild their institutions and sustain peace
and development. To that end, we commend the
Governments of countries on the Commission's agenda
for their active role in efforts to rebuild their respective
countries.

My delegation welcomes the report's
acknowledgement of the importance of official
development assistance, trade and investment in post-
conflict countries. We hope that the Commission will
continue to develop methods for mobilizing
international and domestic resources. At the same time,
quick-impact projects and the sufficient injection of
predictable resources in a country emerging from
conflict is crucial to ensuring stability and
development on the ground.

In conclusion, as we gradually build up the
experience of the Peacebuilding Commission, we need
to place stronger emphasis on the nexus between peace
and development. In that regard, we support a greater
and stronger focus on the development agenda of the
countries on the agenda of the Commission. South
Africa remains committed to the cause of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We will continue to work
with others towards ensuring that post-conflict
countries do not relapse into conflict and to maximize
the Commission's impact on the ground in full
alignment, cooperation and in accordance with the
national Government policies and strategies.

