Mr. Terzic (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; English text provided by the delegation): It is
a great honour for me to have the opportunity to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina on such an
important issue as the twenty-fifth report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and at such an important time for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you every success in guiding the
work of the Council this month. I would like also, on
behalf of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as well as personally, to thank Lord Ashdown for his
thorough and eloquent briefing and for the kind words
he addressed to my Government and to me.

Finally, I would like to use this opportunity to
express my deepest condolences to the people of
Macedonia on the tragic loss of their President, Mr.
Boris Trajkovski, and of his entourage, who were killed
in an aircraft accident on their way to an investment
conference in Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina. His
devotion to bringing about peace and prosperity in his
country and in the entire region makes him
irreplaceable and our loss even greater.

Bosnia and Herzegovina today is just another
European country well on its way through the process
of transition. We are no longer the focus of the
international community, as we were several years ago.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a positive example of how
intervention by the international community can be
effective and of how a post-conflict country can
become an active participant in the process of regional
stabilization.

Considerable effort and a great deal of
coordination were required on part of the local
authorities and international representatives in order to
achieve this kind of success. I daresay that we all are
now close to the finish line. Our ultimate goal is, as
stated in the report of the High Representative,
ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina is put
irreversibly on the road to statehood and the European
Union - that is, Bosnia and Herzegovina as part of the
European and Euro-Atlantic integration processes. I
therefore call upon the Council to continue its support
for this joint project.

On a positive note, I have come from Sarajevo to
assure the Council that my Government is not merely
paying lip service to its determination for reform, but
that we are actively, on a daily basis, taking steps that
prove our determination and commitment to reform.
With this in mind, I am here to assure the Council that
we will continue with the entire process of reform,
especially with economic reform, democratic
institution-building, and establishing the rule of law.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has gone far beyond the
early stages of its European journey. The positive
assessment of the feasibility study carried out by the
European Commission represents much-needed
encouragement for us, and it acknowledges the results
achieved so far. At the same time, the report requires
that we show substantial progress in 16 areas
recognized by the European Commission as being
crucial. We are determined to show the required
progress by June this year. In order to do so, we have
already adopted and started implementing the action
plan, which involves the adoption of 48 new laws and
the establishment of 25 new institutions at the State
level. We are determined to begin negotiations for the
signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union this year.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has already started to
work on the outlined priorities. We have adopted the
Law on Defence, which provides for establishment of
the Ministry of Defence at the State level and for full
civilian control over the armed forces. That was the
key precondition for our joining the Partnership for
Peace, which we expect to do at the forthcoming
meeting in Istanbul in June this year. We have also
started to enforce the Law on Indirect Taxation, which
unifies the three formerly existing customs departments
and introduces a value-added tax. Let me also mention
the set of six laws in the area of public security, which
will establish the State Information and Protection
Agency (SIPA) as a modern, State-level police task
force. The Law on Intelligence and Security Agencies,
whose ratio legis is to put this sector, too, under State-
level control, is in the final phases of its adoption.

The document entitled "Development Strategy of
Bosnia-Herzegovina (PRSP-Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper)", prepared entirely by local experts and
recently completed, enables us to make long-term
development plans for the first time ever. We are
determined to accomplish the goals envisaged in that
document, thereby reducing the poverty rate in the
country. However, the ongoing participation of the
international community is absolutely essential to that
end and we therefore expect the Council's support.
I must emphasize once again our gratitude to the
international community and to High Representative
Lord Ashdown and his Office for their efforts in
achieving countless results together with us. We have
made huge steps towards forming a true partnership
with one another. I call the Council's attention to the
fact that, until recently, all large-scale projects in
Bosnia and Herzegovina were drafted and often
imposed by the High Representative. In 2003, the High
Representative set up several commissions for the
implementation of key reforms. Although
representatives of the international community chaired
the commissions, its members were local experts. This
yielded good results. What we want in 2004 is to form
our own commissions to address reform issues and for
the Office of the High Representative to be there to
provide expert assistance and logistics and to ensure
that we comply with European standards. In that way,
responsibility will shift to local factors, which I truly
believe are capable of assuming it. In my opinion, that
is the only reasonable way of assuming responsibilities
for the future and of taking the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina into our own hands.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has a prosperous future
and potential economic stability within the European
Union. We are aware of the fact that regional
cooperation is the key element of success in that
regard. Therefore, we have done a great deal to
promote it recently. Our country chairs the South-East
European Cooperation Process, which involves the
countries of the region. The recent statement issued by
the prime ministers of seven countries of the region at
the investment conference in Mostar last week speaks
in favour of my argument that regional cooperation is
headed in the right direction. The statement underlines
the importance of a stronger and more open
cooperation between the countries of South-East
Europe. The economic progress and prosperity of the
region depend upon its stability, which was lacking in
the past, but which we now continue to improve upon.
That can be done only by strengthening neighbourly
and regional relations. We are constantly making
considerable efforts to that end and are determined to
keep improving our bilateral relations with all the
countries of the region.

Another important event will occur in Bosnia-
Herzegovina this year: the replacement of the forces of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization with a task
force of the European Union. We expect the Council's
full involvement in defining the precise mandate of the
new task force. The security situation in the country is
very good at the moment and we believe that the threat
of the recurrence of conflict no longer exists.
Therefore, I would like to ask the Council, keeping in
mind the vast experience of this body, to contribute
actively to defining the mandate of the European force
in a way that will contribute to the further stabilization
of the country. Cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the arrest
of persons indicted for war crimes and assistance in
enrolling Bosnia and Herzegovina in Euro-Atlantic
security structures are at the very top of our list of
priorities.

A huge job has been done in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to date. Enormous progress has been
made. In order to achieve our common goal - full
political stability and economic sustainability - we
have to put in more hard work and make further joint
efforts, both domestically and internationally. A
detailed and impartial analysis of the current situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as an overview of
remaining tasks, are presented in the High
Representative's report to the Security Council. While
sharing fully the opinion that urgent measures are
required in key development sectors, I wish to assure
the Council that the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will make whatever efforts are necessary
to fulfil that goal. At the same time, I am convinced
that we will continue to receive the support of our dear
friends on this Council, for it is indispensable to us.

