Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union (EU), and would like to add a few remarks in its
national capacity.

The lines of action presented by the European
Union are the product of intense discussions within
European institutions and among those institutions and
their traditional partners, as well as stakeholders who
can make a useful contribution to understanding and
countering the various manifestations of terrorism at
the national, regional and global levels.

Both the range and the dimensions of terrorism are
changing rapidly. The constant mutation of the threat
is driven by destabilizing factors, such as political
turbulence, fragile institutions, a lack of socioeconomic
development, radicalization and recruitment, as well as

through the use of new technologies. Taken as a whole,
those factors make the threat more dangerous, more
unpredictable, more widespread and more pervasive.
Because of these constant mutations, terrorism requires
new capacities of intervention from international
stakeholders, starting with preventive analysis at the
national level and a multidimensional approach that
exceeds the limits of past experiences.

No area of the world is immune from terrorism.
To a growing extent, it has become a cross-cutting
phenomenon, deeply connected to other global
threats, such as transnational organized crime; illegal
trafficking, including human trafficking; corruption,
cybercrime and piracy. In recent years, the threat has
intensified in specific areas in the Middle East and in
parts of Africa, but it has the ability to strike at the
global level. The rising number of foreign terrorist
fighters is a further index of the risks confronting the
international community.

The main and most dangerous expression of
terrorism today is the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, or Daesh, group. It not only poses a major
threat to the immediate areas of Iraq and Syria, but
extends its reach beyond those areas. Italy believes
that a threat of such gravity and dimensions requires
a joint effort and shared response at the global level
through the key role of the United Nations. In the spirit
of full and effective cooperation, my country advocates
a multilateral, comprehensive and flexible approach in
all the relevant forums, complemented by strengthened
bilateral cooperation, also based on the need to take
into due account the close connections between respect
for human rights, economic and social development,
and stability and security.

At the level of European cooperation, Italy
chairs the European Union Council Working Party
on Terrorism and the Common Position 931 Working
Group, which deals with sanctions and listing and is
implementing Common Position 931 on terrorist groups
and individuals. At the United Nations level, Italy has
participated actively in the drafting and application
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted
by the General Assembly in 2006. We recognize the
importance of adopting and fully applying the counter-
terrorism resolutions that the Security Council has
progressively adopted, up to the most recent resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).

My country is strongly committed to the effective
and efficient implementation of the sanctions regime
aimed at distinguishing the financing and support
for terrorist groups and their affiliates. We are also
active in other relevant international forums, first and
foremost in the Rome-Lyon Group, established in 2001
in the Group of Seven framework at the encouragement
of the Italian presidency. And we are also active in the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, whose initiatives
include, most recently, the creation of the International
Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law, of which Italy
is a founding member.

Countering terrorism and violent extremism must
run parallel to efforts to settle the main political and
institutional crises, in particular the comprehensive
stabilization of the Middle East and North Africa area.
Italy, also in the exercise of its presidency of the
Council of the European Union, considers international
cooperation essential to activating and strengthening
political dialogue with the main partners and
international organizations. Respect for human rights
and the rule of law is crucial to establishing effective
counter-terrorism strategies, so as to build confidence,
including in crisis areas, in the international legal
system and to keep alive in people's hearts and minds
confidence in the work of existing institutions and
in good relations among peoples and States, which
are alternatives to those adopted and propagated by
terrorist groups.

