Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank everyone who has participated in this
debate. It has certainly further developed discussion on
the issue of Iraq, and I believe that it has been very
useful to the Council, to the rest of the United Nations
and to the world.

This important and serious debate has been held
to offset significant efforts that have sought to mislead
public opinion. I should like to thank all those who
have made statements that have faithfully described
reality, because before now reality had been revealed
only in part. The time called for the debate was fairly
short, and it was quite difficult to acquire all the
necessary data from the period since 1999 so that
everyone could participate fully in this debate.

I should like to begin my statement where the
President left off in his statement, when he spoke about
the Sumerian, Babylonian and Akkadian civilizations
in Iraq - Iraq, the land of water, oil and minds, the
Iraq of the Abbassid civilization. Even without oil or
water, would we have experienced the situation that we
are now experiencing? I shall not dwell on a political
analysis of this issue. The Council is fully aware that
the only objectives of the approaching war are oil,
wealth and hegemony - control over the wealth in the
region and the world. I shall not go into detail. I shall
say only that the world is now split into two and that
the larger part favours peace, negotiations and
diplomacy under the Charter of the United Nations,
unity in the United Nations and the very future of the
Organization.

I am definitely in that camp. I fervently desire
peace, understanding and conciliation, and I care about
the future of this international Organization. It was
recently jeopardized by the statement of one major
Power that, if the United Nations failed to take into
account the interests of that State, it would go its own
way. It was not Iraq that made that statement, it was
another major Power that feels it has immense power in
the world. It was the National Security Adviser who
made that statement. It seemed that we had nearly
written the Organization's epitaph.

We ourselves support those who believe in peace,
diplomacy, understanding, the implementation of
resolutions adopted by the United Nations and the
provisions of the Charter. I should like to thank and
pay tribute to all those who have spoken to that effect.
But while we were engaged in this debate, we
witnessed a major event that nearly amounted to a
declaration of war, aimed at striking Iraq, although a
debate was being held here. It was a virtual declaration
of war. War legislation was adopted and celebrated
with great pomp and ceremony by the President and the
leaders of a certain country, and it was against Iraq, a
small country thousands of kilometres away from that
superpower, which is the primary Power in the world
today. It is my hope that that country's President and
his colleagues, who celebrated that declaration of war
in the form of legislation, have all heard what has been
said in this debate by those who favour peace and
security.

I said earlier that the world has been split into
two, one part favouring peace and the other part -
which is actually a very small minority, but an
extremely active minority, made up of virtually two
States - favouring war. But I wonder: how can a State
go along with the warlike approach of another State?
The representative of one State said here that if the
Council does not take a decision, then his State will act
as it sees fit. The text of his statement has been
photocopied and is available to Council members. Its
message is clear: if the Council refuses to declare war
on Iraq, then that State will do it for the Council. That
was one voice in this debate.

I am, however, happy to see that the majority of
the members of the United Nations are still anxious to
preserve peace, the rights of peoples and the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as principles that I myself
have advocated, and have in fact taught for 30 years in
this very country. Those principles are nevertheless
being trampled underfoot on a daily basis in our world.

Like others who have spoken in the Security
Council today, and indeed like the overwhelming
majority of the Members of the United Nations, I
believe that it is necessary to preserve the credibility of
the United Nations in order to guarantee its future. I
can assure the Council that it will certainly not be Iraq
that will undermine or weaken the Organization.
Rather, we will work tirelessly to restore the credibility
of the United Nations, which has been called into
question, not by small countries like my own but by
some major Powers.

Many speakers, members and non-members of
the Council alike, have expressed their trust in Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei. Indeed, the Government of Iraq
also has full confidence in those two gentlemen. Our
doors are wide open to them and to their inspectors.
Let them come as soon as possible; they will be quite
welcome in Iraq. Our doors are widen open, as are our
palaces, houses, hospitals and schools. Let them come
and go where they wish. As I say, our doors are wide
open to them. We are not afraid. We are open to
Mr. Blix, Mr. ElBaradei and their inspectors. They are
welcome to send the inspectors on 19 October, which is
just a couple of days away. Let them come to Iraq,
where they will be welcomed and where they and their
teams will be able to go where they wish. That is our
position regarding Mr. Blix. We have trust in him.

Actually, though, why do we have to reconfirm
our trust in Mr. Blix? When has there ever been any
question about our confidence in him? Who raised the
issue of their being any doubt about him? I do not think
anyone has questioned him. In order to be able to
explain the evolution of events we therefore have to
look back to the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and Mr. Butler, who was entrusted with
the task of leading UNSCOM. There had been some
rumours here and there about Mr. Butler in the past, but
we are now talking about Mr. Blix and the need to have
confidence in him. However, let me reassure the
Council that Iraq has full trust in Mr. Blix and that he
and his team will be welcomed in Iraq.

Some speakers have said that Iraq has violated all
of the Security Council's resolutions. That assertion is
perhaps due to the rather frightening lack of familiarity
with UNSCOM. documents. It has also been said that
Iraq expelled UNSCOM. and the inspectors in 1998.
However, as everyone in fact knows, Mr. Butler was
receiving his orders directly from the United States and
the United Kingdom, which were constantly urging him
to leave Iraq. Those calls were in fact sufficient to get
him to leave Iraq. As the representative of the Russian
Federation pointed out, Iraq was bombed 24 hours after
Mr. Butler's departure. I would invite everyone who is
not familiar with those events to look into the dossier
on this case and to familiarize themselves with its
contents.

I have spoken about the number of meetings held
and about the amount of time spent on inspections and
in Iraqi airspace, so I need not repeat that now. Neither
Mr. Ikeus nor Mr. Butler nor the inspection teams were
able to point to a single element that could indicate the
presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq -
apart, of course, from the information provided by Iraq.
Iraq destroyed the weapons it had, opened up its doors
and provided copious documentation. Iraq was
therefore acting in good faith and with good will. Iraq
itself took the decision to reject weapons of mass
destruction. I think that the fact that we have welcomed
the return of inspectors is further evidence of that
rejection. We fully and forever turned our back on
weapons of mass destruction and we destroyed them.

The representative of Norway has expressed some
apprehension about Iraqi weapons reaching his country.
I do not know the distance between Iraq and Norway,
but I would like to reassure him that our hands are now
clean and that there are no weapons of mass destruction
in Iraq.

Everything that has been said about the issue of
weapons of mass destruction has been part of a
disinformation campaign. We hope that inspectors will
return soon so that they themselves can tell the
international community that Iraq's hands are now
clean and that it has no weapons of mass destruction.
Iraq has no such materials. I just wanted to reassure
anyone who still has any doubts about this as a result
of that disinformation campaign.

I would like to thank some of my colleagues,
including members of the Council, and especially the
representative of Singapore, who have said that
sanctions will be lifted once the inspectors return to
Iraq and they report to the Security Council that there
are no weapons of mass destruction in my country. The
Iraqi people would then get some relief. I fear that they
are being too optimistic, however. American and
British individuals have made clear statements to the
effect that sanctions and the embargo will never be
lifted until there has been "regime change" in Iraq. In
fact, those statements are documented and are available
to the Council and the Secretary-General. Everyone
knows about documents containing such statements.
This is a domestic political issue pertaining to the
interests of the United States and the United Kingdom.
We have said that we are willing to welcome
inspectors. But there is also the question of lifting the
embargo, which, as I have also said, is a political
matter for those two countries.

Several speakers have also referred to the
memorandum of understanding to say that Iraq had not
facilitated its implementation. However, although we
had billions or tens of billions of dollars in a trust fund,
about 2,000 contracts for medicines and medical
supplies were pending due to a hold by the United
States. Those contracts also included equipment
necessary to provide drinking water and to produce
food for the people of Iraq. We have lost untold
thousands of people as a result of the lack of drinking
water and foodstuffs. In fact, the United States even
banned the export of chlorine to Iraq, which is essential
to treating drinking water. There are many other
examples, but I shall not go into them.

The representative of the United Kingdom said
that he was really distressed about the situation of the
Iraqi people. They can well say that they have nothing
against our people, only against the Iraqi Government.
There were four billion dollars available in the fund
that could have been used had it not been for the veto
by the United States and the United Kingdom.

In respect to contractors, 2,000 contracts were
stopped. I heard a colleague mention the lack of money
in the fund. There are really four reasons for that, but
the central one is that the United States and the United
Kingdom imposed a retroactive pricing mechanism for
our oil. In other words, ifI want to buy Iraqi oil today,
I sign a contract, then the United States and the United
Kingdom say that I have to wait for a month before a
price can be quoted. Naturally, one does not want to
conclude such a contract, because oil prices are so
volatile. That was a deliberate policy of these two
countries to thwart the memorandum of understanding
and make sure that it could not work. In the past, the
mechanism worked. Hopefully things will soon
improve again, and so will the situation of the fund.

Those who are shedding crocodile tears for the
Iraqi people have also made statements relating to war
and destruction, as has been reported widely in the
Western and United States media.

There was another point made by several
speakers. I am not sure whether I should mention it, but
I would like to make one point in connection with it.
That is the question of some Kuwaiti property - some,
I stress - that is about to be returned to the owners as
per Iraqi-Kuwaiti arrangements. I recognize what was
said about the Kuwaitis and their wish to get their
property back without any problems whatsoever, a
matter that I appreciate. Another representative spoke
of the matter and tried to politicize the issue.

Before concluding, I would like to mention the
agreement between Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on the
one hand, and Iraqi authorities on the other. We have
heard a lot in the media about this. Both yesterday and
today, here at this meeting, some supporters of the
American position said that the agreement between
Iraq and Mr. Blix had only just been signed and Iraq
was already looking for another margin or space as
delaying tactics, seeking other interpretations in order
to deprive the agreement of any significant meaning or
content whatsoever.

Iraq approved and signed the agreement in
Vienna and is bound by all its provisions. We even
issued an official communique inviting the inspectors
to return to Iraq and undertook to fully cooperate with
them. We are willing to work and resolve any problems
that occur. We are confident that the inspectors will
face no impediments in carrying out their work. I
would like to give assurances that any doubt cast on
this agreement is inaccurate. In an exchange of letters
it is quite natural that there be some misunderstanding
about the actual meaning of words, but that is all there
is.

On the substance of what was agreed on in
Vienna, I affirm that there is no misunderstanding as to
what was agreed there, and we will not in any way
hinder the work of the weapons inspectors. I believe
that we are all civilized persons, as you all said. We
have a history that covers several civilizations and
millennia.

Many who participated in this debate noted that
goodwill is present and that we will cooperate with
UNMOVIC. So I would like to say that the new
resolution being spoken of in the media and in
negotiations about its text - the contents of which we
do not know - will not be about ensuring that
UNMOVIC and the inspectors do their work, but rather
will prevent the inspectors from doing their work. We
urge the inspectors to come tomorrow or the day after
to do their work. We will create no problems.

Of course some say that this is just rhetoric, but I
say that I am not an experienced diplomat familiar with
all these rhetorical flourishes. I speak as an Iraqi who
is sincere in my intention. The United Nations does not
need another resolution. That is my view, though I
know that it will not change the views of the

superpower. But I want to ensure all the peace-loving
countries that reject war that the new text is geared
towards preventing the inspectors from returning to
Iraq. We want them to come and do their work, and we
are resolved to implement the resolution in spirit and in
letter.

I thank you very much, Mr. President, for giving
me this right of reply to comment on what has been
said by other speakers in this debate.

