Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
detailed briefing and report on the situation in Darfur,
as well as for the investigation and proceedings
conducted by the Court. Since the Security Council
decided, with its adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
on 31 March 2005, to refer the situation in Darfur,
starting from 1 July 2002, to the Prosecutor of the ICC,
the Office of the Prosecutor has been transparent in
keeping the Council informed about its work, for which
we are very grateful. We hope that we will soon be
able to deepen the discussion in the framework of an
informal interactive dialogue with the Prosecutor such
as was held last month on the situation in Libya (see S/PV.6962).

The Prosecutor's semi-annual reports give the
Council an opportunity to assess the Court's progress
in fighting impunity, along with the obstacles and
difficulties it encounters. Unfortunately, many of the
concerns that the Council has previously expressed
still exist. We therefore deplore the fact that the ICC's
arrest warrants against Ahmad Harun, Ali Kushayb,
Omar Al-Bashir and Abdel Raheem Hussein have still
not been executed, despite the fact that they have been
indicted for war crimes, crimes against humanity and,
for one of them, genocide.

As Ms. Bensouda recalls in her report, the
Sudanese Government forces and armed militias
active in Darfur have continued in total impunity
with their indiscriminate attacks on the ground on
or affecting the civilian population and obstructing
humanitarian aid, as well as abductions of and attacks
on humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers from the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We are also concerned about the
continuing restrictions that the Sudanese authorities
are imposing on UNAMID's work and movement. They
regularly prevent UNAMID from accessing combat
scenes and in particular investigating reported cases of
sexual violence.

One particularly disturbing aspect that the
Prosecutor's report brings up is the indiscriminate
aerial bombardments by the Sudanese Air Force, which
have resulted in numerous civilian victims, and the
resurgence of inter-community violence, which has
produced massive population displacements since the
beginning of the year. We condemn the acts of sexual
and gender-based violence referred to in the recent
report of the Secretary-General on sexual violence
in conflict (S/2013/l49), as well as violence against
children. All those elements constitute violations of
resolution 1591 (2005) and other Security Council
resolutions on the Sudan, most recently resolution 2091
(2013), adopted on 14 February.

As Ms. Bensouda's report points out, it is the
Government of the Sudan's responsibility to comply
with Council resolutions, cooperate with the Court and
hand over indictees to it. So far, contrary to repeated
claims made by the Sudanese authorities, the Sudan
has launched no judicial proceedings at all. We must
therefore not waver in our determination to ensure that
the indictees are made accountable for their actions.
There will be no lasting peace in Darfur if we allow
crimes against civilians to go unpunished.

Essentially, we are asking all States, whether or
not they are parties to the Rome Statute, and every
regional and international organization concerned, to
cooperate fully with the ICC, as resolution 1593 (2005)
demands. In our View, we believe that the Council
should reflect on what it can do to help the ICC, in
particular in responding to cases of non-cooperation. In
that regard, we deplore Chad's non-compliance with the
requests for cooperation addressed to it by the Court.
That non-compliance was the subject of a decision on
26 March by the Pre-Trial Chamber II of the Court,
which President Song transmitted to the Security
Council.

Although the Security Council must be consistent,
Member States and the Secretariat must also do the
same. That is especially true of contact with defendants.
In that regard, we welcome the new guidelines issued
by the Secretary-General on 3 April concerning
non-essential contact on the part of members of the
Secretariat with individuals subject to ICC arrest
warrants. We call on all States to follow that example.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our thanks
to Ms. Bensouda and assure her of Luxembourg's
full support for the resolute efforts that her Office
continues to make in the fight against impunity. The
entire international community must act together to
ensure justice for the victims of the conflict in Darfur.
Investigating the situation in Darfur has presented an
enormous Challenge for the Office of the Prosecutor
and a huge sacrifice for the witnesses and the victims.
That sacrifice must not have been made in vain.
