Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): This open debate
brings necessary attention to the key issue of our time.
Since the first discussion of this issue in this Chamber,
in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), Member States have become
increasingly aware of the fact that climate change is a
driver of insecurity and a threat multiplier for conflict,
as well as a threat to our collective security.

Although there are other United Nations organs with
the competence to address climate change, including
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly, it is essential that the Council engage to
address the international and transnational threat that
climate change poses to peace and security. One cannot
fully address the root causes of conflict or take on the
mantle of prevention emphasized by the Secretary-
General without acknowledging our changing climate.

We are pleased that the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has
been invited to brief the Council today and encourage
strengthened coordination with other United Nations
bodies with responsibility for addressing climate
change. We also hope that the Council will continue
to advocate for enhanced analysis and information on
climate issues.

We are pleased to see that the Security Council has
begun to integrate climate issues into its country and
region-specific work, building on the precedent set in
resolution 2349 (2017), on West Africa and the Sahel. In
areas such as the Lake Chad basin, where 90 per cent of
the economy relies on agriculture and pastoralism, it is
self-evident that a deteriorating climate will negatively
affect peace and security, exacerbating vulnerability
than can be exploited by malicious actors and driving
mass displacement.

We also welcome the Council's inclusion of similar
language addressing climate in its resolutions covering
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
Mali, Somalia and Darfur. But more can be done on these
issues: in addition to mandating Governments and the
United Nations to address the effects of climate change,
the Council should also encourage measures to prevent
and mitigate its effects as a root cause of conflict itself.
The Security Council should also specifically address
marginalized groups such as women and young people,
who will be particularly vulnerable to the detrimental
effects of climate change, for example due to a lack of
educational and employment opportunities.

In situations such as those in Libya, South Sudan,
Yemen and Syria, climate change has exacerbated the
severity of man-made conflict by increasing extreme
weather patterns. We hope that the Council will be
able to mainstream its consideration of climate in its
resolutions while at the same time maintaining a focus
on those responsible for causing and perpetrating
these conflicts.

Looking forward, we are also aware that our
changing climate may create conditions for conflict
in areas that so far have been peaceful. The melting
of Arctic summer ice creates incentives for increased
contestation over resources, the extraction of which
will further exacerbate climate change and spur further
degradation of the Arctic environment. The increased
attention to the region poses challenges for regional
institutions, including the Arctic Council. We should
also mention the impact of competition for resources
on the indigenous peoples of the Arctic region, whose
relationship with their historic lands, territories and
resources should be respected.

For many States Members of the United Nations,
in particular small island developing States, climate
change is an existential threat. Its effects - mass
displacement and loss of homes and livelihoods - echo
the outcomes of those armed conflicts that the Security
Council addresses in its daily work. Given this reality,
the Council should treat climate change as a direct
threat to our global collective security.

Finally, all action on climate change must
be underpinned by our resolute commitment to
multilateralism, epitomized by the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. We must take the spirit of that
Agreement forward and work together ambitiously to
create effective and sustainable solutions.

