Kenya extends its compliments to the Federal Republic of Germany for remaining seized on the women and peace and security agenda. Addressing conflict- related sexual violence is a human security issue. Furthermore, no one should ever suffer the scourge and indignity of being sexually violated - in conflict situations or otherwise. We therefore thank both Germany and the Dominican Republic for their continued work as the current co-Chairs of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. This year marks the twentieth anniversary of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, championed by Namibia in 2000, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and the review year of Silencing the Guns in Africa. As we look back and ahead on our commitments to the mandates regarding conflict-related sexual violence, my delegation welcomes the call by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, and the other civil society speakers, from the Central African Republic and Myanmar, who reminded us of the need to move from resolutions to results, the centrality of accountability and the need to maintain a survivor-centred approach, in line with resolution 2467 (2019). Gender inequality, the discriminatory perception of gender role and human trafficking and exploitation are among the factors that touch directly on women and contribute to the disproportionate impact on women and girls in both conflict and non-conflict situations. Additionally, the lack of women in leadership roles and the lack of preventive, inclusive and accessible judicial and social protection systems play a key role in propagating sexual violence in conflict. Unaccountability and impunity thrive in such environments. My delegation also recognizes that addressing sexual violence in conflict is a collective endeavour, and not just a women's affair. Creating awareness, training and ownership of the process must involve the whole of society for sustainable results. We therefore believe that it is critical, despite our diverse cultural and social norms, to take a whole-of-society approach, where young boys and men can also see their role in championing and implementing the women and peace and security agenda. In 2016, Kenya inaugurated its national action plan, with strategies for strengthening its judicial mechanisms and ensuring a survivor-centred approach in the fight against sexual violence in conflict, within the framework of resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security agenda. The operationalization of those strategies has ensured a conflict- and gender-sensitive approach in addressing matters pertaining to gender-based violence. Our national action plan is aptly known as "Kuhusisha Wanawake ni Kudumisha Amani", or "to Involve Women is to Sustain Peace" - and has been translated into local languages in partnership with civil society. In April, Kenya rolled out phase II of our national action plan for 2020 to 2024, having completed the benchmarks of phase I, which ended in 2018. The 2019 review and assessment process of the implementation of phase I highlighted increased women participation at all decision-making levels in all institutions and mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and resolution. It also revealed enhanced prevention and reporting of sexual and gender-based violence and increased protection of women and girls against violence. Additionally, enhanced accountability and timely and effective access to justice for survivors of sexual and gender-based violence were observed. Some of the priorities of phase II include addressing climate-related issues that exacerbate the risk of sexual violence and the increased vulnerability of women and girls in conflicts arising from natural disasters and intercommunal and pastoral violence over natural resources. In the semi-arid lands of Kenya, the distances women and girls walk in search for water, for example, increases their vulnerability to conflict and puts them at risk of sexual violence. Kenya's Government has undertaken critical initiatives and has reached key milestones in translating our commitments into compliance. For example, Kenya has adopted a survivor-centred approach through legal frameworks in place to address sexual and gender-based violence, including Kenya's Constitution, which contains provisions on gender equality and guarantees a wide range of rights for both men and women. Kenya has also made considerable strides in addressing sexual-based violence, including through the Sexual Offences Act, whose primary purpose is to ensure justice for survivors. Our national guidelines on the management of sexual violence and our training of military and police personnel on sexual and gender-based violence include essential procedures and services for survivors of sexual violence. The review of standard operating procedures for the prevention and response to sexual and gender- based violence includes gender-sensitive desks in police stations, where the first point of contact is a woman officer, as well as the timely referral of survivors of sexual and gender-based violence to seek medical attention. Those efforts have resulted in increased dignity for survivors, reduced silence and greater reporting of sexual and gender-based violence, as well as less stigma towards survivors. We also invest in relief for, and the recovery of, survivors. There are various initiatives in place aimed at enhancing income generation by women at the grass- roots level, including those recovering from violent conflicts. Some examples of that include the Women Enterprise Fund, the Youth Enterprise Development Fund and the Uwezo Fund. With regard to women's leadership and participation in key peace positions, our Government has appointed women as leaders in key positions on the peace- conflict continuum. For the first time, the Kenya Defence Forces has a female major general, who is in charge of personnel and logistics. The President also appointed Kenya's first woman Cabinet Secretary for Defence. Women have also been involved in the design and implementation of the national conflict early-warning and early- response mechanisms, where women chair at least one third of the 233 sub-county peace committees across the country. Women are also being trained as mediators across fragile and conflict-affected counties. Moreover, the deployment of Kenyan women in peace support operations stands at 19 per cent, surpassing the United Nations-recommended 15 per cent. These are key leadership dockets that are central to the prevention and management of armed conflict. These initiatives also enhance accountability by ensuring that women are not only survivors, but also key leaders in making decisions and formulating strategies pertaining to sexual violence in conflict. We have also established a whole-of-government reporting mechanism. In all Government ministries, focal officers have been appointed to champion, monitor and report on the implementation of the women and peace and security national action plan within their sectors. In addition, we have set up a task force on women, peace and security within the Gender Sector Working Group as a platform to bring together public and private actors to advance our national gender priorities. Partnership between the police and civil society in raising awareness about sexual and gender-based violence has reduced barriers to accessing police stations to report cases of sexual and gender- based violence. Community-based programmes to end cultural and structural violence against women have also been critical. For the victim, the stigma and shame attached to sexual violence often prevents disclosure. The Nyumba Kumi initiative acts as both a preventive and a protective measure, whereby vulnerable groups, including survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, can find safe homes and safe reporting platforms. On our commitment to regional and international instruments, Kenya participates and supports African Union (AU) initiatives that address inequalities and sexual violence in conflict, including the African Union Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and the 2018 African Union policy on prevention and response to sexual exploitation and abuse for peace support operations. The AU Commission has also adopted a zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence in times of conflict and peace. The AU Continental Results Framework is geared towards monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in Africa. We are pleased to be among the Member States that validated the Framework in March 2019. Since then, recent efforts have focused on ensuring that Kenya's national action plan aligns its monitoring and evaluation tools with the Framework. The Council needs to integrate these continental and subregional instruments into their work and decisions. Kenya has also ratified a number of key international instruments focused on addressing sexual and gender-based violence, such as the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women. Although we have made progress towards the implementation of the various initiatives, we note that we still face challenges. We must expand the scope of prevention to ensure it is the preserve of not just security agencies but the whole of society, including local, grass-roots actors and religious leaders. We must also address the persistent lack of reliable baseline records and inadequate documentation of good practices at the local levels. In addition, the enactment of the Sexual Offences Act has not been matched with adequate legal training of officers and agents. As a result, there are still inconsistencies when it comes to judicial action. The Security Council and its secretariat have an important role to play when it comes to monitoring compliance with its own resolutions and acting upon breaches of same, including listing credibly suspected perpetrators and enacting sanctions. That has to be done in partnership with Member States in order to enhance accountability. However, there are concerns in the manner in which the secretariat has been reporting on suspected cases. In many occasions, the relevant offices in the secretariat have presented cases of suspected sexual and other violations against women and children as facts without proper investigations. Many such allegations have been proved to be untrue. A recent example is the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525), which contained inaccuracies on this issue and others, including glaring inconsistencies, contradictions and outright impossibilities. When unverified accusations find their way into the Security Council, it is not only unhelpful for the would-be victims of sexual violations, but it puts in doubt the credibility of such reports. To retain the usefulness of reports adopted by the Security Council, it needs to ensure that the reports adopted are factual and meet the evidential threshold. Offices in the secretariat that publish misleading reports should be held accountable. In conclusion, we reiterate Kenya's continued engagement and commitment in all matters pertaining to the implementation of recommendations contained in resolution 1325 (2000), including subsequent related resolutions and those regarding conflict-related sexual violence.
