Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and to thank your predecessor, the Permanent

 

Representative of Oman, for a successful presidency
during the month of November.

As you know, Sir, Canada made its views on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) very clearly known to
the Security Council during the troop contributors'
meeting of 6 December. I should now like to express the
views of my Government on the draft resolution before
the Council.

Canada welcomes all signs of potential progress in
the Great Lakes region, such as those contained in the
Cairo Declaration. We remain concerned, however, that
the situation in the area is inherently unstable due, in
considerable part, to the presence of 1.6 million refugees
around Rwanda's perimeter.

In this context we would have viewed the renewal of
UNAMIR's mandate, with its current strength and
composition, as a very modest but minimal and necessary
stabilizing presence. We believe that UN AMIR' s activities
in assisting in confidence-building and in the peaceful and
orderly repatriation of refugees still deserve the full
support of the Government of Rwanda and of the
international community.

The situation in Rwanda is indeed a complex one.
The genocide of 1994 is the most recent and the worst of
six separate spates of inter-tribal massacres since Rwanda
gained its independence in 1962. The prognosis for an
end to such vicious events is not bright. A huge
proportion of the population of Rwanda has taken refuge
outside its national territory. As the Secretary-General has
indicated, national reconciliation, essential for stability,
will be achieved only when the refugees have come home
in dignity and the perpetrators of genocide have been
brought to justice.

Since last June, however, the Government of
Rwanda has indicated a growing reluctance to have a
peace-keeping mission on its territory. A number of
countries which care deeply about the plight of Rwanda,
including my own, have tried to convince the Government
in Kigali that it was in its interest to maintain an effective
peace-keeping operation in Rwanda for the purposes of
confidence-building and national reconciliation and to
assist in the safe return of the refugees.

UNAMIR is also the backbone and the rallying
element of a large part of the international humanitarian
assistance effort in Rwanda. Many non-governmental

 

organizations depend on it for logistical and other support
and, in extremis, for protection. The psychological value of
the force, given the horrendous events of 1994, has been
extremely important.

In this context, we deplore the order given to 38 non-
governmental organizations, among them some of the most
prestigious and internationally recognized, to leave Rwanda.
We also continue to be concerned over arbitrary arrests and
detention in Rwanda, as well as over the conditions of
detention of prisoners.

(spoke in English)

During the discussions between the United Nations
and the Government of Rwanda over the past six months,
the Government of Rwanda has tried to dictate the force
structure necessary to accomplish the mandate which you,
the members of the Security Council, will assign to the
force. It has even refused to accept that UNAMIR should
contribute to the safety of international personnel in the
case of need. In short, the Government of Rwanda has, ever
more stridently, sought to impose unacceptable and
unworkable constraints on the continuation of UNAMIR. In
June a troop reduction from 5,500 to 1,800 was accepted by
the Council. It was understood by the members of the
Council, by the Secretariat and by troop contributors alike
to be below the bare minimum for a credible mission.

At a force level of 1,800, in addition to 300 observers,
UNAMIR's presence in the provinces beyond Kigali has,
since June, been inadequate to accomplish its mandate. This
size force offered no protection to United Nations observers
in a number of areas, and in these areas few useful
observations were made. Notwithstanding these very real
shortcomings, UNAMIR played a positive role when the
Government of Zaire decided to expel refugees from its
territory.

The further reduction of the strength of UNAMIR by
one third, which the Council is about to decide, is, we
believe, an unfortunate development. It is unfortunate
because we have allowed the Government of Rwanda to set
its own conditions on the mandate and the structure of the
Mission, independent of expert advice as to what is
required. It is unfortunate, as well, because the Security
Council will be compromising the integrity of a peace-
keeping mission and the credibility of the Organization to
fulfil the short-term, politically expedient requirement of
retaining the Mission in place at all costs. It is particularly
unfortunate because UNAMIR will not be able to do the
job which it was designed to accomplish.

 

Mandates and force structures do not have separate
existences. We should have learned this in the early days
in Mogadishu, when United Nations troops were unable
to move beyond the airport while anarchy raged outside
their perimeter. Surely we should also have learned from
the tragic lessons of the creation of safe areas in Bosnia,
which we knew we could not keep safe with the forces
the Security Council and Member States were prepared to
make available. Indeed, we should have learned from our
tragic experience in Rwanda in April 1994, when an
under-manned, ill-equipped Mission was unable to deter
civil unrest, let along confront genocide. Surely we should
have learned that politically motivated creative ambiguity,
the willingness to endlessly compromise essential Mission
elements, has repeatedly compromised the United Nations,
our peace-keepers and the people and interests they are
meant to protect.

The issue here is not so much whether UNAMIR
should have 800, 1,200, 1,400, 1,800 or 5,500 troops but,
rather, whether the force structure as a whole will or will
not be able to accomplish the mission the Council will
assign to the force. UNAMIR will, with one third fewer
troops, now be confined, largely in a garrison mode, to
Kigali, yet will retain a mandate essentially unchanged
from the one it received in June.

The peaceful repatriation of refugees is crucial if we
expect to make progress towards the peace in the Great
Lakes region. How will a UNAMIR with a limited
presence outside Kigali be able to perform the task of
assisting

"the Government of Rwanda in facilitating the
voluntary and safe repatriation of refugees and, to
this end, to support the ongoing efforts to promote
a climate of confidence and trust through the
performance of monitoring tasks" (S/1995/1015, operative paragraph 2 (b))?

How, from Kigali, will the force acquit the task of
assisting the

"United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other international agencies in the provision of
logistical support for the repatriation of refugees"
(ibid., operative paragraph 2 (c))'?

Is it realistic to presume that such a force will be
able to provide effective support for the Human Rights
Field Operation, United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations? How could the Security

 

Council agree to withdraw, at the request of the
Government of Rwanda, one crucial element of the
mandate, that is, UNAMIR's fundamental role of protecting
the international personnel in case of need?

Has the Security Council seriously considered these
issues? Has it given sufficient consideration to the military
advice that it, and we troop contributors, have received on
this question?

How can UNAMIR, by withdrawing yet more troops
and military observers from the provinces, be able to assist
in any significant way in the return of the refugees or in
confidence-building in Rwanda? Given the extreme
volatility in the region, the United Nations runs the risk
once again of witnessing horrible events that it will be
powerless to prevent or even influence. In such
circumstances the United Nations force would be roundly
criticized for its inaction and, this time, would merit the
international opprobrium it would attract.

By creating false expectations about what UNAMIR
can realistically achieve, the Security Council would be
demonstrating, in our view, that it has not yet fully
absorbed lessons learned from the recent past in peace-
keeping operations. If we have learned one thing from our
experiences in Somalia, the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
itself, it is that we must provide to the United Nations the
resources it needs to perform the tasks assigned by Member
States - effectively by the members of the Security
Council. If we, the Member States, are not prepared to
provide adequate resources, the United Nations should not
be involved.

It appears that the Government of Rwanda is not
prepared to accept the presence of a United Nations peace
operation with the force structure necessary to accomplish
the mandate Rwanda had agreed it should perform. The
United Nations must not allow itself to be put in the
position of supplicant, of pleading with any Government to
receive or retain a peace-keeping operation. In this case we
believe it would have been preferable to withdraw
UNAMIR immediately, as the Secretary-General had
indicated in his report he intended to do.

Given the new force structure of a limited and
possibly ineffective operation, Canada will have to consider
its options carefully regarding its own participation in
UNAMIR.

In closing, I would like to underline Canada's
continuing commitment to encouraging stability in the Great

 

Lakes region. We have participated in UNAMIR since its
inception and have buttressed that participation with
substantial support to United Nations agencies working in
Rwanda, as well as through our bilateral aid programme.
We will continue to work with the Government of
Rwanda in its efforts to rebuild its ravaged country.

