Mr. Shikapwasha (Zambia): First of all, I would
like to commend South Africa for its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, which comes at a
momentous period in the affairs of the African
continent.

With regard to peace and security on the
continent, Africa continues to grapple with intractable
peace and security situations in many parts of the
continent. South Africa's presidency is therefore a
further confirmation of the confidence of the
international community in the leadership and role that
South Africa continues to play in the various conflicts
and their resolution. South Africa's role has in many
ways enhanced Africa's initiatives in the resolution of
some of Africa's long-standing conflicts. In that regard,
the convening of this meeting is relevant in our attempt
to find solutions to Africa's raging conflicts. This
meeting also comes at a time when the international
community is seeking to partner with the African
Union to find solutions to Africa's flashpoints. Finally,
South Africa's presidency also comes at a time when
the world is looking to the continent to assume greater
responsibility for its own human condition arising from
conflict situations.

While we recognize the centrality of the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace and security, the
evolution of conflicts and their management has thrust
new responsibilities on the African continent, and
indeed the African Union (AU). Africa's willingness to
find solutions to some of the hard conflicts has
increased Africa's role in the finding of solutions to
those conflicts on behalf of the international
community, especially the Security Council.

Africa continues to suffer from a lack of
resources and capacity to secure lasting solutions to the
continent's conflicts. There is a need, therefore, to
develop and work on mechanisms with the United
Nations system to enhance the provision of predictable
and sustainable resources to Africa's efforts in finding
solutions to its conflicts. The United Nations efforts in
that respect should include the funding of peace
operations, especially that related to start-up financing
for equipment and logistics.

Zambia supports in that regard the amendment of
United Nations rules on peacekeeping budgets to
finance regional operations authorized by the Security
Council. As regards the deployment and management
of African Union-led peace support operations, Zambia
recommends for consideration at this meeting that such
operations be funded through United Nations assessed
contributions. Considering the importance of resources
to the success of AU missions - and indeed, to those
of the United Nations - it is proposed that an in-depth
analysis of the current financial outlays to peace
missions also be made.

While financial resources are cardinal to positive
outcomes in conflict zones, Zambia would support
cooperative mechanisms that ensure human dignity
based on the development of coherent strategies and
policies that would protect civilians in armed conflicts.
Zambia would, in that respect, support early warning
systems that anticipate human-made social, political
and economic upheavals which are the precursors of
Africa's conflicts.

