Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others
in thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/422), Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his remarks this morning.

Ijoin my Spanish colleague and others in strongly
condemning this morning's attack on the Afghan
Parliament. The Taliban have claimed responsibility. It
was a callous attack. It once again targeted civilians in
Violation of international humanitarian law. My deepest
sympathies go out to all those affected, their families
and friends. I should like to pay tribute to the swift and
effective response by the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF).

The Taliban will further alienate the Afghan people
by such attacks. Afghanistan has clearly demonstrated
its commitment to democracy, as the Afghan people
courageously turned out to vote in the millions during
last year's elections. The United Kingdom will continue
to stand alongside all those who seek a more peaceful,
prosperous and democratic future for Afghanistan.

After many difficult years and despite such attacks,
Afghanistan has now begun its Transformation Decade,
with full ownership of its national affairs. The country
is moving forward. Cabinet ministers and provincial
governors are being appointed, and the National Unity
Government has set out an impressive vision for reform
at the London Conference. These reforms could have
a real impact on day-to-day life in Afghanistan by
improving citizens' rights, strengthening accountability
and promoting economic growth.

It is Vital that this vision now be translated into
actions to address Afghanistan's many challenges.
The remaining Government appointments should be
made swiftly. Reforms should be implemented quickly
in order to build a better future for all Afghans. The
forthcoming meeting of senior officials from the
international community and Afghanistan to be held
in September 2015 should take stock of how far the
country has come in tackling corruption, strengthening
the economy and improving women's rights. That
meeting is also a chance to look ahead to the longer-term
development of Afghanistan. We hope that it will agree
on a refreshed framework between the international
community and the Government.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a crucial role to play
throughout this process in support of the Government's
reforms. Its continued presence in Afghanistan
underlines the international community's commitment.

This year's fighting season and the intensification
of armed clashes is testing the capabilities of the ANSF.
They are showing that they are capable of meeting
this challenge. I pay tribute to their resolve and the
sacrifices they are making for the sake of security and
stability in Afghanistan.

Let me take this opportunity to reiterate the United
Kingdom's commitment to a strong and self-sufficient
ANSF. We are proud of our support for the Afghan
National Army officer academy, and we will maintain
our contribution of $110 million each year to the ANSF
until at least 2017.

However, no matter the strength of the ANSF,
a political settlement remains the best prospect for
bringing peace and stability to Afghanistan. We
welcome President Ghani's commitment to a peace
process and his efforts to build regional cooperation for
a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.

The continued violence experienced by innocent
civilians gives us a clear illustration of why a political
solution is so vital. The rise in civilian casualties
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report is
worrying. We deplore the Taliban's large-scale
attacks against civilian targets, including Government
officials, legal professionals and those participating in
cultural events. These are in stark contrast to Taliban
statements on protecting civilians. The time has come
for the Taliban to sit down at the negotiating table for
the sake of the people of Afghanistan.

Turning to the situation of women and girls
in Afghanistan, we welcome President Ghani's
commitment to making fundamental and sustainable
changes for Afghan women. These need to include
participation in decision-making and economic
empowerment. Despite his commitment, women and
girls continue to face significant challenges, including
violence against them and against those who defend
their rights. We condemn the horrific killing of
Farkhunda Malikzada in March. Her death was a tragic
reminder of the scale of the challenge facing Afghan
women and girls.

There are two immediate steps that the Government
of Afghanistan can take to improve the lives of
women and girls: first, implement fully the law on
the elimination of violence against women, so that
the perpetrators of these terrible crimes face justice;
secondly, publish soon Afghanistan's national action
plan for women and peace and security. We hope it will
set a clear framework for improving women's rights
across the country.

In highlighting the challenges, we should not lose
sight of progress. As my Afghan colleague outlined,
Afghanistan now has women running the Ministries of
Higher Education, Women's Affairs, Counter Narcotics
and Labour and Social Affairs. For the second time
in Afghanistan's history, there is a female provincial
governor, and only last week, the first female judge
was nominated to the Supreme Court and the first
female officers graduated from the United Kingdom-
supported national officer academy. All of this would
have been unthinkable a decade ago. These gains must
be protected and further promoted.

Let me close by stressing that we must never
forget the sacrifices made by the men and women of
Afghanistan and the international community to bring
Afghanistan this far. Thanks to their commitment, so
much has been achieved over the past 13 years. Life
expectancy is rising. Health care is improving. Millions
of children - and millions of girls in particular - are
now receiving education. Yet as the country moves
forward and tackles the challenges that remain, this
morning's attack shows that we cannot afford to let
international attention to Afghanistan slip. Through
this regular debate and through the work of UNAMA,
we must maintain our focus.
