Mr. Berteling (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries have aligned themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia.
Iceland and Norway also wish to align themselves with this
statement.

As I understand, Sir, that today is the penultimate day
of your presidency, I should like to voice the appreciation
of the European Union for your able stewardship of the
Council during this month of February.

During recent months, the Angolan peace process has
shown some signs of progress: political contacts between
the parties have taken place in the framework of the Joint
Commission; violations of the ceasefire have diminished;
the incorporation of UNIT A troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces has started; most UNITA policemen have been
quartered; and the free movement of persons and goods
throughout the country is improving.
However, the peace process remains far from
completed. UNITA, in particular, has yet to demonstrate its
unequivocal commitment to the terms of the Lusaka
Protocol. The slow pace of implementation of several
crucial aspects of the peace process, in particular the
integration of UNITA soldiers and officers into the Angolan
Armed Forces and the Angolan National Police,
demobilization and the extension of State administration
throughout Angola, is cause for serious concern. The
disarmament of the civilian population as well as the
overall human rights situation remain unsatisfactory.

Further delays and difficulties have recently arisen.
The European Union notes with concern that not all
UNITA National Assembly members and officials
designated for the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation had arrived in Luanda by the agreed date
of 12 February 1997. As a consequence of the refusal by
UNITA to meet the time-table established by the Joint
Commission in the context of the Lusaka Protocol, the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation could
not, as envisaged, be formed before the expiration of the
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) on 28 February. In this regard,
we wish to stress once again that linkages between the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and other outstanding or newly raised
issues are not acceptable.

The European Union attaches paramount importance
to preserving the spirit of Lusaka and is firmly committed
to a long and lasting peace in Angola. The ultimate
responsibility for the restoration of peace in Angola,
however, rests with the Angolans themselves. In order to
ensure the continued involvement of the international
community in the peace process, it is imperative for the
parties, in particular UNITA, to take urgent and decisive
steps to fulfil their commitments. The European Union
shares the view of the international community that
continued pressure should be applied until compliance
with the commitments undertaken in the Lusaka Protocol
is assured. We therefore fully endorse the decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III
by only one month, until 31 March 1997, and we support
the readiness of the Council to consider the imposition of
appropriate measures, should the Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation not have been formed by that
date.

The European Union will follow closely the
discussion on the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General on the future role of the United Nations
in Angola. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
pace of the planned withdrawal of United Nations-formed
military units should take into account the state of affairs
on the ground as regards, inter alia, the formation of the
Angolan Armed Forces, demobilization, the closure of
quartering areas and the extension of State administration.

 

Over the years, the European Union and its member
States have already provided substantial support - in the
order of several hundreds of millions of US. dollars - for
humanitarian, reconstruction and development activities in
Angola. We continue to respond to specific needs. As the
security situation in some regions continues to hamper the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the carrying out of
reconstruction and development assistance, there is still an
urgent need for security guarantees for international
personnel.

We all are aware of the horrors that anti-personnel
mines can cause to innocent civilians, often children. That
is why the European Union and its member States have
been among those who have provided significant political,
financial, material and personnel support for demining
activities. The United Nations has already cleared 4,500
kilometres of roads, and the training of Angolan demining
brigades is continuing. The planned transfer by 1 March
1997 of the responsibility for support of the national mine
clearance programme from UNAVEM. III and the
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Unit to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) cannot take
place before the project concerning the development of a
national mine clearance capacity in Angola has been
approved. We therefore call upon the Angolan Government
to do so urgently. The European Union wishes to express
its concern at recent reports about the hampering of mine
clearing activities, and calls on the parties, particularly on
UNITA, to cooperate in this respect.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to Special
Representative Maitre Beye, who is with us today, for his
untiring efforts and unwavering optimism in helping to
bring the peace process forward. We should also like to
express our deep appreciation for the role played by the
three Observer States - Portugal, the United States and the
Russian Federation - and for the important contributions
made by the staff of UNAVEM. III, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations in support of
the consolidation of peace and national reconciliation in
Angola.

I should like to conclude by expressing the European
Union's sincere condolences to the Government and people
of China on the loss of their Paramount Leader, Mr. Deng
Xiaoping, who contributed so much to the economic
development of his country and its opening up to the
international community.
