Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga for their briefings on the progress in the
peace process between the Sudan and South Sudan and
on the activities of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We note the contribution
of Ethiopian peacekeepers to the effective work of the
United Nations presence.

We have consistently emphasized that the joint
efforts of the parties are essential to making progress
towards achieving a settlement between the Sudan
and South Sudan. We look forward to seeing work on
demarcation between Khartoum and Juba resumed as
soon as possible. There is an international legal basis
for that in the form of the existing Security Council
and African Union resolutions and the package of
bilateral agreements concluded between the two
countries in Addis Ababa in September 2012. We hope
that the relevant work of the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel with the Sudanese parties
will continue.

We note that the improvement in inter-Sudanese
relations that began at the end of last year has continued.
Khartoum's participation with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in revitalizing the South
Sudan peace agreement was a significant contribution
to the peace process in the country, as have been the
significant mediation efforts of President Salva Kiir
aimed at launching negotiations between the Sudanese
authorities and the various groups in Darfur. It will
be crucial to make use of the positive momentum in
bilateral relations to resolve the Abyei issue as well.

We note that there has been some improvement in
the situation in Abyei. An intercommunal dialogue is
being established and progress is being made in the
demarcation of border corridors. We believe that the
work of UNISFA is vital to maintaining constructive
relations with the local communities. The measures
taken by the United Nations to establish intercommunal
cooperation in issues related to ensuring law
enforcement and regarding economic activity around
the common market in Amiet need support, since
without that the restoration of trust and intercommunal
reconciliation will be impossible.

We believe that the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism is integral to the incident
prevention system between the parties. Ending
UNISFA's support to it could have an extremely negative
impact on the prospects for a full settlement of the
situation in Abyei. We are all well aware of the factors
preventing Khartoum and Juba from accelerating
the settlement of the final status of Abyei, and in the
circumstances, UNISFA's continued presence in the
region remains urgent. In that connection, we support
the Secretary-General's proposal (S/2019/817) to extend
UNISFA's mandate by six months, including its support
for the Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. At the
same time, we believe that the Secretariat's proposal for
a civilian component for the Mission should take into
account the views of Khartoum and Juba, in line with
the basic principles of peacekeeping.

