Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on the situation in the
Middle East - a situation that has seriously
deteriorated in recent days, as has been rightly pointed
out by the countries and organizations that formally
requested the holding of this meeting, in particular the
League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. My delegation also endorses the
statement to be made later by Cuba on behalf of the
Non Aligned Movement.

The deaths of 18 people, including seven women
and eight children, on 8 November as a result of an
Israeli military operation in Beit Hanoun, and the
destruction of vital infrastructure and property in the
Gaza Strip, constitute an intolerable escalation of the
situation.

Strangely enough, those extremely serious events
occurred after Israel announced that it would withdraw
its forces from Beit Hanoun, where the most recent
excessive - as we see it - disproportionate and

indiscriminate Israeli military operations took place, in
response to the firing of rockets into Israel by
Palestinian militias.

My delegation firmly condemns such military
actions, which have led to considerable loss of life
among civilians, particularly women and children. We
call for an independent inquiry to determine who was
responsible for those heinous acts.

Of course, we recognize once again that Israel
has a right to defend itself and to protect its people
from attack, but that right does not free it from its
obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian law, in particular the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We call upon Israel to show
the greatest restraint in carrying out military actions in
densely populated areas.

My delegation is particularly concerned, because
such actions clearly erode efforts aimed at establishing
confidence-building measures between the two parties
to the conflict. It also notes that these developments
are taking place at a time when efforts are under way to
give the Palestinian Authority a national unity
Government made up of professionals - a
Government that could meet the requirements tied to
the recognition of Israel's right to exist, the
renunciation of violence and the acceptance of
agreements previously entered into, in particular the
Road Map.

My delegation also notes that these dangerous
developments, which we regret, are taking place while
efforts are under way to secure the release of Corporal
Gilad Shalit, who is being held by Palestinian militias.

We hardly need recall that military actions in the
Middle East are always counterproductive. We
therefore steadfastly reaffirm that only negotiations
between the two parties, on the basis of existing
mechanisms, including the Arab Peace Initiative and
relevant United Nations resolutions, will lead to the
achievement of the goal of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.
