Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. We welcome you, Minister
Bellingham, and we are particularly pleased to have
you preside over this important debate. Your presence
here is the best testimony to the commitment of your
country to the resolution of the Somali conflict. I
would like to assure you of my delegation's support
during your presidency. We also want to congratulate
the delegation of Togo for the manner in which it
steered the work of the Council during the month of
February.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
participation and welcome his comments. We also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his
informative briefing and for his tireless work.

Today's debate is a reaffirmation by the
international community in general, and the United
Nations in particular, that the people of Africa and
Somalia are not alone in their quest to resolve the
scourge of conflict that has ravaged the continent and
their country for many years now.

Since the beginning of the year, the international
community has coalesced its work around the national
and regional levels to resolve the Somali conflict. In
January of this year, the Security Council, under the
presidency of South Africa, convened a debate with the
leaders of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union on their
revised strategy concept for the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM).

South Africa fully supports the strategic
engagement and collaboration between the Security
Council and the African Union on peace and security.
7

The meeting of the Security Council in January
(see S/PV.6702) with members of IGAD and the
African Union was a practical demonstration of the
strategic engagement called for in resolution 2033
(2012). From 5 to 6 February, the international contact
group on Somalia met, and on 23 February the
international London conference on Somalia was held.

It is our hope that the London conference has
given renewed impetus to what the Somali people and
the Transitional Federal Government, supported by the
African Union, the United Nations and IGAD, are
striving to achieve. South Africa welcomes that meeting,
which underscored the interrelated nature of the
political, security, humanitarian challenges, as well as
the piracy issue, which are directly related to the
instability on land.

The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012), on the
eve of the London conference, in which the Council
significantly enhanced the United Nations support
package for AMISOM, was an important achievement.
We particularly welcomed the authorization to increase
the troop level to 17,731, as requested by the African
Union. The resolution was adopted at a critical time,
and we hope that it will go a long way towards
ensuring the consolidation of the military gains that
AMISOM. has made thus far.

The African Union welcomed resolution 2036
(2012) as an important milestone and further testimony
to the commitment of the United Nations to help
AMISOM. and the Somali leadership to consolidate the
important progress made towards the completion of the
transition process in Somalia.

We also commend the important contribution of,
and sacrifices by, troop-contributing countries, which
serve under difficult conditions in AMISOM. As we
welcome those important developments, we also
reiterate our long-held View that the military strategy
for Somalia must be in support of a broader strategic
and political objective.

Investment in the military operation should not be
viewed as an end, but as a means for the creation of a
conducive environment for a political engagement in
dialogue to take place. In that regard, the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) must continue the important
task of outreach and reconciliation within Somalia. That
should include persuading military elements who are
willing to lay down their arms to join the peace process
and be reintegrated into the community, including
through the development of a defector programme.

The adoption of the Kampala Accord, in June
2011, and the road map, in September 2011, as well as
the outcomes of the first and second Garowe
Conferences, are all strong indicators of the
determination of the Somali people to reach peace
among themselves. The Principles agreed upon during
the second Garowe Conference on federalism, the
system of Government and ending the transition will
significantly contribute to finalizing the draft
constitution by 20 April 2012. We welcome that
important development, as the end of the transition is
fast approaching. We wish to encourage the
Transitional Federal Institutions to utilize the existing
window of opportunity to achieve measurable results in
all the priority areas identified in the road map.

We are mindful of the fact that the road map will
require financial and technical support for its full
implementation. We therefore call on the international
community to continue its support to the Transitional
Federal Institutions in that regard.

The extension of the TFG's authority throughout
the territory of Somalia should lead to the improvement
in the lives of ordinary citizens. We therefore support
the expansion and full implementation of the Mogadishu
Stabilization and Recovery Plan for enhancing the safety
and security and economic opportunities and basic
services to the population in Mogadishu and the newly
liberated areas.

We also welcome the new recovery fund, which
will further enhance local stability. Somalia's long-
term security and stability will require a credible and
effective justice system. We encourage the international
community to continue its support for building the
capacity of the Somali judicial system in line with the
agreed Somali legal foundation.

The United Nations and the international
community's support for the provision of those
services and for institution-building must also support
the national and the local ownership of those processes.
We therefore welcome the coming Istanbul conference.

While piracy along the coast of Somalia remains
a critical challenge, we call on the international
community not to forget that the solution to that
problem will have to come from land, not sea. The
comprehensive resolution of the Somali conflict must
address all the root causes of piracy and the other
challenges, including the exploitation of marine
resources and the dumping of toxic wastes.

Equally, Somalia's myriad challenges, including
its humanitarian situation and the terrorism plaguing it,
will remain with us for as long as the instability on
land is not addressed. In that regard, we welcome the
continued focus of the international community on
Somalia, as well as efforts geared towards addressing
Somalia's challenges in a comprehensive and holistic
manner.

For our part, in relation the humanitarian situation,
we will continue, together with our partners in the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
region, to provide whatever assistance we can to the
people of Somalia. We have just provided assistance
for the air-lifting of the humanitarian aid contribution
from the SADC member States to the people of
Somalia. We stand ready to play our part in supporting
all efforts that can help bring about lasting peace,
security and stability to Somalia.

As we mark the fifth anniversary of the AMISOM
presence in Somalia tomorrow, we remember and
honour those who have sacrificed their lives for peace
and stability in that East African country. A lot of
progress has been made in the past five years, and
Somalia will never be the same again.

