Ms. O'Donnell (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for
calling this open meeting today. I would like to
welcome our guests, Mr. Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of East Timor, and
Mr. Vieira de Mello, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative. I am very pleased that the Prime
Minister of Australia, Mr. Howard, has addressed this
meeting. His presence and his important and committed
intervention this morning demonstrate the continuing
significance of international engagement on East
Timor, both for the country itself and for wider
regional reasons. Australia has played a critical role in
assuring the security that has facilitated the transition
of East Timor to independence.

Ireland associates itself fully with the statement
which will be delivered shortly by the representative of
Spain on behalf of the European Union.

This is the final time that the Security Council
will be asked to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). The next time the Council takes action on
East Timor, it will be to decide on the successor United
Nations mission to work with the Government of an
independent East Timor. What a heart-warming thought
that is for all of us.

On this occasion, the Secretary-General has
recommended that the Council extend the mandate of
UNTAET until 20 May. Ireland is happy to support this
recommendation and we look forward to the Secretary-
General's proposals for the important United Nations
post-independence presence. Ireland, of course, will be
represented in East Timor on 20 May. It will be a day
of great celebration and happiness indeed in Ireland.

We are watching in great admiration as the people
of East Timor progress towards independence. The
latest report of the Secretary-General on UNTAET
gives a clear sense of the real advances being made.
The setting of a date for the presidential election, the
establishment of an independence day and the solid
work of the Constituent Assembly are all welcome
signs of a political system that is very quickly finding
its feet. The Secretary-General's report on the
development of the country's public administration
points to important areas where the East Timorese
people have assumed ownership, particularly in the
education and health sectors. We note, too, that the
East Timorese people will also be taking a predominant
role in preparing and holding the election that will soon
decide the country's first President.

A further development which Ireland strongly
supports is the recent swearing-in of the members of
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation. We very much hope that the
Commission will be able to assist the people of East
Timor to achieve accountability through truth-telling
and healing through reconciliation. Its work will take
many years, but we believe it can be an important part
of the effort to forge a more stable future for the
country and, in due course, bring closure to the many
injustices of the past.

Also of critical importance is the relationship
between East Timor and Indonesia. We wish to see
both countries working to improve links and to resolve
outstanding bilateral issues, including the delineation
of the border and cooperation on bringing to justice
those responsible for serious crimes.

Today we mark further confident steps away from
the traumatic events of September 1999 in East Timor,
which followed the people's decision by a large
majority to seek their future as an independent nation.
The firm conviction of the Security Council at that
time; the exceptional work carried out by United
Nations personnel over more than two years since; and
the bravery, perseverance and well-known resilience of
the East Timorese people have brought us to the point
where the Secretary-General can convey the positive
news contained in his recent report.

That said, Ireland is convinced of the need for a
strong United Nations role after independence.
Continuing United Nations involvement is contributing
importantly to the incremental advances being made in
East Timor, and we believe this involvement must be
maintained. We are very conscious that, because of the
terrible circumstances that arose following the popular
consultation of August 1999, the institutions of State
are being constructed from the very foundations up.
This presents enormous challenges and opportunities
for the people after independence - challenges and
opportunities which the international community,
including the United Nations, must assist them in
facing.

The Secretary-General has highlighted those
priority areas where the East Timorese Government
will require support and guidance until mid-2004. The
creation of a critical mass of indigenous administrative,
military and policing expertise will require further
support from the international community.

We are especially mindful of the size of the task
involved in building national defence and police
forces - all the more so for a new, small, developing
State which so recently suffered such violent
confrontations. We note the headway being made in
relation to the East Timor Defence Force and Police
Service, and we commend it, although we have to
expect this to be a gradual and incremental process.

We welcome also the fact that the Secretary-
General's approach to future United Nations
involvement in East Timor remains consistent with the
strong proposals outlined last October. We agree that
this United Nations presence should be a robust one.
We also agree that, together with bilateral and other
multilateral arrangements, the United Nations can and
should play a major role in ensuring that the rewards
flowing from the hard work of UNTAET can be
maintained and increased for the benefit of the people
of East Timor.

Ireland is one of those already involved in a range
of development cooperation programmes in East
Timor. We have done so since 1999, and last year we
opened a representative office in Dili. Our experience
there has shown us that bilateral aid is crucial to the
future development of East Timor.

East Timor has already been identified by
Ireland's development aid programme as a priority for
reconstruction and rehabilitation. Ireland Aid, which
has opened our office in Dili, is implementing an initial
country strategy designed to support the transition to
democracy and general rehabilitation activity in East
Timor. The field experience that is being acquired
through the implementation of this strategy will
provide the basis for the development of a full country
programme in due course.

Our experience on the ground has also shown us
that the unique dimension of the engagement of the
United Nations in the administrative and security tasks
is also still required. The Organization will have a vital
role in maintaining progress in East Timor towards an
effective Government and full independence for the
first time after four centuries of external rule.

In a matter of months, the Security Council will
consider the application of East Timor for membership
in the United Nations. The Council will, during the
coming period, have a unique opportunity to shape
positively the future of this new Member, in full
collaboration with its citizens. Ireland will do its level
best to ensure that after 20 May, the United Nations
presence is one that best suits the requirements of the
Government and people of East Timor. That is, we
believe, the best way to consolidate the progress that
the Organization and the people of East Timor have
built together.

