Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): First, Sir, let me
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I thank you for organizing today's
meeting. It gives me great pleasure to welcome High
Representative Catherine Ashton to her first briefing to
the Council.

The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in
December brought about significant changes for the
European Union (EU), and especially for its foreign
and security policy. With the strengthening of the
Office of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, which will be supported by the
European External Action Service, the European Union
will be able to speak to its partners with a stronger and
more unified voice. Among those partners, the United
Nations occupies a preeminent place. As stipulated by
the EU Treaty, the EU's actions on the international
scene shall be guided inter alia by respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter.
The challenges we are facing in the twenty-first
century - resolving and preventing conflicts,
combating terrorism and organized crime and
preventing nuclear proliferation, to name but a few -
clearly show that the United Nations cannot operate in
isolation but requires cooperation and concerted action
by its international partners.

The Security Council recently reaffirmed the
important contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to the peaceful settlement of local
disputes and to preventive diplomacy, in its
presidential statement adopted in January under the
Chinese presidency (S/PRST/20lO/l). Due to their
understanding of particular conflicts and the respective
root causes as well as to their specific capabilities,
regional organizations can have a comparative
advantage in addressing crisis situations. In addition,
local and regional ownership are often key to the
success of such efforts. The importance of active
participation by civil society has to be highlighted in
this respect.

In the field of international peace and security,
the firm and well-established cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union remains
crucial. With its Common Security and Defence Policy,
the European Union makes an important contribution
and has developed significant capacities for conflict
prevention and conflict resolution.

The European Union is currently engaged in
13 military operations and civilian missions, and
Austria contributes personnel to six of them. The EU's
commitment to support the United Nations and the
Security Council in its responses to threats to
international peace and security is reflected in the
Union's support to all current United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Concrete examples of cooperation include in the
Horn of Africa, notably Somalia, where the EU is
actively engaged in anti-piracy efforts to protect
shipments by the World Food Programme to the Somali
population. Equally, the newly established EU training
mission in Uganda, aimed at supporting the Somali
Transitional Federal Government by providing training
to 2,000 members of the Somali security forces, is
conducted through close coordination between the EU
and the United Nations. In civilian crisis management
as well, the EU is interested in close cooperation with
the United Nations and other international actors, as in
Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan and in
Guinea-Bissau.
When the Security Council debated the subject of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in January (see S/PV.6257), it agreed that
increased cooperation with regional organizations also
contributes towards the coherent and effective
implementation of Council resolutions by the wider
United Nations membership. That is certainly true of
the cooperation between the Council and the European
Union; the Union has a strong interest in adding to the
Council's work in many areas of mutual concern.

Here, as an example of the important role the
European Union is playing in translating Security
Council resolutions into its own actions, I would like to
point to two thematic issues: the protection of civilians
in situations of armed conflict; and women and peace
and security. Security Council resolution 1894 (2009),
on the protection of civilians, explicitly stresses the
importance of consultation and cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations to
improve the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The European Union has on various occasions
reiterated its firm commitment and active engagement
to enhance the protection of civilians. Missions under
the Common Security and Defence Policy have
included important protection concerns in their
mandates, in particular on women and children affected
by armed conflict. The protection of civilians was the
main objective of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Chad, aimed at improving the
security of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Civilian Common Security and Defence Policy
missions, such as the European Union Monitoring
Mission in Georgia and the European Union Police
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, also
have an important monitoring and reporting role in that
regard.

The European Union makes a particular
contribution to sustainable peace with its expertise in
the areas of the rule of law and human rights. In that
regard, I welcome ongoing efforts in the European
Union framework to further integrate the protection of
civilians into Common Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations, taking into account the best
practices identified by the United Nations in this area.

One of the lessons learned from EU civilian and
military operations is that missions become more
effective through the mainstreaming of human rights
and gender perspectives, both in the planning and
implementation phases. To that end, in the context of
our Common Security and Defence Policy, the
European Union has adopted various instruments
relating to the implementation of, among others,
Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), on children
affected by armed conflict, and 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. The EU is also actively
supporting ongoing efforts to reinvigorate
commitments on the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) in order to ensure the effective
implementation of that landmark resolution.

On all of those issues, better exchange and
sharing of best practices and lessons learned is crucial,
both between the United Nations and regional
organizations as well as among regional organizations
themselves.

Another important example of constructive EU
engagement in multilateral negotiations is the Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which has just begun. Nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and ensuring the
responsible development of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy in countries wishing to develop their capacities
in that field represent key challenges today to which
the European Union has found a common response
despite the large spectrum of views of its member
States. Thus, also in the sensitive field of nuclear
cooperation, the European Union is making a
substantive contribution.

The Lisbon Treaty has simplified the
international representation of the European Union.
The External Action Service will help to enhance its
strategic direction, coherence and effectiveness and to
further improve the cooperation of the EU with
international partners, and in particular with the United
Nations. I hope that the Visit by Baroness Ashton to the
Council today will be the first in a series of regular
appearances before this body.

