Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Valerie Amos,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Mr. Yves Daccord for their comprehensive briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/579) and the latest
update of the aide-memoire, which is an important
practical and useful analytical tool to address issues
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Allow me to start with the unfortunate and
unacceptable fact that civilians continue to account for
a high number of casualties in conflicts. Bosnia and
Herzegovina condemns all deliberate attacks against
civilians, forced recruitment, attacks on schools, the
use of civilians to protect military objectives and the
deaths resulting from the use of force.
Women and children continue to suffer extreme
violence during conflicts. Recent events in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo illustrate
failures in the areas of both prevention and response.
We should bear in mind that the struggle against
impunity is an integral element of the protection of
civilians, which cannot be addressed seriously without
prosecuting those responsible for serious crimes.
Efforts must be enhanced to support the fight against
impunity, both at the national and international levels.

Sanctions and other targeted measures play an
important role in overall efforts, as well as in
initiatives to improve compliance with the law by non-
State armed groups.

Although the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with States and with parties
to an armed conflict, the United Nations, with its
systematic approach to the protection of civilians, must
be, and is, at the helm of the global effort.

Positive developments must be supported and
publicized. The enhancement of communication
between the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and sanctions committees is one such example.
Situation-specific resolutions calling for protection to
be prioritized in the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates constitute another such development. There
have also been significant improvements in creating
joint protection teams, as is the case with the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Activities have
also been undertaken to foster interaction with local
population and provide valuable information for
assessments on the ground.

In addition, there must be support for the
enhancement of accountability. Different justice and
reconciliation mechanisms should also be considered,
including national and international criminal courts and
tribunals. Such mechanisms are aimed at supporting
national-level investigation and prosecution.

Unfortunately, conflicts remain the major cause
of the increasing number of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We would like to emphasize the
importance of unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance to those vulnerable groups. We also express
our awareness of concerns about the security risks and
continued dangers faced by humanitarian personnel as
they operate in increasingly complex situations. We
urge the cooperation of all parties to a conflict in order
to create areas of security and provide access for
humanitarian assistance. The challenges facing the
Council with regard to the protection of civilians call
for greater international cooperation and better
coordination between the Council and other United
Nations bodies and agencies. To that end, additional
efforts should be made to prevent conflicts and their
recurrence and to promote early warning systems and
effective responses to situations that specifically
threaten civilian populations.

We support more comprehensive and detailed
information on the protection of civilians in country-
specific situations as well as on measuring progress in
the implementation of peacekeeping mandates issues
related to the protection of civilians. That is of key
importance in the context of mission drawdown, as
well as when identifying areas of concern, prioritizing
response activities and ensuring accountability for
actions or shortcomings.

