Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, an issue of paramount
importance to the international community. Let me also
thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on recent
developments in the Middle East.

Before I proceed further, let me associate my
delegation with the statements to be made by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by the representative of Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Conference.

The Middle East conflict remains the most
volatile conflict on the globe today and continues to
pose a clear and present danger to international peace
and security. The intractability of the conflict in the
Middle East is a matter of deep concern to my
delegation. We believe that an unprecedented step
should be taken by all parties concerned to put an end
to the conflict. Hopefully sooner, not later, there will
come a moment when a once-and-for-all solution to the
conflict is agreed upon and is acceptable to all parties.
In that context, we reaffirm Indonesia's long-standing
and tireless commitment to support and contribute to
the process towards finding a peaceful solution that
would fulfil the right of the Palestinians to self-
determination and statehood. At this stage, however, it
is hard to think of the victory of peace through a lofty
one-time solution.

At this moment, we have to appreciate positive
developments of any scale that keep the peace process
in motion. Among such positive developments was the
signing of the Mecca declaration by President
Mahmoud Abbas and Hamas leader Khaled Meshal on
8 February 2007. This lays the foundation for the
formation of a government of national unity in
Palestine. It is our fervent hope that the agreement will
immediately be implemented and that it will be
supported by the international community. We believe
that the international community should respond to this
encouraging development in a positive manner.

My delegation believes that peace cannot be fully
obtained by diplomacy alone; it also requires the
commitment of the parties to the conflict to cease the
use of force. Thus, my delegation encourages the
Israelis and the Palestinians to exercise restraint. Our
call for the exercise of restraint from all extrajudicial
or provocative actions would also include firm
assurances by the Israelis, as the occupying Power, that
they will maintain the nature of the holy sites in East
Jerusalem, and the Muslim character of those sites,
including the holy Al-Aqsa mosque.
Indonesia deeply deplores the excavation in the
holy Al-Aqsa mosque. We urge Israel to immediately
stop the excavation, because not only does the work
have the potential to damage the mosque, which is
highly revered by Muslims, but it will also increase
tension and complicate efforts to revive the peace
process in the region.

With reference to the situation in Lebanon, my
delegation has mixed feelings about recent
developments in that country. We are pleased with the
steady implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). The
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
which is now standing at approximately 12,000
personnel, has steadily been carrying out its mandate.
However, tensions remain in that country.

My delegation stresses the need for respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. In
this regard, we note with great concern the continuing
Israeli air violations and the recent crossing by the
Israeli military of the Blue Line, which led to a series
of exchanges of fire, causing injuries to Lebanese
security personnel. These actions are also a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

My delegation is also concerned about the
security situation in Lebanon. The very recent bomb
blasts tearing through two buses, which caused at least
a dozen casualties and deaths near the town of Bikfaya,
are deplorable. Previously, violent clashes between
students in Beirut University had reinforced concerns
in Beirut.

We believe that the achievement of sustainable
peace in Lebanon depends not only on the deployment
of an international peace mission such as UNIFIL, but
also on the existence of political unity and national
cohesion. Threats from within are no less perilous than
those from outside. This will require that all parties in
Lebanon have a strong commitment to national
reconciliation and consensus and to the creation of a
united and stable Lebanon.

We strongly encourage countries in the region to
help to mitigate the consequences of the ongoing
political turbulence in Lebanon and to prevent its
spread.

As a final point, let me say that, in the view of
my delegation, peace will come to the region only
when the Israeli Government is willing fully to comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515
(2003), which envisage the establishment of a
independent, viable and sovereign Palestinian State,
living in peace and security alongside Israel.

It would be a tragedy - for the Israelis, the
Palestinians and the rest of the world - if peace is
rejected and sustained violence is permitted to continue
to prevail in the region.

