The President: I should like at the outset of this
meeting to extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
the United Nations, His Excellency Sir John Weston. We
look forward to cooperating with him in the work of the
Council.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to his Excellency Mr. Gerardo Martinez Blanco,
Representative of Honduras to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of July 1995. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Martinez Blanco for the great diplomatic skill
with which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the deterioration in the situation in and around the
Republic of Croatia.

"The Security Council fully supports the efforts
of the Secretary-General's Special Representative
and of the Co-Chairman of the Steering Committee
of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia to defuse the situation, in line with the
Council's previous resolutions.

"The Security Council stresses that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Croatia and
welcomes the holding of talks between the parties in
Geneva earlier today. It calls on both parties to
commit themselves fully to that process and to
acceptance of the Draft Agreement drawn up by the
Co-Chairman as a basis for continuing those talks.

"The Security Council demands that the parties
halt all military actions and exercise the utmost
restraint."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 9.35 pm.

