Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. J an Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing.
We also thank him for his dedication and unflagging
work alongside the Afghan people. I would also like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing.

We are closely following the results of the
democratic process in Afghanistan. The Afghan people
have courageously expressed their free will throughout
the historic and transparent elections. We hope that a
national unity Government will be formed as soon as
possible. The Afghan people's aspiration and optimism
turned to disillusionment and concern about the future
on account of the current electoral crisis. We call on
the candidates to cooperate in a timely fashion in
implementing the technical and political elements
of the 12 July agreement so as to find an appropriate
solution to the crisis. We also call on the candidates
and all Afghan stakeholders to ensure the peaceful
and democratic transfer of power, and to avoid any
escalation of violence, which could have disastrous
consequences for the country's future.

Afghanistan will surely encounter difficulties
during and after the transition period. There will be
interconnected economic and political challenges,
particularly because the extremist forces seek to sow
lasting instability in the country. International support
must therefore be significant, continuous and active
during and after the transition period. The international
community should honour its commitments and
provide the means necessary to strengthen the security
sector because the security situation in Afghanistan
remains difficult. The security forces and civilians are
still exposed to terrorist attacks. There are no words
strong enough to condemn those terrorist acts. The
United Nations must continue its work in Afghanistan,
adapting to the changes on the ground during the period
that lies ahead. We must also strengthen our partnership
with Afghanistan because the international community
cannot sit idly by while the situation deteriorates.

Work in the political and development fields and
efforts to promote reform and update the development
priorities must be coordinated in order to achieve
sustainable development and strengthen the economy.
At this critical stage, the Afghan authorities must
pursue political and economic reforms aimed at
strengthening the rule of law, good governance, the
fight against corruption and the preservation of the
progress achieved over previous years. That includes
progress with respect to the human rights issues, which
should not suffer as a result of the recent crisis. We urge
the next President to take up the many challenges to the
human rights situation in the country.

We hope for increased regional cooperation, a better
understanding between Afghanistan and its neighbours,
and a continuation of forums and meetings aimed at
strengthening opportunities for economic cooperation.
Accordingly, we warmly welcome the positive dynamic
in Afghanistan's bilateral relations with its neighbours
and we support all efforts aimed at building trust at the
regional level.

