Ms. Banks (New Zealand): May I first thank the
Secretary-General and the Security Council for the
steps that they have taken to date in response to the
situation in Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank
Special Envoy Ian Martin for his briefing. We welcome
as well the update from Minister Ramos-Horta
conveyed to us this morning by the Ambassador. We
hear his message that the situation is redeemable.

The situation has improved since the arrival of
forces from our four countries, but it remains fragile.
New Zealand's deployment in Timor-Leste currently
includes 176 troops, supported by a military planning
team in Australia and logistical and air-transport assets.
We appreciate the expressions of support for the
deployment of our forces in response to the request
from Timor-Leste. New Zealand is fully committed to
working closely with the forces from Australia,
Malaysia and Portugal, and in close coordination with
the Government of Timor-Leste and the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). Such coordination
and collaboration by all parties is vital.

Our immediate focus has been on restoring the
law and order situation. We have also contributed to
humanitarian relief efforts. The New Zealand
Government is still giving consideration to the shape
and duration of New Zealand's present deployment.
But our expectation is that our forces will remain in
Timor-Leste while they are needed. Options for further
assistance to Timor-Leste, including a possible police
contribution, are being considered by my Government.

As the situation has now changed drastically, we
need time for the Government of Timor-Leste and the
international community to assess the options for the
path forward. The input of Special Envoy Ian Martin
and the needs-assessment mission will be essential
components, complemented by the views of
contributing countries and regional partners. New
S/l'V.5457

 

Zealand stands ready to assist and participate as the
team undertakes its work.

We note that any future United Nations mission,
and all multilateral and bilateral partners, must work
with Timor-Leste to build up real institutional capacity.
New Zealand supports the extension of UNOTIL's
mandate for a further period, to allow sufficient time
for the needs assessment-mission to visit and report
back expeditiously.

The Government of Timor-Leste has a decisive
role to play throughout this process, especially given
that true stabilization can only occur once the
underlying political issues are resolved. New Zealand
sympathizes with the major challenges being
addressed. Some of those result from the complex
process of nation-building, with its inherent
vulnerabilities. We urge and encourage the Timorese
leadership to address those challenges constructively,
constitutionally and in a manner that promotes trust
and respect. We look forward to the return of security
and stability to Timor-Leste, so that confidence in the
future can be restored as quickly as possible.

Careful consideration needs to be given to the
next steps - not just on the security and policing side
but to all the components of stabilization and recovery.
As we all know, the investment by the Timorese
people, bilateral partners and the international
community has been significant. It is important that the
United Nations system and the international
community send the message of a long-term
commitment to supporting and assisting Timor-Leste.
New Zealand remains a committed bilateral partner,
and we will continue to assist.

