Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their briefings.

We are seriously concerned by the acuteness of
the armed confrontation in Somalia and the general
security situation. The death on 17 September of 21
peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) gives rise to feelings of deep regret and
outrage. We express our sincere condolences in that
regard. The combativeness of the unreconciled
opposition and the relentless attacks on Government
and AMISOM. positions clearly lead to an atmosphere
of lawlessness, fear, and insecurity in the country, and
significantly complicate the actions of the Transitional
Federal Government to establish effective governance
throughout the country.

We believe that, despite the positive signs of the
temporary success in combating the insurgents and the
factional clashes within their ranks, unfortunately,
these trends do not seem to be irreversible. Armed
groups making their living from crime operate on the
majority of the national territory and many civilians as
well as United Nations and humanitarian personnel
suffer as a result. We are again forced to note that,
without serious and sustainable stabilization in the
field of security, it will be essentially impossible to
move significantly forward with the tasks of
normalizing the situation, State-building and resolving
issues in the economic and humanitarian fields.

Combating piracy off the coast of Somalia
remains a pressing task, and Russia is actively
participating in the efforts of the international
community in this area. Unfortunately, the ongoing
instability throughout the country significantly
contributes to the problem of piracy in the region. We
continue to believe that these issues must be resolved
in a comprehensive way. The international community
should expand its participation through agreed action
in the security field, including efforts on the part of the
European Union, African Union and other relevant
organizations focused on building the capacity of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia. Of
course, of equal importance are efforts to alleviate the
consequences of the humanitarian crisis, which only
contributes to the difficulties on the path to national
reconciliation.

Under the current conditions, it is clear that the
leading role in tackling the issue of strengthening
security falls to the African Union. We welcome the
decision of the leadership of Burundi to remain within
AMISOM, despite the losses that country sustained as
a result of the attack on Burundian peacekeepers.
Bringing the Mission rapidly up to strength, including
by ensuring sufficient logistical supplies, is of critical
importance to the effectiveness of this operation. At the
same time, we also believe that the AMISOM. mandate
enshrined in resolution 1744 (2007) is sufficient to
assist the Government of Somalia to resolve the
situation in the country.

One cannot but agree with the conclusion that the
conditions for a fully fledged United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia are regrettably not
yet present. There is not yet any peace to keep.
Nonetheless, we believe that it is necessary to continue
to work on the question of the possible deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation, as well as on
the modalities of integrating AMISOM. into such an
operation.

Russia is a consistent advocate of achieving
sustainable peace and national reconciliation in
Somalia on the basis of the Djibouti Agreement in the
interest of strengthening stability and security
throughout the region. The peace process requires the
mobilization of efforts first and foremost by the
Somalis themselves and the involvement of all main
political forces that are not tainted by having
conducted terrorist crimes. We support the efforts of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and the national
Government of Somalia in this area. We expect these
efforts to be stepped up to provide sustainability to the
political process.

An important precondition for the success of a
settlement in Somalia and the normalization of the
situation in the country as a whole is broad support for
the Somali Government, first and foremost from
neighbouring countries. We call upon the States of the
region not to allow the flow of foreign mercenaries and
arms into Somalia in violation of the relevant sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council. We believe
that there is a need to take additional steps to
strengthen that regime.

