The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would like to thank Special Representative Kubis
for his briefing today and for his ongoing leadership in
challenging circumstances. We wish him all the best
and are grateful to him for his service in a very difficult
assignment. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for a statement that eloquently conveyed the
stakes of the current impasse.
My remarks today will centre on two issues, the
election and the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the international
community going forward. First, concerning the
election, as the efforts to finalize its results proceed, we
should not lose sight of the Afghan people's commitment
to their democracy. Many Afghan voters took real risks
and overcame fears for their safety in order to cast
their ballots. No matter who they voted for, their votes
were an affirmation of Afghans" desire to shape their
country's future. We commend the Afghan auditors and
observers for the critically important part they have
played in this process. We also commend the United
Nations, particularly UNAMA and the United Nations
Development Programme, for their constructive role in
the electoral process.

One of the Afghans who voted was Mohammad
Ismail, a tyre shop owner in Kabul. In the June runoff,
he brought his six-year-old daughter Nida with him to
the polls. She insisted, he told the New York Times,
that "[w]hen I told her she did not have a voter card,
she told me she would use mine." He said that he never
thought he would have the chance to bring his daughter
to participate in a vote. The turnout of people like
Mohammad is a measure of the progress Afghanistan
has made in the last 13 years. That progress has come
at a high price, as the suicide attack in Kabul earlier
this week, which killed three people and wounded five
more, brought into stark relief.

So many people have given their lives in order
to build a more democratic, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, and while there have been some setbacks,
the progress is real. Afghans have seen improved access
to education for all children, including girls. Fewer
than a million students were enrolled in school in 2001,
none of them girls; today, more than 8.3 million attend
school, a third of them girls. Health care has improved
dramatically. A decade ago 10 per cent of the Afghan
people had access to basic health services; today, nearly
two-thirds do. During this decade Afghanistan has
seen the fastest gains in life expectancy and maternal
and child health in the entire world. In 2001 there was
virtually no independent Afghan media, only Taliban
propaganda. Today Afghans can listen to 175 FM. radio
stations, watch 75 TV channels and read hundreds of
print publications. All of that progress has changed
people's lives for the better.

And the admirable patience of most Afghans with
the democratic process, particularly through the recent
recount, is a reflection of that progress as well. All
of that progress now hangs in the balance. Until now,
the candidates have been willing to stay at the table
and work towards a compromise that would avoid the
kind of divisions that could undermine Afghanistan's
progress towards greater stability. Both have openly
expressed their commitment to putting Afghanistan's
future first. Our message to them today is to persevere
in that effort and forge a durable compromise.

Secondly, we support UNAMA's ongoing efforts
to assist the Afghan Government, from building good
governance and strengthening economic development
to promoting regional cooperation. UNAMA has been
Afghanistan's partner since 2002 and will continue to
play a role in the country's development. The United
States is also committed to Afghanistan's ongoing
growth, development and security, and will remain
a close partner of its Government. That commitment
to Afghanistan is rooted in the strategic partnership
we entered into in 2012. We look forward to working
with the new Government to align our development
assistance with its priorities and uphold the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.

NATO allies and partner nations stand ready to
continue to train, advise and assist the Afghan national
security forces after 2014. Their mission will be based
on the sound legal footing provided by the United
States-Afghanistan bilateral security agreement and
the NATO-Afghanistan status of forces agreement,
which we hope will be concluded soon. The proposed
plan, announced at the recent summit in Wales, is
for the new NATO mission to be conducted in full
partnership with the Government of Afghanistan. In
the coming months, we hope to work with the members
of the Security Council to develop a draft resolution
welcoming the Government of Afghanistan's decisions
on that agreement.

Not long ago, an election in Afghanistan would in
itself have been unthinkable. Today, a six-year old girl
can insist that her father take her along when he casts
his vote. That should give us all hope for Afghanistan's
future, and it should inspire the country's leaders to
reach a political compromise, helping to insure that one
day that girl can cast her own ballot.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of India.

