Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today's open debate, which is timely, as it
coincides with the ongoing process of a comprehensive
review of the mechanism under resolution 1540 (2004).
That process should benefit from the views of the
broader membership. We hope that the diverse views
expressed by Member States during the formal open
consultations held by Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) will be taken on board.

The global disarmament landscape presents a
gloomy picture. The principal reason for that is the
lack of progress made by the nuclear-weapon States
in the fulfilment of their legal nuclear disarmament
obligations. That has negatively impacted on
the non-proliferation regime. Disarmament and
non-proliferation are inextricably linked. It is unrealistic
to expect progress on one without movement on the
other. A key challenge to long-held non-proliferation
norms and rules is the granting of discriminatory
waivers to some and the making of exceptions out of
power or profit considerations. Granting such waivers
carries obvious proliferation risks. Those special
arrangements are not only discriminatory and denote
nuclear double standards but also open up possibilities
for the diversion of material intended for peaceful uses
to military purposes. They contravene non-proliferation
rules and also undermine regional strategic stability.

We should not forget that the fulfilment of
non-proliferation objectives is a shared responsibility,
and we are only as strong as the weakest link in the
chain. Improved matchmaking by the Committee,
thereby making it more responsive to requests for
assistance from States, is therefore imperative.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has made useful contributions
to the advancement of non-proliferation goals. The
success of the resolution owes less to its use of Chapter
VII provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
than to the cooperative approach that it has engendered
to promote its implementation.

We are cognizant of the fact that the challenges
in addressing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), their means ofdelivery and related
materials are imposing. Differences in State capacities,
such as gaps in legal and regulatory frameworks, the
lack of effective export-control mechanisms, border
management capacities and the lack of human and
technological resources for effective implementation,
all compound the difficulties. We also recognize the
importance of staying one step ahead of non-State
actors that seek access to WMDs. Some ofthe suggested
solutions, such as making radical changes in the regime
established by resolution 1540 (2004), could, however,
take us farther away rather than closer to our shared
objective of addressing proliferation challenges.

Letus take the example ofthe submission ofnational
reports. As of April, 17 States had not yet submitted
even one report. Then there are others, including my
own country, that have submitted several. Rather than
casting aspersions on the intentions of States that could
not report, we need to understand their shortcomings
and assist them. Creating additional reporting
obligations would only add to reporting fatigue, without
any real impact on achieving universal reporting. It is
of paramount importance that the voluntary nature of
visits to States and national action plans, as envisaged
in resolution 1977 (2011), be preserved.

In order to ensure that the comprehensive review
helps Members States better manage challenges
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), its final product needs to be realistic, generally
acceptable and practical. It should take into account the
existing provisions ofresolution 1540 (2004). To change
the focus of the resolution from a preventive mechanism,
aimed at thwarting access by non-State actors to
WMDs, to an instrument with a mandate for which it is
ill-equipped would be an error. Also, obligations under
the resolution should not be interpreted in a manner that
impinges upon the responsibilities of the International

Atomic Energy Agency or of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

Let me turn briefly to what my country has done
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) and to fulfil its
non-proliferation obligations in general. Pakistan has
elaborated and implemented a comprehensive export-
control regime, fully harmonized with those of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), the Missile Technology
Control Regime and the Australia Group. Exemplary
measures have been taken to strengthen nuclear safety
and security. We have also actively participated in the
Nuclear Security Summit process. Our ratification of
the 2005 amendment to the Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and our declared
adherence to NSG guidelines are among the recent
steps that we have taken. Under resolution 1540 (2004),
we have submitted four national implementation
reports. We have also declared a unilateral moratorium
on further nuclear testing and have reiterated our
willingness to translate that unilateral moratorium into
a bilateral arrangement on non-testing with India.

Those credentials, among others, clearly establish
my country's eligibility to become a member of
the Nuclear Suppliers Group. We expect that a
non-discriminatory, criteria-based approach will be
followed in the extension of NSG membership.

