Mr. Jonathan: I commend your delegation,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to undertake
a strategic review of the evolving international security
environment. During this review, it is essential for us
to agree on a shared vision and provide the highest
political direction necessary for the Security Council to
more effectively maintain international peace and
security.

Our evolving security landscape is marked with
multiple threats that respect neither borders nor
nationalities. They include the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, the illicit trade in and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, and drug and human
trafficking, as well as the use of sexual Violence as a
weapon of war.

Ours is also a world of extreme inequality,
deprivation, marginalization and exclusion. These
problems are compounded by systemic issues such as
underdevelopment, pressure on natural resources and
difficulties related to social cohesion and governance.
The viral nature of conflict spillovers adds to the
international security paradigm.

These complex challenges call for Vision,
creativity, commitment and leadership from the United
Nations and Member States. The Council should
consider repositioning itself to deal with the changing
international environment.
The recent review of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the discussion of the New Horizon
Initiative in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping

Operations - the C34 - make the case for greater
cooperation among the various organs of the United
Nations to ensure effective service delivery on the
ground. The Council should therefore enhance its
collaboration with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council and also build
partnerships with other relevant stakeholders,
especially the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, in finding solutions to the interwoven
challenges of peace, security and development. The
Council should more readily deal with smaller-scale
challenges as it does with big picture issues like global
terrorism.

Our current security architecture is not the best
model for addressing today's multiple security
challenges. The growing human, material and financial
cost of peacekeeping is unsustainable. The competing
demands of growing poverty and the spread of diseases
cannot be ignored. Those factors make a compelling
case for a coherent strategic framework to integrate
security and development imperatives. We have seen,
in Sierra Leone and Liberia, how United Nations
agencies can work with political actors to foster
stability through the creation of opportunity, the
promotion of good governance and the rule of law.

Nigeria has learned many lessons about the
evolving security paradigm and the causes and
consequences of Violent conflicts. Within West Africa
in the last two decades and in Africa as a whole, we
have witnessed the value of preventive approaches to
conflict management a concept this Council
embraced under Nigeria's presidency in July. We are
encouraged by the Council's recognition of the need to
optimize the use of the full range of preventive
diplomacy tools.

 

By refining our understanding of conflict
management, we afford ourselves the opportunity to
reflect critically on the tools we need to respond
adequately to the task at hand. We are already
witnessing the green shoots of change as conflict
management models adapt to incorporate preventive
perspectives in their design.

Through the use of preventive methods, actors
such as the Department of Political Affairs and its
Mediation Support Unit are making significant
contributions to the building of confidence among local
communities. The Secretary-General, with the support
of the Security Council, is on a right track to establish
a United Nations Office in Central Africa. The office
will, we hope, replicate the peacebuilding gains
witnessed in West Africa through the work of the
United Nations Office for West Africa. However,
continued instability in places like the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and the Middle East
are stark warnings against complacency.

We must acknowledge today that the Council will
have little success in freeing peoples from the scourge
of war without the contributions of regional and
subregional actors, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter. Working together, they can significantly
support United Nations efforts to secure stability, as we
have seen from the contributions of the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
Nigeria is willing and well positioned to be a driver for
such enhancement efforts.

We must consolidate our efforts based on the
foundation of what has already been accomplished.
Recently many Council members have propelled this
process. The United Kingdom and France initiated the
ongoing peacekeeping review; Nigeria has pressed for
a focus on preventive diplomacy; and the United
States, Japan and Turkey initiated a focus on
peacekeeping and troop contribution. We encourage the
Council to now build in a mechanism to monitor the
progress of objectives identified at summit meetings
such as this.

The vulnerable, the marginalized and the
oppressed are calling upon the United Nations for
leadership to end the torment of conflict. In answering
this clarion call, we must allow the United Nations to
serve as

"the indispensable common house of the entire
human family, through which we will seek to
realize our universal aspirations for peace,
cooperation and development" (General Assembly resolution 55/2, para. 32).

I therefore urge my fellow leaders to be bold,
imaginative, pragmatic and unwavering in purpose. Let
us be particular in setting our objectives; let us be
concrete in marking out our goals. Above all, we must
translate our lofty words into concrete action without
let or hindrance.
