Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and his detailed information on what we
asked for. We particularly appreciated his words when
he said that there should be only one agenda for all of
us - ending this crisis.

Russia supported the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 2401 (2018), guided by the priority of
improving the humanitarian situation in various
parts of Syria. We not only believe that its effective
implementation is extremely important, we have also
proposed concrete ways of achieving that, something
that was discussed in today's briefing. And that is
unlike various capitals whose representatives have
settled comfortably for doing nothing while vilifying
the Syrian regime, as they call it, and making endless
accusations about Russia. In out last meeting on the
subject (see S/PV.8188), Ipromised to count the number
of times that Ambassador Haley mentioned Russia
in the next meeting. The answer is 22. France came
second, with 16 mentions, and the United Kingdom
was third, with 12. This matters not just for the record
but for the context in which it occurs. What is going
on is a political policy, and it does not have to do
merely indeed, not much at all - with concern for
Syrians' humanitarian needs.

 

It is important that everyone understands that
resolution 2401 (2018) is not about an immediate
ceasefire, which is a utopian notion, but a preliminary
agreement between the parties as a condition for
achieving sustainable de-escalation in all the contested
areas of Syria, notjust eastern Ghouta. That is the only
realistic way. The resolution contains an unequivocal
demand in that regard, and we are trying to make that
happen. The Council has heard about that today and
will hear more.

The authorities in Damascus have expressed their
satisfaction with the resolution and their willingness
to implement its provisions. However, they have also
rightly demanded an immediate cessation of attacks
on the capital and of all infringements on Syria's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The counter-
terrorist operation that the Syrian armed forces are
conducting does not contradict resolution 2401 (2018).
The Government of Syria has every right to work to
end threats to its citizens' security. The Damascus
suburbs cannot continue to be a breeding ground for
terrorists. It is the terrorists' persistent attempts to
disrupt the ceasefire that serve to maintain the tensions
in Syria, and of course the most problematic area is in
eastern Ghouta.

The July 2017 Cairo agreements on the eastern
Ghouta de-escalation zone gave the militants a chance
to be included in the political settlement. They did
not take advantage of it and have still not dissociated
themselves from the terrorists. Even now the groups'
activities are coordinated from the joint headquarters
run by Jabhat Al-Nusra. We have reliable information
that they are in active radio contact, discussing plans
for shelling the humanitarian corridors, among other
things. Why are they only now talking about being
willing to drive Al-Nusra's members out of eastern
Ghouta? And why are we the only ones asking that
question? We have answered it a number of times
ourselves when we have spoken about suspicions that
Al-Nusra is being preserved for particular political
purposes, in this case to maintain a dangerous hotbed
of armed resistance in the immediate vicinity of Syria's
capital.

Even now they continue to lull us with fairy
stories about how few terrorists there are in eastern
Ghouta. And who is going to monitor the armed
groups' implementation of the resolution? Who will be
responsible for that? Just please do not keep saying the
so-called regime, and Russia, and Iran. Such ideological
attitudes are simply not serious in the context of the
professional discussions that we conduct in the Security
Council. What responsibility will the members of the
Council take for the implementation of the resolution?
How will they implement it? How will they influence
the militias they support?
Following the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018),
with Russia's participation, daily five-hour humanitarian
pauses were established and the Muhayam-Al-Wafedin
checkpoint was opened for use by both civilians and
militants with families. They were guaranteed security,
transportation and protection along the entire route.
The Syrian authorities then opened another checkpoint,
Jisreen-Mleha, in the southern area of eastern Ghouta.
Medical posts have been set up, distribution points
organized for hot meals, buses are standing by. However,
the insurgents continued to subject the central areas of
Damascus and its outskirts to massive shelling. Dozens
of mines have been laid for days, resulting in deaths
and injuries as well as major damage. Since the day the
resolution was adopted more than 100 people have died,
and many more been injured, as a result of the shelling
in the capital. The Tishrin and Al-Biruni hospitals and
a medical centre in Al-Rihan have been hit more than
once. These are real hospitals, not the militants' field
offices that are frequently disguised as hospitals. They
are making active use of snipers. We know this for
a fact.

It is a tragedy when any civilians die during an armed
conflict. But my delegation has always been interested
in the origin of the statistical information being used in
the United Nations. In a highly politicized situation this
subject is extremely important. Frequent assessments
are pronounced about civilian losses in eastern Ghouta.
We hope that future reports will be required to indicate
where their data is from, how reliable it is and who
exactly is meant by "reliable sources on the ground".

Every day that has passed, the extremists have
forbidden civilians to leave the areas they have
blocked and have severely suppressed attempts to
resist arbitrary action, including through exemplary
executions. We have reliable information about that too.
Strikes on corridors and exit checkpoints are constant,
including during the humanitarian pauses. On 9 March
a convoy of refugees was shelled, once again disrupting
an evacuation. Tunnels are being used for attacks on
the Syrian army, and the exits from underground
installations are located in neighbourhoods where there
are public institutions, mainly mosques, hospitals and
markets. They have inflated food prices and at the
same time have been taking away the people's food,
water, medicines and mobile phones. They are setting
up firing positions in residential buildings and using
people as human shields. They are laying mines in
neighbourhoods that are adjacent to the line of contact.
They are conducting searches and confiscating permit
papers distributed by Government forces.
The residents are trying to resist this repression,
organizing spontaneous rallies and clashing with
the militias. On 1 March, in north-eastern Douma,
Al-Nusra terrorists shot four people who participated in
such a demonstration. Today there was a major protest
in Kafr Batna. The first major exodus of civilians took
place on the night of 11 March, when 52 people, 26
of them children, left the village of Misraba with the
assistance of the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides and the Syrian army.

There are also militants who want to leave eastern
Ghouta, but their field commanders threaten potential
defectors with reprisals. For the first time, on 9 March,
after long and tense negotiations, with the participation
of officers from the Russian Centre for Reconciliation,
13 militants were evacuated from the enclave through
the humanitarian corridor at their own request. Talks
have been held with Jaysh Al-Islam on reaching an
agreement on the withdrawal of a second group of
fighters. A meeting was also held with the leaders of
Faylaq Al-Rahman, at which it was demanded that
they dissociate themselves from Jabhat Al-Nusra
immediately. However, according to information
received, the militants of the group decided to continue
their armed resistance, forcibly recruiting ordinary
citizens into their ranks.

To turn to the subject of the humanitarian convoy
entering Douma on 5 March, the convoy received
comprehensive support from the Syrian Government
and the Russian military. A humanitarian corridor was
established, security ensured for its passage and the
situation was monitored. However, there was a great
deal of evidence of disorganized activity on the part of
the humanitarian actors. According to our information,
United Nations staff needlessly delayed the convoy
operations, creating real security risks. While the
convoy was being put together, they attempted to
load it with undeclared medical supplies - and the
fact that not all of them were declared was mentioned
today - and wasted around two hours in a meeting
with the leaders of the so-called local councils. They
spread unreliable information about aerial strikes in
the trucks' unloading area, and today some delegations
seized on thatjoyfully, although what actually occurred
was one instance of mortar fire from the armed groups'
positions. They did not respond to local residents'
request to help them leave the enclave. Nonetheless, 13
people, five of them children, were evacuated.

Afterwards, it was curious to read a report that one
of Ahrar Al-Sham's field commanders had, in a tone of
irony, expressed his appreciation for the humanitarian
pause on 5 March, which enabled the militias to regroup,
recover their strength and a number of lost positions
and prepare ambushes for the Syrian military.

A 9 March action was successfully carried out with
the Russian military providing a truck convoy with
safe conduct.

However, the scope of resolution 2401 (2018) is
not limited to eastern Ghouta. We should note that
in the past two weeks, the terrorists of Al-Nusra and
associated militia groups have repeatedly shelled
villages in Hamah province. As a result of new strikes
there are been deaths and injuries in blockaded Fo'ah
and Kafraya in Idlib. Armed clashes between illegal
groups in that province have led to threats of a number
of medical facilities being closed. Al-Nusra has become
more active in the southern de-escalation zone, which
could be related to the fact that they continue to be
supplied with weapons from outside. The situation in
Afrin remains very difficult.

The Syrian authorities have given permission
for humanitarian aid to be delivered to the residents
of Rukban camp, in the area illegally held by the
Americans around the Al-Tanf military base. We would
like to know what the United Nations is doing about
that. Needless to say, we assume that the distribution
of humanitarian assistance will be undertaken by a
trustworthy entity such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross or the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
We are also awaiting the speedy dispatch of a United
Nations humanitarian needs assessment mission to
Raqqa, which was bombed out by the coalition. There
should be no pointless delays with this, so I would
like to ask the United Nations when that mission will
take place.

We understand very well the unspoken motives for
the current disinformation campaign, whose aim is to
create a public perception that the Syrian authorities use
toxic substances. In fact, both we and the Syrians have
well-founded fears that provocations are being planned
with the aim of accusing the Syrian authorities of
carrying out chemical attacks. According to information
received, Al-Nusra used a chlorine-based substance in
eastern Ghouta on 5 March, affecting more than 30
local residents. This is all being done in order to prepare
the ground for unilateral acts of force against sovereign
Syria. We heard hints of that in the statements made
by some delegations today. Essentially, steps are being
considered that could deliver yet another heavy blow
to regional stability. Meanwhile, on territory formerly
controlled by illegal armed groups, there have been
more new discoveries of stores of chemicals, but the
relevant bodies of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons have been very slow to react to
the appeals of the Syrian authorities.

Russia will continue its efforts to implement
resolution 2401 (2018), but we demand that some of
our colleagues do their part and exert genuine pressure
on the groups that they support or sponsor, instead
of constantly calling on Russia and creating the false
impression that the resolution applies only to us.

In conclusion, I would like to say that this afternoon
four Security Council will be holding an unofficial
Arria Formula meeting with the declared intention of
making opposition voices heard on the humanitarian
issue in Syria. This is going to be widely covered in
the media. First and foremost, we want to point out
the fact that is unacceptable to use United Nations
resources for politicized purposes, and that is certainly
not what Arria Formula meetings were conceived for.
This event conceals the desire of its organizers to exert
informational pressure on the Syrian Government and
those who are helping it fight terrorism. In our view,
to get the full picture, it would not be a bad idea to
listen to the residents of Raqqa and Rukban camp, not
to mention eastern Ghouta, where there are quite a few
people who would be glad of the opportunity to appeal
for their deliverance from the presence of extremists.

