Mr. Vidal (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Coming
from a country that is highly committed to the United
Nations peacekeeping system, Ijoin the representatives
who spoke before me in congratulating the delegation
of Pakistan on this timely initiative, both in terms of
the debate and resolution 2086 (2013), adopted earlier
this morning.

Before entering into the core issue of this debate,
it seems relevant to us to underscore the importance of
those activities that have brought us together today. The
topic goes hand in hand not only with greater interaction
with troop- and police-contributing countries, which
we regularly call for, but also with regard to those of us
advocating an improvement in the working methods of
the Security Council. More and better dialogue among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, while not an end in itself,
is essential for the comprehensive interconnection that
the system needs to be a reality and, in particular, the
increasingly effective implementation of mandates. That
is all the more true for multidimensional peacekeeping.

Multidimensional peacekeeping operations must
be reliable in order to ensure the lasting transition of
States emerging from conflict. Efforts to build lasting
peace in a country emerging from conflict require the
coordinated action of various actors. Peacekeeping
operations play a crucial role and are essential to
peacebuilding in order to establish the necessary
conditions for other actors to undertake reconstruction
and development tasks in support of national authorities
and to provide direct cooperation in different areas.

At the same time, we should recall that the catalytic
role of peacekeeping personnel in terms of peacebuilding,
in particular in the prompt strengthening of peace,
has been acknowledged by various bodies within and
outside the United Nations system. In that regard, we
believe that strengthening the institutional capacity of
the host country of a peacekeeping operation must be
a priority from the very outset of a multidimensional
mission. That is essential to prevent the resumption of
a conflict. It is also critical to the more complex tasks
of today's multidimensional missions, such as, for
example, the protection of civilians.

One of the greatest challenges to achieving a
successful exit from multidimensional missions
is to ensure, at the critical time of transition, the
necessary continuity in order to avoid losing such
hard-won achievements. We all more or less agree that
sustained international support must be ensured when
a peacekeeping operation ends and, as usually happens,
responsibilities are transferred to the relevant national
and international actors.

However, ensuring that continuity can be a very
difficult task since the existing mechanisms that come
into play before the drawdown of a peacekeeping
operation are not inevitably as predictable as those
related to peacekeeping.

In conclusion, we must underscore the significance
of the role of multidimensional peacekeeping operations
in supporting institution-building, dialogue, political
inclusiveness, reconstruction and the establishment of
conditions for the economic and social development
of a country emerging from conflict, through a
coordinated approach that avoids duplication and that
has a sustainable timeframe for transition.

