Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Presidents of the two
Tribunals - Judge Pocar of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Judge
Byron of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) - and the two Prosecutors, Ms. Del
Ponte and Mr. Jallow, for their presentations this
morning. We commend their efforts and the progress
made in both Tribunals during the period covered by
their briefings.

The briefings by the Presidents and the
Prosecutors indicated the results that have been
possible because of the commitment of the Tribunals'
organs to duly implement the completion strategies as a
means of carrying out their mandate: to prosecute those
who committed atrocious crimes in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. While we recognize the
difficulties that they face, we are encouraged that both
Tribunals are making every effort to meet the
established deadlines in a context of full respect for
due process.

The efforts of the Tribunals necessarily require
the full cooperation of States in overcoming impunity
and ensuring justice for the victims. That is why it is
disturbing that, to date, Radovan Karadzic, Ratko
Mladic and Felicien Kabuga, among other important
leaders accused of having committed serious crimes,
remain fugitives. The international community cannot
allow the passage of time and the expiration of
deadlines to preserve impunity. In that connection, it is
essential and urgent that all States meet the
international obligation to arrest and transfer the
accused.
In that context, the recent arrests of Zdravko
Tolimir and Vlastimir Djordjevic and the handing over
by Serbia of a significant number of documents
requested by the Office of the Prosecutor are very
positive signs. We hope that this cooperation will
intensify and lead to the arrest of other fugitives.
Likewise, we encourage Croatia, Kenya, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other States on
whose territories those fugitives may be hiding, as well
as the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), in the area of witness protection,
to step up cooperation with the Prosecutors.

The transfer of cases involving mid- and low-
level accused to competent national jurisdictions is an
integral part of the completion strategy. We recognize
the efforts that are being made by both Tribunals in
that respect, in particular with regard to building the
capacity of local judicial systems.

Success in this area is particularly important
given that its impact will not end when the accused are
tried at the national level. There will be significant
long-term repercussions as concerns the rule of law and
improved administration of justice in the countries
concerned. For that reason, we join in the calls for the
provision of the necessary international assistance to
those States. Likewise, we stress the need for national
jurisdictions to act impartially and as quickly as
possible in trying the cases transferred to them.

With regard to judicial cooperation among the
Balkan States, we support the efforts of Prosecutor Del
Ponte to address what has been called "an impunity
vacuum". That vacuum exists because it has been
impossible to resolve certain aspects related to the non-
extradition of nationals and to the transfer of cases
between States. We wish to stress that, in cases of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
such issues cannot be left unresolved, and we therefore
urge the Office of the Prosecutor to continue working
with the States involved with a View to overcoming
those difficulties.

Concerning the Tribunals' legacy as they come to
the end of their work and the creation of a residual
mechanism, we wish to thank them for their valuable
contributions.

The Security Council must consider these issues
in the framework of a broad and inclusive process
involving the States directly concerned, similar
tribunals, and civil society. We believe that the
appropriate decisions should be taken before the
expiration of the deadlines for the work of the
Tribunals.

My delegation reiterates its support for the work
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We express our willingness to cooperate to ensure that
their mandates are fully discharged and to send a clear
signal against impunity.

Finally, as this is the last report that Ms. Del
Ponte will present to the Council as Prosecutor, allow
me to convey to her my Government's gratitude for her
important service in the cause of justice. Likewise, I
wish to thank Judge Erik Mose for his tireless work as
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

