Ms. Rice (United States of America):
Congratulations, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the leadership of the Security Council. We would also
like again to thank our colleagues from France for their
very able leadership of the Council last month.

The United States welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg as the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, and we thank
him for his briefing on the new United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). We also wish to thank Ambassador Frank
Majoor for his update and leadership in the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ambassador Touray,
the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone, for his
very comprehensive and helpful presentation.

We commend UNIPSIL for the support it has
provided the Government and people of Sierra Leone
in making their transition from conflict to durable
peace. We further applaud President Koroma for his
effective leadership, for his Agenda for Change, for his
actions, including appointing a new strong head of the
Sierra Leone Anti-Corruption Commission, and for
undertaking reform of the justice system, enhancing
respect for human rights and strengthening the rule of
law. We note the important role that UNIPSIL will play
in supporting these promising developments and
helping Sierra Leone to tackle the underlying causes of
instability.

We have come a long way in the ability of the
United Nations to help countries and regions resolve,
recover from and rebuild after conflict. The type of
office that UNIPSIL represents is new instrument for
the United Nations to assist post-conflict countries as
they make the critical transition from insecurity and
violence to lasting peace. It is an innovation that we
have added to the toolkit of mechanisms that we can
deploy in post-conflict situations. We will need to
follow its progress, both to ensure that as Member
States we give the necessary support to help its efforts
to succeed and to ensure that this new office has the
impact that we all seek.

We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made in Sierra Leone. We see real value added from
the presence of an integrated office such as UNIPSIL
and we hope that UNIPSIL will quickly validate the
worth of this integrated approach to peacebuilding. In
that regard, we welcome the Joint Vision initiative as
an important further step in seeing the United Nations
family pull together on behalf of a common strategy to
assist Sierra Leone's post-conflict transition.

However, we are concerned that UNIPSIL is not
yet at full strength owing to staffing shortages, which
underscores the importance of a smooth transition
when United Nations missions hand over authority, so
that we do not risk losing critical momentum. As a
supporter of the Peacebuilding Commission, the United
States is encouraged to see that the Commission has
facilitated national dialogue on important issues. We
also note the contribution that Peacebuilding Fund-
supported projects are making to tackle the
peacebuilding priorities outlined by the Government of
Sierra Leone in conjunction with the Commission.

The United States also applauds the work of
United Nations Radio, which has reached out to the
people of Sierra Leone from Freetown to rural
communities across the country to provide vital
information about elections, women's rights, health
concerns and many other crucial issues. We support
transfer of this service to the Sierra Leone Broadcast
Corporation, as well as the use of unallocated
peacebuilding funds for the further development of the
national public broadcasting service.

We continue to be concerned about the increased
use of Sierra Leone as a trans-shipment point for drugs
trafficked from South America to Europe. We welcome
UNIPSIL's collaboration with the Sierra Leone Joint
Drug Interdiction Task Force and will continue to offer
our assistance in addressing this threat to Sierra
Leone's national security and, indeed, to the security of
the region. At the same time, we encourage a regional
approach to addressing these issues, in particular
narco-trafficking and piracy. The fact that Sierra
Leone, despite its impressive progress, remains
vulnerable to instability from drugs and crime, youth
unemployment of over 60 per cent and persistent
poverty, reminds us not only that peace is hard-won,
but also that we need to continue to work together
within and beyond the United Nations community to
effectively confront the challenges that remain.

Sierra Leone reminds us not only of the
difficulties of post-conflict transitions, but also of the
promise of the United Nations and the broader
international community to assist a country and its
people to build a better future. The United States fully
supports UNIPSIL and will remain steadfast in
assisting Sierra Leone to put conflict in its past and
move towards a future of lasting development and
democracy.

