Mrs. Crivano Machado (Brazil) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I
welcome you, Sir, in your capacity as President of the
Security Council. I reiterate Brazil's support for the
Portuguese presidency and our satisfaction with the
holding of this debate on Timor-Leste. I would also
like to welcome Minister Zacarias Albano da Costa and
express my appreciation for his presence in the
Council. I thank Special Representative Ameerah Haq
for her briefing and congratulate her on her leadership
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) and for her efforts in support of the
country.

Timor-Leste has shown a remarkable capacity to
overcome the difficulties it has faced in the last
decades. Today's debate gives us the opportunity to
acknowledge the country's success in the course it has
chosen despite the many challenges along the way. The
current situation in Timor-Leste shows that those who
doubted the ability of the Timorese people to progress
towards political stability, security and development
were mistaken.

In the security sector, we welcome the transfer of
police responsibilities to the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste. UNMIT's efforts in the transition and its
capacity-building programmes have played an
important role in consolidating national police force.
The continuing calm and stability in the country are a
clear sign of the success of this process. The fact that
the goals to be reached by Timor-Leste are now of a
socio-economic and institutional nature is a
demonstration that the former challenges of conflict
and instability have been overcome.

Moreover, new obstacles are already also being
surpassed. Although there may still be need for
progress, Timor-Leste has made its way steadily
towards the necessary improvements. The country has
had accelerated economic growth and laid the bases for
investment and infrastructure development. Social
indicators have improved significantly.

In the institutional sphere, the Timorese
Government has made efforts to create mechanisms for
the protection of human rights, programmes for the
fight against corruption and for the promotion of
transparency. These are signs of the consolidation of an
active political class and of a society that is conscious
of what the country needs to move forward.

The increasing international integration of Timor-
Leste - for example, its membership in the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, as well
as through other initiatives, such as its drive to join the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which we
hope will be successful - is a springboard that will
benefit not only the Timorese, but the international
community as a whole. The integration of Timorese
military officers into Portuguese contingents in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon demonstrates
that the country is beginning to make its own
contribution to the efforts of the international
community.

The greatest sign of Timor-Leste's maturity is the
healthy political process that is in place in preparation
for the elections next year. The constructive and
peaceful political debate between the Government and
the opposition is exemplary. The fact that the country's
third elections, to be held in 2012, coincide with the
tenth anniversary celebration of the restoration of
independence, is of great symbolic significance.

Brazil praises the important contribution of
UNMIT to the success of Timor-Leste. The Mission
has played a fundamental role in supporting the
country with the tasks necessary for its progress. Brazil
believes that it is important for Timor-Leste to extend
the positive results obtained with UNMIT's support to
such areas as transition and capacity-building. The
joint transition plan is a positive measure that will
allow adequate planning for the post-UNMIT period
and the continuity of international cooperation in the
areas in which the Timorese Government identifies a
need for assistance.

Brazil has supported Timor-Leste through a large
number of bilateral and trilateral cooperation projects.
We will continue to work together on programmes in a
broad range of areas, including agriculture, education,
justice and security.

The Timorese have reason to be proud. Their
successful journey has not always been the rule in
similar situations. The case of Timor-Leste stands out
as an example in post-conflict situations. The Timorese
people and Government have been able to mobilize
their efforts, with the help of UNMIT, and rediscover
the way to peace and development. The international
community and the Security Council must continue to
support them on this path.

