Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks New Zealand for its initiative in holding today's
meeting, thereby giving the small island developing
States and their international partners the opportunity
to comment on the major challenges to security faced
by those States.

We also welcome the holding, last month, of an Arria
Formula meeting of the Security Council, which again
showed the role of climate change as a threat multiplier
for global security. The meeting emphatically reminded
us of the existential threat posed by the adverse effects
of climate change on low-lying island nations: their land
and coastal resources diminish as do their livelihoods,
and their fresh water and agricultural resources are
reaching their limits, resulting in increased tensions
within the affected communities. For some of them,
forced emigration becomes the only long-term prospect.

The case for review by the Security Council of
the implications of climate change, especially for
small island developing States, is therefore becoming
increasingly compelling. Accordingly, we would like to
see the 2009 report of the Secretary-General entitled
"Climate change and its possible security implications"
(A/64/350) brought up to date. In that context, Belgium
fully supports the commitment of the European Union
to reach a legally binding instrument applicable to all
parties within the framework of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change at the
Conference of the Parties in Paris at the end of this
year, taking into account the fact that the European
Union will exceed the target for reducing greenhouse
gases that it has set for 2020 and that it has embarked
on the implementation of its commitment to reduce its
emissions by 40 per cent by 2030.

The Outcome document adopted by consensus
at the International Conference on Small Island
Developing States in September 2014, better known as
Samoa Pathway, puts particular emphasis on the need
for a strong partnership to meet the challenges. In the
document, Member States acknowledge

"the leadership role of small island developing
States in advocating for ambitious global efforts to
address climate change, raising awareness of the
need for urgent and ambitious action to address
climate change at the global level and making efforts
to adapt to the intensifying impacts of climate
change and to further develop and implement plans,
policies, strategies and legislative frameworks with
support where necessary". (General Assembly resolution 69/15, annex, para.33)

We therefore encourage small island developing
States to further strengthen their profile and their
position as a group in negotiating the Climate
Convention.

For small island States, the link between
sustainable development and security appears evident.
In that regard, Belgium welcomes the progress made
in the negotiation of a new post-2015 development
programme. The inclusion in that programme of Goal
14 and its targets, which highlight the importance of
oceans, the protection of marine resources and their
sustainable use, is the result of an ongoing and sustained
commitment on the part of the small island developing
States, for which we are grateful. Indeed, we believe
that Goal 14 is an essential component of our future
programme. Humankind depends on the oceans for its
survival and sustainable development. That requires
a holistic approach to the oceans and their resources.
Small island developing States have played a pioneering
and mobilizing role on those issues.

We also welcome the fact that the 2015 Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development
contains many references to small island developing
States, their specificities and the particular challenges
they face. I quote:

"SIDS remain a special case for sustainable
development in view oftheir small size, remoteness,
narrow resource and export base, and exposure to
global environmental challenges."

The Addis Ababa Action Agenda also contains
numerous operational references to small island
developing States and to climate change, such as
investments in enhancing resilience, research on clean
energy, services in sustainable energy, adaptation needs
through the Green Climate Fund, and marine research.
Finally, we should not lose sight of the fact that
other security issues also directly affect small island
developing States and need a prompt solution. Belgium
is an active partner in the fight against trafficking in
drugs, weapons and human beings. Concrete actions
against drug trafficking, such as the patrolling by
frigates and helicopters of the Belgian Armed Forces
in the Caribbean, have contributed for many years to
improving the security of countries in the region.

Belgium looks forward to continuing its active
engagement with small island developing States on
issues of vital importance to all, but whose specific
dimension for those countries we need to understand
better. Global solidarity unites us, and Belgium is a
willing defender thereof.

