Mr. Ikouebe (Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes the initiative taken
by the presidency in convening this meeting which is
shedding new light on peacekeeping and international
security - a concern that is at the heart of activities of
the United Nations, as stressed in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization, as well as that of the Security Council to
the sixty-first session of the General Assembly.

Periodic reports of subsidiary bodies of the
Council on counter-terrorism often reflect the need to
strengthen the security sector in various Member
States, in order to assist them in complying with their
obligations in implementing resolutions on counter-
terrorism. As has been said by others, recent years have
seen a considerable increase in the number of
peacekeeping operations in the world. That evolution
clearly demonstrates the challenges posed by the need
to reform the security sector in certain countries
coming out of armed conflict, as has been recently
discussed in the Council with regard to the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Timor-
Leste.
07-24463

More concretely, at the most recent public debate

of the Council on 31 January 2007 on the

Peacebuilding Commission, my delegation pointed out

on the basis of experiences with Burundi and Sierra

Leone, two countries on the agenda of the

Peacebuilding Commission, that in order to build peace

it is necessary to enhance the capacities of those

countries, in various areas, in particular the security
sector.

In fact, examining the situation of those two
countries has shown, for example, that their security
services do not have the means needed to guarantee
public order, that social and political obstacles
continue to pose real threats to the stability of those
countries, that the unemployment among youth is far
too high and that the dilapidated state of social services
could lead to popular discontent, which could affect
social peace and political stability. It is not out of place
to recall that economic progress and improving the
functioning of the State, as well as improving
conditions of life for its people, are essential factors in
creating stability. Strengthening the security sector
should also be planned at various levels within an
interactive system.

The Security Council must define policies for
various organs of the United Nations system, in
particular the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
principal missions are, among other activities, to
advise and propose integrated strategies for the
re-establishment of peace and for peacebuilding after a
conflict and to develop best practices on issues that
need very intense cooperation between political,
military, humanitarian and development actors.

In dealing with Member States, the Council
should not only promote best practices in various
fields, but should also help to ensure that those
practices are assimilated, for which we urge the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations,
because they can provide essential and indispensable
links.

Cooperation in many different fields of activity
should be strengthened among Member States as a
whole, especially those whose fragility does not allow
them to ensure streamlined and effective management
of administrative structures. Any action to that end
should ensure greater streamlining of working methods
and the improvement of public services so as to
strengthen justice and equity.
07-24463

The streamlining of the security sector must take
into account good governance, fighting corruption,
respect for human rights and the rule of law, free and
democratic elections, promotion and defence of human
rights and fighting impunity. The reform of the security
sector cannot be ensured unless it generates a chain
effect with the other sectors mentioned. In those areas,
the coordinated technical support of the United Nations
and other bilateral and multilateral partners is required.

The Slovak delegation is to be commended for
providing the Council with a concept paper (S/2007/72, annex), which stresses the appropriateness of national
ownership of security sector reform, seen as a
comprehensive, contextual and long-term endeavour.
Such an approach will make it possible to identify all
the aspects of these problems, which must remain at
the centre of the Council's discussions on how to
consolidate peace and security throughout the world. It
is in that conviction that my delegation supports the
draft presidential statement submitted by the Slovak
delegation.

