Mr. Lowcock: The people of Syria are suffering a
cold, hard winter, with freezing temperatures, snowfall
and heavy rain resulting in flooding, which is destroying
shelters and forcing tens of thousands more people to
move. Millions are living under tents or tarpaulins or
in damaged buildings, with no power or heating. There
are severe shortages of all the basics - from blankets
to baby milk to bandages.

Since late last year, the United Nations and its
partners have been raising funds to support Syrians
across the country with vital winter items, including
plastic sheeting to reinforce shelters, stoves and
heating fuel, blankets, jackets and winter clothes. We
have raised $81 million, which has allowed us to help
1.2 million people. Continued support is critical to
ensuring that all those in need can be reached.

The weather has been difficult for people in Idlib,
where the risk of military escalation continues to loom.
Over the second half of last year, I frequently highlighted
our growing concerns about the plight of 3 million
people in Idlib and neighbouring areas in north-west
Syria, where civilians simply have nowhere else to
flee should there be a full-scale military incursion into
the area. The September agreement between Russia
and Turkey was followed by a significant decrease in
ground fighting and air strikes. However, January saw
an increase in fighting among non-State armed groups,
placing civilians at risk and resulting in injury and
death. Today I reiterate the importance of sustaining
the Russia-Turkey agreement, and I remind the Council
that a large-scale military operation in Idlib would have
catastrophic humanitarian implications.

Last month the Council extended the authorization
for the cross-border relief operation into Idlib.
Hundreds of thousands of people are reached each
month with lifesaving assistance through our cross-
border operations. We must continue to be able to
provide food, medicine, tents, critical winter supplies
and other help.

Forty-two thousand people remain stranded in
Rukban, along the Syria-Jordan border. Conditions in
that informal settlement have continued to deteriorate
since the most recent humanitarian convoy to the area,
from 3 to 8 November. Eight infants have reportedly
died since last month. Again, the cold is making the
situation even worse. It is therefore critical that the
parties support a second convoy to Rukban. The
United Nations has been engaged on multiple fronts
to ensure it can happen, including by addressing
concerns expressed by the Russian Federation and the
Government of Syria about the security of the convoy
and monitoring arrangements for aid distributions.
The convoy will include more than 100 trucks of relief
supplies, focusing on food, winterization support and
health, nutrition, household and water and sanitation
items. The vaccination campaign from the first convoy
will be continued, and the team will conduct an
intention survey to help identify a durable solution for
those people in the informal settlement.

Monitoring will be further enhanced, from the
offloading site up to the distribution points where
beneficiaries collect their assistance, with about 250
United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent personnel
accompanying the convoy. The team plans to stay in
Rukban for at least a week to ensure sufficient time to
monitor distributions, carry out the intention survey
and vaccinate as many children as possible. In terms of
security, to avoid any interference, we have agreed that,
from the entry to the 55-kilometre exclusion zone up to
the offloading site, there will be a 5-kilometre buffer
zone between the armed groups present in the area and
the convoy. However, protection for the accompanying
personnel must be provided at the offloading point and
the accommodation site, and security is needed inside
the informal settlement, where distributions will take
place, where vaccination points will be established and
where enumerators will conduct the survey.

We received verbal approval on 27 January from
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Damascus for the
convoy to proceed. Security guarantees have also been
received from the Russian Federation and international
coalition forces. Planning is now under way for the
loading of the trucks to begin before the end of the
week, and for them to set off by 5 February. We call
on all parties to ensure that goes ahead without any
further delay.

Turning to the north-east of the country, we are
concerned about the humanitarian impact of ongoing
military operations in south-east Deir ez-Zor, where
thousands have been displaced and an unknown number
of people remain trapped under the control of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Continuing and intense
air strikes and ground fighting have caused scores of
civilian casualties and damaged critical infrastructure.

About 20,000 people, most of them women
and children, have been displaced since December
from the Hajin area to Al-Hol camp in Hasakah
governorate. They have been exposed to hostilities,
explosive hazards, intense cold and prolonged security
screenings, throughout which they have received
minimal assistance. We have received reports of
25 children having died, either in transit or shortly
after reaching the camp. We are scaling up our efforts
to respond in Al-Hol, but people continue to arrive in
critical condition, with many reporting that they were
relocated involuntarily, that their documentation has
been confiscated, that their movement continues to be
restricted and that they would prefer to seek shelter with
family members or acquaintances in Deir ez-Zor. I call
on all parties once more to do their utmost to protect
civilians and allow them freedom of movement to seek
safety and basic services in a location oftheir choosing.

We have frequently reported to the Council about
the unacceptable risk that mines, unexploded ordnance
and other explosive hazards continue to pose across
Syria. I am therefore pleased to be able to confirm that
the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
yesterday launched its first project out of Damascus,
following the opening of its office last year. About
25 young Syrian men and women are being trained in
explosive hazard risk education. UNMAS remains ready
to deploy and assist with humanitarian mine action in
Raqqa, should such a deployment be authorized by
the authorities.

Humanitarian organizations are fully mobilized
throughout Syria to meet the needs of the people. In
consultation with the Government and guided by
humanitarian principles, we are now finalizing our
2019 humanitarian needs overview. We are working to
ensure that our humanitarian response plan is completed
in advance of the upcoming Brussels conference. Those
documents are based on a thorough assessment ofneeds
undertaken over the course of the past year, including
in areas that have recently seen changes in control, such
as eastern Ghouta, south-west Idlib and the south of
the country.

Monitoring and evaluation remain central to
our efforts. In the past three months of 2018, for
example, the United Nations, with the agreement of the
Government, undertook nearly 1,000 missions across
Syria, 75 per cent of which were for monitoring and
evaluation purposes, thereby allowing us to understand
in greater detail and report credibly to donors on how
their money is being used.

I would like to conclude by reiterating some current
priorities for which we seek the Council's help.

First, support from all Member States is needed
to ensure that the parties respect and protect civilians,
with particular attention to the north-west and north-
east of the country. Once again, a full military offensive
in Idlib and the surrounding areas must be avoided at
all costs.

Secondly, the humanitarian convoy to Rukban must
be allowed to proceed as planned.

Thirdly, all parties must facilitate safe, regular and
sustained humanitarian access so that we can carry
out additional needs assessments, deliver to all areas
where needs are most severe and monitor the impact
our interventions.

Fourthly, to go back to where I started, financing
for the immediate lifesaving needs in Syria is needed
to help people through this bitter winter, but also to
ensure the humanitarian programmes in our 2019
humanitarian response plan are well funded. The
conference in Brussels on 13 and 14 March will be a
critical marker in that regard.

