Ms. Lee (Singapore): The Security Council is
meeting once again, for the third time in just over a
week, to consider the dangerous situation in the Middle
East, especially in the occupied territories. We will not
repeat the points made in recent debates. However, it
bears reiterating that the Security Council is determined
to see the full and immediate implementation of its
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002). Resolution 1403 (2002) was
the first resolution on the Middle East in a long time
which was submitted as a presidential text and adopted
unanimously by the Security Council. This clear
message from a united Council must be heeded.

Many significant diplomatic initiatives have been
undertaken to help implement these resolutions,
including the decision by United States President
George Bush to dispatch Secretary of State Powell to
the region, and the momentous decision taken by the
Arab leaders at the Beirut Summit. However, no
amount of diplomatic initiatives, including the current
debate of the Security Council, can substitute for real
action on the ground, not least by the parties involved.

Yet despite the clear demands of the Security
Council, we find developments moving in exactly the
opposite direction. Not only have Israeli troops not
been withdrawn from Palestinian cities, including
Ramallah; there has, in fact, been an acceleration of
military incursions into occupied territories, resulting
in the loss of too many civilian lives.

We heard earlier today of the alarming
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories.
Whilst Israel has every right to exercise self-defence,
its obligations under international law are also clear. It
must allow immediate medical access to the occupied
areas by international humanitarian agencies such as
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Both parties have found it impossible to move
towards any meaningful ceasefire, and implementation
of the Tenet security work plan or of the Mitchell
Committee recommendations looks further away than
ever. Violence, including acts of terror, provocation,
incitement and destruction, have continued unabated.

Before the adoption of resolution 1403 (2002)
last week, the Secretary-General pointed out that all
parties risked making serious miscalculations about the
effects that their actions are going to have on each
other. This includes the disquieting developments along
the Blue Line. Such miscalculations would draw the
region into greater and greater danger.

We stand ready to take any further action, in a
united fashion, which could help facilitate the work of
international mediators on the ground to halt the
violence, bring an end to the suicide bombings and
secure the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian
cities. It is now time for the parties to listen to the
voice of reason and to act in accordance with the
collective will of the international community,
expressed through resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002).
