Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio
Archila, Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation. We also thank Special Representative
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for presenting the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/780).

We agree with previous speakers that the peace
process is at a critical stage. We greatly appreciate the
contribution of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to the post-conflict peacebuilding. We
know that the support of the United Nations is warmly
welcomed by all stakeholders in Colombia, including
the Government, the parties to the peace process,
the country's indigenous peoples and civil society as
a whole. That speaks to a high level of trust in the
international staff and their objectivity. Needless to
say, however, the main responsibility for the peace
process lies solely with the Colombians themselves,
and not on any external actors. And judging by today's
report, despite a certain amount of progress that has
been made, the greater part ofthe work of consolidating
peace in the country is still to be done.

The fact that various participants in the peace
process have returned to armed combat shows that not
everyone in the country is happy with the progress
made in implementing the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The Secretary-General warned about such risks in
previous reports, and it is currently reported that a
further 8,000 participants are at risk. The situation
is creating increasing concern and once again shows
that the peace is not irreversible. However, we want to
emphasize that armed confrontation is unacceptable. A
consensus in Colombian society can be achieved only
through a broad dialogue without preconditions and
within a legal framework. Resorting to violence in order
to resolve political differences is impermissible. That
also applies fully to the run-up to the elections. We are
naturally disturbed by the information in the report that
there have been 54 cases of electoral violence during
the reporting period, including seven murders, five
attacks, two abductions and 40 death threats.

Besides the emergence of new threats to the
Colombian peace process, there are also a number of
existing challenges requiring urgent solutions. There
are still complex and knotty problems involved in
ensuring the safety and security of participants in the
peace process and civilian activists, and in order to
address them, the presence of State authority in areas
distant from the capital has to be strengthened. Progress
must also be made with humanitarian mine-clearance
programmes and agricultural reform, a key element
in the peace process, as well as the implementation of
crop-substitution programmes.

It will be important to strengthen public trust
in the peace process, and that requires more active
promotion of programmes for the legal, socioeconomic
and political reintegration of former combatants and
the creation of jobs for them. In that context, we share
the view expressed by Cuba and Norway, the guarantor
countries of the Colombian peace negotiations, in their
joint communique of 30 August.

The decision to end negotiations and return to
the forced suppression of rebels from the Ejercito de
Liberacion Nacional in the wake of the terrorist attack
on 17 January has introduced additional problems.
While we condemn the attack unequivocally, we also
believe that without a dialogue with the group it will
be impossible to achieve lasting peace in Colombia.
We call for resolving the differences with Cuba
regarding the negotiators there and for compliance with
the guarantees established under the protocols of the
signed agreement.

In general, we want to emphasize once again
that the consolidation of peace in Colombia can
be achieved only through the comprehensive and
consistent fulfilment by all Colombian stakeholders of
their obligations under the final peace agreement. We
believe that should continue to be the Government's
priority and at the centre of public discussions. We fully
support the Secretary-General's call for all disputes
to be resolved within the framework of existing legal
mechanisms, and for any new legislative initiatives to
be subject to broad public discussion. Only in this way,
step by step, can Colombia consolidate its society and
thereby create lasting peace.

As far as the views on the impact of external
factors on the Colombian peace process are concerned,
we believe that it was the Colombians themselves who
reached the key agreements on peace in their country
after decades of internal armed conflict. It was the
Colombians themselves who assumed their national
responsibility for their country's fate and committed
to the path of the peace process. That commitment to
peace has become an exemplar of responsibility and a
source of pride for the Security Council, and we hope
it will continue.

We are pleased with the assurances of commitment
to the peace process, but Colombia cannot rest on
those laurels. The international community, the United
Nations, the Security Council and, most importantly,
the Colombians themselves expect the Colombian
Government to comply strictly with its obligations.
Without that, we can never consider the internal armed
conflict a thing of the past. We hope that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will continue
to play a meaningful role in the peace process.

