Mr. Texeira da Silva (France) (spoke in French):
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern countries
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves with this
statement.

 

The debate today follows up the Security Council
meeting of 10 January 2000, which was devoted to the
impact of AIDS on peace and security in Africa and
was presided over by the Vice-President of the United
States, Mr. Al Gore. That meeting was a major event
which the Security Council had the obligation to follow

up.

AIDS has special characteristics which has made
this human and medical tragedy also one of the major
causes of economic and social decline that the
developing world has had to confront for decades. The
pandemic's impact is particularly unacceptable in these
countries, where decades of effort and progress have
been wiped out, as borne out by the brutal drop in life
expectancy in certain African countries to early levels
of the 19705.

AIDS is a massive killer. It caused 10 times more
deaths last year than did all the conflicts on that
continent, and by leading to the disappearance of
trained and qualified staff it destabilizes entire sectors
of society: education, health, the productive sector and
security.

Finally, it is clear that conflicts that topple the
structure of social organization and destroy
infrastructures, particularly health and medical
infrastructures, are, unfortunately, propitious for the
propagation of the pandemic. In addition, there is the
sexual violence committed by the combatants
themselves that directly contributes to the spread of the
disease. We must therefore promote the mobilization
and coordination of all bodies concerned. Each should
play its role in the light of the nature of the problems
and the stakes involved.

The efforts of all are necessary. I believe we must
once again underscore the importance of the action
undertaken by the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and its Executive Director,
Dr. Peter Piot, whom we wish to thank for having come
before the Council and for describing the efforts
undertaken since last January. The 34.3 million
individuals infected throughout the world, of whom
24.5 million are in Africa, mean many imminent deaths
and the threat of a human tragedy unprecedented in
recent history, if we do not find solutions quickly.
Mobilization is progressing, fortunately, and the
European Union welcomes the convening of the
Thirteenth International Conference on AIDS in
Durban, in an African land so harshly ravaged by the
disease.

The Council has met again today to adopt a
resolution. The text focuses on the question of the
impact of the pandemic on peacekeeping operations
and on the health of civilian and military personnel
who participate in these operations. This draft
resolution demonstrates that the Security Council is
endeavouring to see that the health of these personnel
and their families is protected. It also calls for the
development of preventive measures for the disease in
the context of United Nations operations.

Peacekeeping operations personnel are, as others,
subjected to the risk of exposure to AIDS, whether it is
a question of operational personnel, particularly
military personnel, or the of the medical or dental
support staff that provide their care. The European
Union welcomes the adoption of this resolution, which
shows that the Security Council is endeavouring,
within its area of competence, to take account of this
grave situation. No effort can be overlooked in waging
this difficult yet necessary struggle against AIDS.

I should now like to speak in my national
capacity.

Following the meeting of 10 January 2000,
France formulated various proposals. I shall recall two.

First is the organization of an international
conference, under the auspices of the United Nations,
on the question of access to treatment for persons
infected with HIV/AIDS in the developing countries.
Access to treatment, and particularly to anti-retroviral
treatment, was at the core of deliberations at the
Durban Conference. The pledge last spring on the part
of the pharmaceutical industries to lower medication
costs in developing countries and even to engage in
free distribution represents a major breakthrough which
places a new responsibility on Governments, be they
donors or recipients. These pledges must be followed
up through partnerships that strengthen the health
infrastructures of recipient countries, while
guaranteeing that there are no parallel exports to
developed countries.
For that reason, France considers that an
international meeting under the auspices of the United
Nations could usefully organize dialogue in this area,
dialogue that would bring together manufacturers,
donor countries, recipient countries, non-governmental
organizations and patients associations. France
welcomes the fact that the operative part of the
resolution clearly refers to this matter.

Secondly, we had also proposed that there be
prepared, under the auspices of UNAIDS, a file of all
bilateral and multilateral actions now under way, in
order to ensure consistency and geographical, medical
and social complementarity of those actions. We await
with interest UNAIDS proposals on this point.

I wish to affirm that France will remain very
focused on the question of AIDS in the coming months.
It will, inter alia, support the proposal to convene a
special session of the General Assembly.

