Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having invited the
European Union to this timely and important debate. In
accordance with your instructions, in order to expedite
the Council's work I will make an abridged statement.
The full text of the European Union statement will be
distributed in the Chamber.

(spoke in English)

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

Peacebuilding provides the vital bridge that helps
create the conditions for peacekeeping missions to be
drawn down, laying the foundations for longer-term
efforts to consolidate stability and achieve sustainable
development. At the heart of this process are efforts to
strengthen national capacities to manage conflict and
early investments in economic recovery, basic services
and national institutions. The sooner such efforts start,
the quicker they can contribute to building long-term
stability and reduce the risk of a relapse into war.

The peacebuilding tasks in peacekeeping
missions - such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform, rule of law, good
governance and human rights - have a critical role to
play and should feed into the broader peacebuilding
efforts. In pursuing these tasks, attention must be
placed on strengthening local capacities and civil
society, encouraging the participation of women in
peace processes and peacebuilding, and promoting
dialogue among stakeholders. Special efforts should be
undertaken in assisting national authorities in the
protection of civilians from acts of Violence.

We have listened today to statements from some
of the most highly qualified professionals and experts
on these issues, starting with the Secretary-General. I
would like on my part to share some views based on
the experience of the European Union (EU) in the
field.

First, the success of peacekeeping efforts requires
a comprehensive, holistic and inclusive approach. To
this end, early and comprehensive planning to integrate
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is essential. The
integrated mission planning process and the
development of integrated strategic frameworks are, in
the EU's view, essential tools for the coordination and
prioritization of the security, political, development
and humanitarian activities undertaken by the United
Nations.

Secondly, peacebuilding tasks need to be taken
into consideration in mandates from the outset. At the
same time, The Security Council has to make sure, in
cooperation with contributing countries, that missions
are mandated and equipped with the adequate
capabilities to carry out these tasks. Where relevant,
peacekeeping missions should be requested to include
information on progress in peacebuilding in their
regular assessments of mandated tasks in order to
identify and draw attention collectively to critical gaps
and to harmonize future steps. In this context,
peacebuilding actors, including the Peacebuilding
Support Office, should be involved from the earliest
stages of a peacekeeping mission.

Thirdly, effective peacebuilding needs strong
coordination. The United Nations could play an even
more important role in this regard, including through
the Peacebuilding Commission, which could help to
generate a more coherent and coordinated approach,
including beyond the United Nations system, and to
maintain a framework of mutual accountability
between the host Government and its partners. The
European Union hopes that the forthcoming session of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Peacebuilding Commission review process will
provide opportunities to elaborate and enhance those
linkages.

F ourthly, to ensure that the peacebuilding agenda
bears fruit on the ground, it is essential that personnel
responsible for peacekeeping be aware of the
importance of this supportive work. An efficient in-
country coordination mechanism must be in place to
facilitate close communication between these agents
and peacekeeping personnel. Equally, peacekeepers
have to play their part in supporting confidence-
building in the political process and delivering initial
peace dividends.

Fifthly, a critical element required for a
sustainable exit from conflict is economic recovery.
The European Union has seen this clearly in theatres
ranging from Aceh to Guinea-Bissau. Peacekeepers
play a critical role in helping to stabilize the situation.
They can also play a small but significant role through
the implementation of quick-impact projects, such as
undertaking interim repairs of infrastructure. They also
play a key role in the disarmament and demobilization
of ex-combatants and initial support for their
reinsertion into civilian life. In this regard, the EU
underlines the importance of improving the pace at
which and the way in which we approach the
reintegration of ex-combatants, including the
rehabilitation of former child soldiers and the specific
needs of girls, which is a major issue in many of
today's conflicts, in particular in Africa.

Lastly and fundamentally, the European Union
believes that local and national ownership of the
peacebuilding process is the single most important
element in bringing about a successful transition from
conflict. Responsibility for building a peaceful and
stable society rests first and foremost with
communities themselves. From the outset of a
peacekeeping mission, the international community
should focus on supporting this responsibility. That
requires the development of an operational strategy to
assess needs and identify local capabilities and
partnerships, including with neighbouring countries.

We dissect the crisis management and
peacebuilding processes into their security, political and
development dimensions in order to structure the work
and ensure coordination of the different international
actors involved. But it is only when such projects are
joined under one goal capable of uniting a society - a
project for living together, in the words of the Spanish
philosopher Ortega y Gasset - that they acquire their
full meaning. The European Union is ready to continue
working with the United Nations, other crisis-
management actors and the countries affected by
conflict in pursuit of this comprehensive approach.

