Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to welcome once again the Special Envoy to the Security Council. I also welcome the Director. I thank both of them for their briefings and for their tireless efforts and those of their teams on this very acute problem. I think it is clear from what we have heard today that the political settlement is the only way to bring long-term stability to Yemen and also to address the humanitarian crisis. The Security Council has a vital role to play in supporting the peace process. I would therefore like to begin by welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2505 (2020) on Monday renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement (see S/PV.8701). There are a number of things I would like to say, so I will break them down into different headings. Starting with the Riyadh agreement, we strongly support this Saudi-brokered agreement, which is vital to stabilizing the south and key for an overall peace process. Therefore, the announcement on 9 January of a military agreement to make progress on the Riyadh agreement, together with the reports of prisoner exchanges, is very welcome. I was interested in whatSpecial Envoy Griffiths had to say about reconvening the prisoner-exchange committee. Let us therefore hope that it goes well. Announcements do need to be followed by implementation on the ground, and the formation of anew Yemeni Government is critical to progress. On de-escalation, it is very welcome that there has been a tangible decrease in inflammatory rhetoric and an apparent decrease in violence around the Saudi border, which are good demonstrations of political will. The announcement on 20 September that the Houthis would cease strikes on Saudi Arabia is particularly welcome, but obviously that needs to be properly enforced and carried out. We must not allow this small window of hope to close. That is one message I took away from what Mr. Griffiths was saying. It is vital that Yemen does not become hostage to a wider regional crisis, and we do hope that the international community can come together to press the Houthis not to become a vehicle for wider retaliation from Iran in the region. Ultimately, though, as we know, any sustainable peace process needs to be underpinned by a comprehensive security agreement, and brazen strikes, such as the Iranian missile strike on the ARAMCO facilities last year, place that prize in jeopardy. On the humanitarian side, I thank Director Rajasingham for his briefing. The core message that stands out there is that this is still the largest humanitarian crisis. It was alarming to hear that some of the factors that brought Yemen to the brink of famine are returning. We therefore share the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs' sense of urgency in that regard. We also hope that humanitarian workers can be allowed to do their work properly, and we pay tribute to the work of the Humanitarian Coordinator and the country team. What Mr. Griffiths told us about World Health Organization mercy flights is obviously extremely important and a bit of good news. I understand that there has been intimidation of humanitarian workers and that it is not limited to Houthi areas. I want to take this opportunity to support the statement that the Emergency Relief Coordinator issued on 23 December 2019, condemning attacks on the premises of several humanitarian organizations in Al-Dhale'e that month. Aid workers must be allowed to deliver their life-saving support in safety. Concerning the oil tanker, we can only echo what Director Rajasingham said. We do need the issue to be resolved. The consequences of a rupture or explosion would be phenomenal. Accordingly, we urge the Houthis to let the United Nations assessment team have access to the tanker. Continued inaction can only be described as reckless; therefore, we hope that this can be resolved soon. The economy is obviously a very difficult issue. We continue to encourage constructive engagement on the economy. We look forward to an ongoing injection of hard currency and greater public financial transparency because the foreign currency shortfall faced by the central bank is extremely concerning and could have serious implications for the humanitarian situation. To come back to where I started, all of this is obviously leading up to an expression of support for Mr. Griffiths as he tries to take the broader political process forward. However, it is clear from what we have heard today that we cannot afford any let-up in our support for that and the Special Envoy's work.
