Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution
2098 (2013) and thanks France for its role in leading the
negotiations on it.

The United Kingdom joins the broader international
community in welcoming the Framework for Peace,
Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region as an opportunity for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to enter a period
of lasting peace and increased prosperity, in which
civilians can go about their lives in safety, justice is
done and seen to be done, the women of the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo no longer
need to fear sexual violence and children are protected
from the impact of conflict.

The resolution is an important step in that direction.
The signatories to the Framework must now play their
part by meeting their commitments. The Council,
too, must play its part in providing the long-term and
sustained oversight on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that has too often been lacking on our part. In
that regard, we welcome the appointment of President
Mary Robinson as Special Envoy to the Great Lakes
Region. Those are all vital elements ofa comprehensive
approach to addressing the root causes of the crisis
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO), with the inclusion
of an Intervention Brigade, is an important means by
which the United Nations contributes to the realization
of that vision. By doing so, the Security Council and
the United Nations has moved into new territory. For it
to succeed, it will be important for the whole Mission,
including all its troop contingents, whether they are a
part of the Intervention Brigade or not, to be willing
and able to fully implement the whole of the Mission's
mandate. It is one Mission with one mandate, one
Special Representative and one Force Commander.

The work of a peacekeeping force relies on the
generosity of those countries that contribute their
troops. The dedication of military expertise does not
come without a cost to those nations. We recognize the
sacrifices made by them in the pursuit of their duties,
in full delivery of the Mission's Chapter VII mandate
and in carrying out MONUSCO's top priority, which
is the protection of civilians. We strongly support the
troop-contributing countries in undertaking that work.

United Nations peacekeeping has come a long
way. Years of experience have led to the development
of methods that fully integrate the work undertaken
by the civilian and the military components of a
peacekeeping operation. Resolution 2086 (2013),
adopted in January, sets out the need for that integrated
approach to peacekeeping. We therefore expect
MONUSCO to conduct all its tasks in an integrated
manner, while making the best use ofits civilian, police
and military capabilities and acting under a unified
leadership. MONUSCO's peacekeepers must follow
a comprehensive and multidimensional approach
whether or not they wear uniforms. That is the recipe
for successful peacekeeping.

In that context, we welcome the work mandated by
the resolution to set out the division of labour between
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team. That
will inform a much-needed road map on the transfer of
tasks from the Mission. It will play an important role in
guiding the way forward for the United Nations family
to work together to build peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
