Mr. Chergui: First of all, allow me to reiterate
to you, Mr. President, my dear brother Ambassador
Matjila, my sincere congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and your
excellent leadership of the work of the Council this
month. At the African Union we greatly appreciate
the importance given to Africa's priorities under
your presidency, particularly through the strategic
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations. In that respect, I welcomed the successful
thirteenth annual United Nations-African Union joint
consultative meeting between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
that was held in Addis Ababa earlier this week. I want
to say once again what an honour and pleasure it was
to welcome the Council here in Addis Ababa. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in the
Central African Republic and specifically on the joint
Visit to Bangui of the African Union, United Nations
and European Union from 4 to 7 October.

(spoke in French)

The situation in the Central African Republic
has generally seen a significant decrease in violence
throughout the country, an undeniable and tangible
result ofthe signing ofthe Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. In
that context, we welcome the progress that has been
made in setting up the implementation and monitoring
mechanism's structures, which are now operational,
including the executive follow-up committee for the
Agreement, which is chaired by the Prime Minister of
the Central African Republic and the African Union's
Special Representative in Bangui, whose work is
proceeding normally. We should also highlight the
establishment of the committee's technical secretariat,
the national implementation committee, the prefectural
implementation committees, the technical security
committees, and the inclusive commission, which
began work on 28 May.

The Government's presence is gradually being
re-established in areas that the central authorities
were previously unable to access. As a result, all 16
prefectures and 66 of the 71 planned sub-prefectures
are already in place on the ground, and the defence
and security forces are in the process of being
deployed throughout the national territory. In addition,
the formation of the joint security units began on
16 October in Bouar in the north-west of the country
in the presence of President Touadera, members of the
Government and representatives of the international
community. I also want to commend the Central African
Government for its efforts, including the finalization
of the electoral code, which has been approved by the
Constitutional Court. We expect that other legislative
texts will be adopted soon, particularly those related to
decentralization, the status of former Heads of State,
and political parties.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank and pay tribute to the countries of the region
that have continued to support the implementation of
the Agreement and provide assistance to the Central
African Republic, particularly through the meetings of
the Central African Republic-Cameroon and Central
African Republic-Congo mixed commissions, and
soon those of the Central African Republic-Chad and
Central African Republic-Sudan mixed commissions.
On the humanitarian front, the situation is encouraging.
Between January and September the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
facilitated the voluntary return of more than 357,000
refugees and displaced persons to their respective
regions. The need for humanitarian assistance has
therefore been significantly reduced, and according to
humanitarian reports some 30,000 people will return to
their regions in 2020.

Despite the improved security situation, we have
unfortunately seen several cases of violations of the
Agreement, including in Paoua on 21 May and in
September and in Birao in October, which resulted in
considerable loss of life and which we have firmly and
collectively condemned. Those clashes have in no way
slowed the implementation of the Agreement, and the
African Union continues to encourage the Government
and stakeholders to maintain the existing dialogue
framework while stressing the importance of promoting
a climate of trust, especially in View of the elections
scheduled for 2020 and 2021.

That was the context for my joint Visit to Bangui
from 4 to 7 October with my friend Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-Genera1 for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service, our second visit to the Central African
Republic, following the one in April. At the end of
our consultations with President Touadera and the
actors involved, we called for scrupulous respect for
their commitments regarding the implementation of
the peace agreement. We also clarified grey areas,
reaffirmed our common commitment to ensuring strict
respect for electoral deadlines and urged the Central
African Republic's partners to mobilize to ensure the
creation of the necessary conditions for that. To that
end, we are once again counting on the members of the
Council to provide the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) with the mandate it will need to
ensure its support during the process. I would like to
conclude by making some recommendations.

First, it is important to welcome the convergence
of the positions and coherence of the actions of the
African Union, the United Nations and the European
Union and - if I may assume it - the entire
international community in all of our interactions with
the stakeholders of the Central African Republic and
the international community in general. It is therefore
imperative that we collectively continue to support the
implementation of the Agreement, which remains the
frame of reference for the country's return to stability.
Let me be very clear that there can be no plan B.

Secondly, I welcome the commitment of the
Central African Republic's neighbours and the
Economic Community of Central African States to that
effort and urge them to continue to support the Central
African Republic.

Thirdly, the start on 16 October of the formation of
joint security units in the western part of the Central
African Republic is a major development and a clear
achievement. It is now time to launch the units planned
for the country's other regions in order to consolidate
reconciliation and inclusiveness.

Fourthly, while the African Union is deploying
military observers who are responsible for supervising
the joint security units, I am counting on MINUSCA's
usual collaboration and assistance in supplying
the logistical support, particularly in terms of
accommodation and transport, that is needed to ensure
the success of this operation.

Fifthly, while, as I mentioned, there has been
progress on the humanitarian front, the situation
remains precarious and requires the international
community's sustained attention if we are to respond
to the expectations of both the humanitarian observers
and people in vulnerable situations. I want to stress the
importance of focusing particularly on the situation of
women and children in the Central African Republic
and to solemnly and firmly reiterate our common
policy of zero tolerance for all forms of sexual Violence
and the exploitation of children.

Finally, I would like to stress once again that there
can be no alternative to holding general elections in
2020 and 2021, and we have emphasized to all the
stakeholders in the Central African Republic that every
possible effort will be made to ensure that they are held
on time. I therefore call for the Council to support us
by bringing all of its influence to bear to ensure that all
the stakeholders concerned will respect the deadlines
and contribute positively to the effective organization
of the elections.

