Ms. Korpi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries and members of
the European Economic Area Iceland and Norway, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the Security Council
discussion on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants as timely and pertinent. We highly
commend your initiative, Sir. It highlights the growing
importance of multidimensional approaches to the solution
of today's conflicts. We also welcome your idea that
techniques for executing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and the problems associated with
them should be studied in depth to help enhance United
Nations peacekeeping activities. I also would like to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for her introduction to this
issue from the United Nations point of view.

The international community faces enormous
challenges in dealing with the complexity of conflict
management today. The nature of the conflicts has become
more and more complex since the fall of the bipolar cold-
war order. Most of the new conflicts in the 1990s have
been of a civil-war type. One of the most disturbing factors
is the growing involvement of children in such conflicts.
Peacekeeping can no longer be viewed as a distinct and
isolated event. Instead, it should be viewed as a part of a
wider process, ranging from preventive diplomacy to post-
conflict peace-building.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants have been important parts of a number of
peacekeeping operations with a view to strengthening post-
conflict peace-building. Such practical disarmament
measures have a special relevance to conflicts that are
approaching solution, to recently ended conflicts, and, as a
consequence, to preventing a given conflict from re-
emerging. Without success in this area it is hardly possible
to create the stable, just and democratic political
environment which in turn is an indispensable precondition
for sustainable human, economic and social development.

The United Nations has been successful in resolving
a number of conflicts. Many countries formerly in conflict
have already gone several years without war, and there is
a fair prospect of lasting peace. In these countries the
conflict was successfully channelled into a legitimate
political process, so that interests no longer had to be
pursued by military means. The United Nations provided
incentives for former combatants - many of whom had
been pressed into service as children and had no other
way of life - to demobilize. In other cases the United
Nations has not been successful. Both instances merit a
thorough evaluation of the lessons learned.

The European Union has played an active role in
efforts to combat the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation and spread of small arms and light
weapons, and invites all countries to support the aims set
out in the joint action that it adopted in December 1998.
The previous year, 1997, the European Union adopted a
programme for preventing and combating illicit trafficking
in conventional arms. The European Union supports a
proportionate and integrated approach to security and
development. Through its joint action, the European
Union has committed itself to promoting the inclusion of
provisions for arms collection, control, disposal and/or
destruction; for demobilization; and for the integration of
ex-combatants into peace agreements between the parties
to the conflict and into mandates of peace-support
operations where appropriate. The Union will also provide
financial and technical assistance to programmes and
projects of the United Nations and other organizations,
including non-governmental organizations. These
undertakings may include, inter alia, weapons collection,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. The
European Union is funding in particular a pilot weapons-
collection project in Albania. The project offers
community-development assistance in exchange for
weapons. The Union is studying proposals for the funding
of similar projects elsewhere.

The international community should promote
regional and collective approaches to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants. In its
first report, the United Nations Panel of Government
Experts on Small Arms recommended a set of reduction
and prevention measures to combat the destabilizing
accumulation of small arms. The adoption by consensus
at the United Nations Disarmament Commission in April
this year of guidelines on conventional arms
control/limitation and disarmament with particular
emphasis on consolidation of peace represents a major
step forward. The guidelines provide a valuable tool

 

which can assist the international community, as well as
regions, subregions and countries directly affected. They
should also be drawn upon in the design of mandates for
future United Nations peacekeeping and preventive
operations.

These guidelines contain specific recommendations for
the collection, control, disposal and destruction of arms,
especially small arms and light weapons, and conversion of
military facilities. They address the criteria required for a
successful and well-organized programme for the
demobilization of combatants, as well as measures needed
for their effective integration into civil society.

The European Union looks forward to seeing the
results of the work already done by the Lessons Learned
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
encourages the Department to build on these guidelines in
the planning management, implementation and monitoring
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in future
peacekeeping operations.

The European Union also welcomes the work and the
initiatives of the group of interested States. This group
supports concrete projects of practical disarmament and
serves as a forum for the exchange of information about
relevant lessons learned in the field of practical
disarmament. The initiative has the support of the
Secretary-General.

War-tom societies have great difficulties in offering
socially and economically viable alternatives for ex-
combatants. The promotion of sustainable employment and
skills training should be a priority in integration
programmes for former combatants, and international
assistance should be made available for this purpose. At the
same time, States should be encouraged to reflect in their
educational and economic programmes the integration of
combatants and to secure domestic resources for such
activities, supplemented as appropriate by external support,
in order to provide, inter alia, for effective follow-up
action. The needs of different target groups among the
reintegrated combatants, including vulnerable groups such
as children, should be identified and options designed for
their integration to suit local conditions. The reintegration
of child soldiers, representing the next generation, requires
special measures, such as medical and psychological
treatment, as well as education, housing and other similar
measures.

Any reintegration has to be complemented by systems
of accountability and accompanied by proper legal
procedures. In this context, lessons learned, for example,
in South Africa or in the former Yugoslavia - recently
in Bosnia and Herzegovina - could prove useful.

In 1996 the European Union adopted legislation on
rehabilitation and reconstruction operations in developing
countries. Among the priorities of this regulation is the
social reintegration of refugees, displaced persons and
demobilized troops. Potential partners can represent
international, regional, national, local or community-based
organizations, non-governmental organizations and public
or private operators alike.

The European Union is especially concerned by the
extension of armed conflicts and the huge influx of arms
and military equipment into conflict areas in Africa. More
than a third of African countries are at present or have
recently been involved in conflicts. The European Union,
bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1209 (1998)
on arms flows in Africa, considers that in the search for
a long-term solution to conflicts, high priority should be
given to measures that curb arms supplies, the illicit
circulation of arms, and the illicit trafficking of gold,
diamonds and other lucrative commodities that may
finance the arms.
The European Union will actively contribute to the
mechanism set up to help in the implementation of the
West African moratorium, adopted within the Economic
Community of West African States at the initiative of
Mali. Its main purpose is to prevent illicit manufacture of
and trade in small arms, as well as to make sure that
these weapons are collected and put out of use. The Mali
initiative is a pioneering project and could serve as an
example in other regions with similar problems.

In Central America, the European Union has paid
increasing attention to the reintegration of demobilized
ex-combatants from both sides of the conflict into the
economic and social life of their communities through
financing important development programmes in
Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua. These
programmes have shown very promising results. Ex-
combatants who have participated in the reconciliation
programmes have turned out to be active promoters of
local development processes.

At the Fifteenth San Jose Ministers of the European
Union and Central American countries agreed on the need
to step up efforts to increase the participation of citizens
in political life in order to further consolidate democracy
in Central America. Needless to say, this also includes

 

former actors of the internal conflict. Ministers also
welcomed the European Union Joint Action on small arms
and light weapons and underlined their determination to
cooperate more closely in this field.

Given the reality of present-day conflicts, the Security
Council should consider the following. First, it should give
direction to United Nations peace mediation efforts so that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are properly
included in peace agreements. Secondly, the Council should
see to it that enabling United Nations resolutions integrate
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as part of the
peacekeeping operations mandate, with adequate funding
and implementation follow-up. The Security Council should
address the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
issue on a regular basis in the context of reviewing
peacekeeping operations.

But the key is that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration need a third D: development. Disarming and
demobilizing troops and reintegrating ex-combatants cannot
be done in a vacuum. The Security Council should endorse
what is known as an integrated and proportionate approach
to security and development. Perhaps a part of official
development assistance should be devoted to the
consolidation of peace and reconciliation. Bilateral and
multilateral development agencies should direct part of their
assistance to the rapid re-establishment of income-earning
activities.

Such assistance can help ensure the early success of
practical disarmament measures. A key objective must be
to allow the administrative capacity and infrastructure that
were damaged during the conflict to be rebuilt in a process
of conversion from a culture of war to a culture of peace.
In the end, it is the parties to a peace agreement who are
responsible for its full implementation and who alone can
provide the best guarantee for the consolidation of peace
and for the essential economic and political regeneration of
their societies.

