Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): Thank you for calling this
very important meeting, Mr. President. It is a strong
acknowledgement of the seriousness of the situation,

and Sweden welcomed the opportunity to sponsor
today's resolution (2177 (2014)).

Sweden aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

We join the global emergency appeals for scaling
up all efforts, and we commend the leadership shown
by the Secretary-General and the United States in
that regard. We welcome the Secretary-General's
initiative in convening a high-level meeting on
this topic during the upcoming General Assembly
ministerial week, and his important efforts to improve
the international coalition's coordination, including
through his appointment of a Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola and his proposal for the
establishment of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response.

Sweden is one of the world's top donors of
humanitarian assistance and development aid. We
clearly hear the call for an immediate scaling-up of
the efforts to combat Ebola. We have longstanding
relationships with all the countries concerned, and a
strong partnership with Liberia, both bilaterally and
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's Liberia
country team, along with partnering the United States
in implementing Liberia's new deal on peacebuilding
and State-building.

Bilaterally, since April Sweden has contributed
$4.4 million to the three countries most affected,
mainly though partners such as the International
Rescue Committee, Medecins Sans Frontieres, Action
contre la faim and the Swedish Red Cross. The Swedish
international development cooperation agency is now
in the final stages of preparing an additional package
of $13 million in response to the appeal from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, directed
primarily to UNICEF, the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service. We are also supporting a WHO coordinator
in Sierra Leone, and we are investigating ways of
supporting the accommodation of international medical
staff in Monrovia and possibly also in Freetown.

Due to the current parliamentary situation in
Sweden, where since Monday of this week we have had
a caretaker Government, it is not certain that additional
contributions will be able to be decided on or announced
in the next few days. Our clear ambition, however, is to
come forward with significant additional contributions
very soon.

Sweden would like to underline the importance of
ensuring that the national health systems ofthe countries
involved are generally strengthened in parallel with
the short-term emergency efforts. The crisis has also
highlighted other fragilities in the countries concerned
that should be closely monitored and addressed. We
must remain mindful of the potential implications of
the crisis for peace and security, considering that all
three countries most affected are under the supervision
of the Peacebuilding Commission. And, finally, we
should identify benchmarks and key measures to be
taken during their post-emergency transition. A new
void must not materialize.

In closing, Sweden will continue to stand by the
affected countries and will announce further significant
support at the earliest opportunity.

