Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International
Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, to the
Security Council today. I take this opportunity to
congratulate her and her delegation for the success of
their presidency of the Council this month. We also
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Antje Leendertse, State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany.

We would also like to once again thank the team
represented by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for their significant contributions.
We also welcome the presence of the Israeli and
Palestinian delegations, as well as that of other
delegations here in the Chamber, for the importance
they attach to this question, manifest in their having
joined the list of speakers.

Two months from the end of the year, we find
ourselves in the Council again engaging in the monthly
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, at a time when insurgency
and the lack of political will have not yet stopped
producing deaths, destroying infrastructure and
forcibly displacing millions of innocent people from
their homes and properties.

It is disheartening that despite the numerous
initiatives and regional unilateral and multilateral
efforts to put an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
we are still far from discerning a mutually acceptable
peaceful solution. The two-State solution continues to
be the only viable option to put an end to the conflict.
There is no reasonable alternative plan to replace it.
Since the consideration ofthis issue at the United Nations
first began in 1947, with unquestionable repercussions
throughout the region, that has been the wish of an
overwhelming majority of its Members, as attested to
by the various resolutions adopted on it to date. Many
of the eminent persons from around the world who have
spoken in the Council and the General Assembly have
affirmed it too. In the long term, it is the choice that
will benefit both Israelis and Palestinians, and to reject
it would be to repudiate the multilateralism that we
embraced once more with the foundation of the United
Nations after the Second World War.

Equatorial Guinea supports a two-State solution
based on direct negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians. While it may well entail painful
concessions by both parties, the very nature of dialogue
involves being willing to make concessions and
accepting their necessity. All negotiations should be
conducted within the framework of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. One
of the outcomes of the negotiations must determine
the final status of Jerusalem. These negotiations have
been stagnating for several years, during which time
events such as Israel's policy of building and expanding
settlements have increased tensions on the ground
while fomenting further hatred between the parties.
Many reports confirm that this policy undermines the
viability of a two-State solution and the prospects for
lasting peace in the region.

The militant actions of armed groups from Gaza
must also cease. Provocations and attacks on Israel
will not help to reach a solution to the conflict. On the
contrary, they can increase the tensions between the
parties even more, thereby endangering the lives of
women and children and of the peoples on both sides
in general. Given the situation, we continue to insist
on the need to support Egypt's efforts to facilitate an
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and thereby enable the
reunification of Palestine under a single, legitimate,
democratic Government that not only takes into
account the aspirations of the Palestinian people but
also helps to substantially improve the socioeconomic
and security conditions there.

I should not conclude without paying tribute to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for the noble humanitarian
services it provides and calling on the international
community to continue to furnish it with the financial
support it needs to improve their effectiveness.

In compliance with the mandate of the United
Nations established in the Preamble to the Charter of
the United Nations, Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to supporting every initiative that takes
into consideration existing instruments of international
law such as the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and others that are internationally
recognized. For us, the most important thing is to find
a solution based on negotiations between the Israelis
and Palestinians and endorsed by the international
community. That can only be a solution involving
two independent States living in peace, with security
guarantees for both sides and for the other States of the
region. Palestine and Israel must respect each other's
right to exist.

