At the outset, we thank the President of the Security Council for convening today's meeting and convey our appreciation to Ms. Deborah Lyons and Mr. Saad Mohseni for their informative briefings. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to promote a durable political settlement and lasting peace in Afghanistan. Afghanistan is currently at a critical juncture, as the volatile security and political situations have been further compounded by the spread of the coronavirus disease, natural disasters, food insecurity and other humanitarian concerns. More is expected of the United Nations: in particular in terms of leading international efforts towards a peaceful solution of the nearly two-decades-long conflict in the country and of coordinating the provision of humanitarian assistance. We appeal to members of the international donor community to renew their support for Afghanistan and cooperate closely with the United Nations to ensure that the urgent humanitarian needs are addressed. We also emphasize the importance of regional consensus, which is imperative for the success of intra-Afghan peace and reconciliation. As we look towards the upcoming intra-Afghan negotiation, Afghanistan's partners in the region should engage constructively in support of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. We also call on partners in the region to strengthen relations and facilitate direct peace talks with the Taliban. In the area of security, the situation in Afghanistan remains unpredictable and highly volatile. We strongly condemn all acts of violence and intimidation directed against civilians, the Afghan National Security Forces, United Nations and other humanitarian personnel, and other collateral targets. We reaffirm our serious concerns at the number of civilian casualties reported by UNAMA in its midyear update on the protection of civilians and reiterate our full support for a zero-tolerance approach to addressing serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in Afghanistan, especially against women and children. The rights of all Afghans must be respected, in line with the Afghan Constitution and international law. Once more, we echo the Secretary-General's calls for a global ceasefire, which is an imperative for successful intra-Afghan negotiations. In conclusion, we reaffirm our strong commitment to UNAMA and the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. We remain convinced that a durable political solution to the conflict can only be achieved through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process that ensures the full, equal and effective participation of women in decision-making processes at all levels.
