At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his introductory remarks and the presentation of his fourteenth report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). I take this opportunity to reiterate Tunisia's commendation of his tireless efforts to advance the peace process in the Middle East. I also thank the French presidency of the Security Council for its positive response to the request to hold this meeting at the ministerial level, and I would like to warmly welcome my counterparts, Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Vice-Ministers and all representatives of the brotherly and friendly countries. Our thanks also go to Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, for his extensive briefing and to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his exhaustive briefing, as well as for their efforts to promote peace. This important meeting is taking place alongside the United Nations preparations to celebrate its seventy-fifth anniversary, with all the deep connotations and significance of this event, which represents a renewed opportunity to affirm our adherence to the Charter of our Organization and to emphasize the crucial and renewed importance of international law and covenants in regulating international relations and maintaining international peace and security. Paradoxically, in return our meeting comes a few days ahead of another sequence in the course of Israel's disdain for international legality, with the announcement by the country's Prime Minister to start implementing a plan to annex parts of the Palestinian territories in flagrant violation of international law and United Nations resolutions and in a blatant challenge to the international community, which has expressed, at different levels, its clear rejection of these aggressive policies. For more than seven decades, Israel, the occupying Power, has pursued and still pursues its aggressive practices against the brotherly Palestinian people. The front runners of these practices, which have never ended, are the confiscation of land, the demolition of homes, the settlement expansion, the violation of human rights, the desecration of holy sites, coupled with restrictions on movement and tightening the unfair siege on Gaza, the economic strangulation and all other forms of collective punishment. In the same vein, despite the international efforts, the multiple United Nations resolutions and the agreements concluded, successive Israeli Governments not only have ignored and violated those references, but rather have taken a series of unilateral decisions and measures, within a fait accompli policy, to change the legal and historical status of the Arab lands and implement the Israeli expansionist plans. These include the decisions to annex East Jerusalem and impose Israeli sovereignty over it, changing its demographic composition and Judaizing the city, the decision to impose sovereignty on the occupied Syrian Golan, the so-called Jewish nation-State law, the never-ending projects to build thousands of settlement units and, recently, the plan to annex parts of the West Bank, including the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead Sea. The intended Israeli annexation represents a grave violation of international law, including the relevant United Nations resolutions, and yet another aggression against the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. It constitutes a serious threat to any efforts to advance the regionally and internationally desired peace, and it would have extremely dangerous repercussions on the whole situation in the region. In that regard, Tunisia renews its call upon the international community to assume its responsibilities at this decisive stage by opposing this plan and preventing its implementation as an urgent priority in order to uphold international law, preserve the prospects for peace and prevent the escalation to a new cycle of violence and chaos. Tunisia also stresses the need to send a strong and clear message to Israel that the international community rejects the annexation plan and stands against the continuing violation of international law, putting at risk the security, peace and stability of the region and the world. Based on the principles of its foreign policy, Tunisia reiterates its firm and principled support to the brotherly Palestinian people in their struggle to regain their legitimate rights, establish their independent and sovereign State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and resolve all final- status issues through a just, durable and comprehensive solution in accordance with the resolutions of international legality, the two-State vision and the Arab Peace Initiative. Tunisia also affirms that the Palestinian rights are not time-bound and that the Israeli measures are null and void and with no international legal effect. Our absolute rejection of the annexation plan and our call for concerted international efforts to oppose it and prevent its ultimate implementation are equally matched by our demand for an end to the Israeli occupation, which constitutes the root cause and the most prominent embodiment of the Palestinian tragedy that has been going on for more than 70 years, with all the aggressions and violations to which the brotherly Palestinian people are still subject, continuously and systematically. In this connection, we renew our call on the Security Council to compel Israel to end the occupation and withdraw from all Palestinian and Arab lands to the borders of 4 June 1967, according to a specific timetable. We also stress the importance of intensifying efforts to revive the peace process in accordance with the internationally agreed parameters. Tunisia stresses, in the meantime, the importance of providing international protection to the Palestinian people, lifting the unjust blockade imposed on Gaza and ending all other forms of discrimination and collective punishment. We call upon the international community to continue to support the Palestinian Authority's efforts to confront the growing economic, social and humanitarian challenges as a result of the continued occupation and the novel coronavirus pandemic threat. In closing, Tunisia reaffirms that stability and security cannot be restored in the region, and that peace and calm cannot be guaranteed to its populations, unless a just and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict is reached. I renew my thanks to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, to the French presidency of the Security Council and to all the brotherly and friendly nations that have expressed their support for upholding international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the universal values of peace.
