The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf ofthe Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
elections held in Sierra Leone on 14 May 2002. It
congratulates the people of Sierra Leone on the
peaceful and orderly way in which the elections
were held. It commends the National Electoral
Commission and all those responsible for the
successful management of the elections, and
commends UNAMSIL for their invaluable
supporting role. The Council notes that the
various electoral observation groups were
impressed by the Sierra Leonean people's
commitment to democracy and their
determination to vote. The Council calls on all
political parties and their supporters to work
together to strengthen democracy and thereby
assure continuing peace.

"The Security Council considers the
elections an important milestone on the road to
peace and security in Sierra Leone and the Mano
River region. The next challenge for Sierra Leone
and the international community is the further
consolidation of peace. There is much still to do,
including the extension of public services to
make real the restoration of government authority
throughout the country, the further enhancement
of the operational effectiveness of the security
sector, and the effective reintegration of all ex-
combatants. A sustained effort from the
international community will be needed to
achieve our shared objective of sustainable peace
and security, which must be the basis for Sierra
Leone's economic regeneration and future
development. The Council urges all donors to
contribute generously towards these ends,
including by providing urgently needed funds to
the Special Court and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission.

"The Security Council will continue to pay
close attention to developments in Sierra Leone
and the Mano River region. The Council requests
the Secretary-General to monitor the situation
there closely and to keep the Council informed of
any significant developments."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2002/14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.35pm.
