Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start on
the Middle East, I would just like to say how sorry
we were to hear about the terrorist attack on 16 June
in Nigeria, near Maiduguri, which killed at least 30
people. The press statement on that attack (SC/13852)
that the Security Counciljust issued is welcome, but our
sympathies and condolences go out to those affected
and to Nigeria.

Turning to the Middle East, I thank Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing. I think some common themes are
emerging. For the United Kingdom, we share the
Secretary-General's views on the expansion of Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. It was disappointing that, on 30 May, the
Israeli authorities published tenders for the construction
of over 500 settlement units in East Jerusalem. That
is a decision that we condemn. As others have pointed
out, the continued escalation of settlement activity
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem is contrary to
international law as reaffirmed by resolution 2334
(2016). An annexation of any part of the West Bank
would also be contrary to international law, not to
mention destructive to peace efforts. Ijust wanted to
set that out clearly.

Turning to Gaza, the United Kingdom condemns
the rocket attack by Palestinian militants against
southern Israel on 13 June. We strongly condemn all
acts of terrorism and call on Hamas and other terrorist
groups to put a permanent end to their incitement and
rocket fire against Israel. We were saddened by reports
of a Palestinian medic who succumbed to wounds
received last month when he was hit in the face by a
rubber-coated bullet at the Gaza periphery. It is very
hard to comprehend the killing of those delivering
medical services.

We would therefore like to take this opportunity
once more to urge all parties concerned to take action to
reduce the risk of violence and make renewed progress
towards a long-term agreement. It is only through a
long-term political solution that brings the Palestinian
Authority back to Gaza that communities in Israel and
Gaza can be free from the threat of violence.

In response to the fragile humanitarian situation, on
29 May the United Kingdom announced the $2 million
package of support for the World Health Organization
to help address the gap in trauma and emergency care in
Gaza, and will help establish a new-limb reconstruction
unit. We hope that package of support will help relieve
the pressure on Gaza's hard-pressed health services.

I wish now to turn to the altercations on Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount on 2 June. Given the religious
importance and political sensitivity of the holy sites, we
look to all parties to maintain the status quo and engage
in dialogue to ensure calm, especially during religious
Observances such as the holy month of Ramadan.

Turning to a solution to the conflict, along with
other Member States, the United Kingdom continues
to promote a just resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is our understanding, and it seems that
the understanding is shared by most Council members,
that a sustainable peace requires a safe and secure Israel
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
State based on 1967 borders with the agreed land
swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States
and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for
refugees. There need to be security arrangements that,
for Israelis, prevent the resurgence of terrorism and, for
Palestinians, respect their sovereignty, ensure freedom
of movement and demonstrate that the occupation
is over.

To that end, I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage our United States colleagues to bring forward
detailed proposals for a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of
both parties. We continue to believe that the only way to

achieve that is through substantive peace talks leading
to a two-State solution.
There will be a meeting in Bahrain next week about
the economic situation and proposals. That is welcome.
More needs to be done to enable the Palestinians to
trade freely with the rest of the world. In turn, that
requires greater movement of goods and people and the
easing of Israeli restrictions. Ultimately, in order for
the Palestinian economy to flourish, a political solution
to the conflict needs to be found.

Lastly, others have mentioned the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), and I would like to reiterate
that the United Kingdom also remains a committed
supporter ofUNRWA and ofPalestinian refugees across
the Middle East. We welcome UNRWA's efforts to
broaden its donor base. I would like to encourage others
to step up with more funding and more predictable
disbursements. In that context, we look forward to a
successful pledging conference here in New York
next week.

