Mr. Florent (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, in my purely personal capacity, to note that the
work of the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee does not seem to be as popular a subject as
Iraq. I regret that personally, but would point out that
the Chamber is less crowded.

On a more serious note, my delegation fully
adheres to the statement to be made by the Italian
presidency of the European Union. In my national
capacity, I wish to state our position on the current and
future work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

The Committee has been in existence for two
years now. Ever since its creation under resolution
1373 (2001), it has done work that we all rightly agree
to have been outstanding. In accordance with its
mandate, it has actively and effectively contributed to
monitoring and facilitating the correct implementation
by all States of resolution 1373 (2001) and of
subsequent relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1456 (2003) adopted at the
ministerial level in January.

Without going into detail, I simply wish to
highlight, first, the unprecedented number of national
reports that the Committee has considered and
assessed, with the valuable and effective assistance of
the independent experts - without whom this work
could not have been carried out, and whom I personally
wish to thank; secondly, the indispensable development
of cooperation with regional organizations, including
the European Union, and international organizations
with competence in the war on terrorism, as evidenced
by the joint meetings held on 6 March in New York and
on 7 October in Washington, DC; thirdly, the efforts
made to facilitate the provision of technical assistance
to States that need it in order to help them fully to
implement resolution 1373 (2001); and fourthly, the
substantial increase since the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) in the number of States parties to the
various international anti-terrorism instruments, in
particular the 1999 International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. This rapid
overview, although positive, must prompt us to give
further thought to the experience gained and to the
guidelines that we plan to provide for the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

It is important in working towards this goal that
we do not lost sight of the fundamental principles that
must guide our action. First of all, the war against
terrorism must remain a major priority for the
international community, in particular the Security
Council. Secondly, it can be effectively carried out
only with the determined participation of all. As recent
events have tragically confirmed, no figure on the
international stage - including within the United
Nations - is safe from the global scourge of terrorism.
Two years after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
the Security Council must remain the foundation for
our deliberations in the campaign against terrorism.

Nevertheless, it seems to us that it would be
desirable for the CTC - while continuing with its
essential tasks - henceforth to commit itself more
actively to evaluating the measures taken or announced
by States with a view to fighting terrorism more
effectively.

My delegation believes that a number of
guidelines should be given pride of place. First, the
CTC must focus further - as it is beginning to do -
on ensuring that the efforts undertaken by States in
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) are
commensurate with the terrorist threats against them.
In this regard, through its evaluations, the Committee
should intensify its consideration of the progress made
by States in fully implementing resolution 1373 (2001),
taking into account the effectiveness of measures
adopted at both the legislative and administrative
levels - that is, the institutional structures set up to
intensify the fight against terrorism. National reports
should also be adapted along these lines. Such national
reports i which are indispensable - are not, however,
all we need. It is important that they be supplemented
with other sources of available information which the
Committee, in particular its independent experts, must
receive from regional or international bodies, which
are, in turn, engaging in evaluations of their members
in various areas in the fight against terrorism. Such
cooperation, if it avoids duplication, can only
strengthen the effectiveness of the war against
terrorism, which must be our primary concern.

Of course, in the context of this strengthened
evaluation process, it is essential that technical
assistance needs be duly taken into account. Given the
magnitude of those needs and the limited resources
available to satisfy those needs, priorities must
inevitably be established. In this respect, there is a
particular need to maintain and intensify the close
cooperation between the CTC and the Counter-
Terrorism Action Group, established by the Group of
Eight during the Evian summit in June. It is the job that
Group - in whose meetings the CTC Chairman
participated, with the agreement of all of the members
of the Committee - to better assess needs and
priorities for technical assistance in the fight against
terrorism. It is working with the CTC to strengthen
global capacities to combat terrorism and thus to
ensure that all Governments take effective measures to
prevent any active or passive support for terrorism.

Secondly, it seems to us to be crucial that the
work of the CTC, which, is by its very nature is
technical, be more actively linked to the political level
through the Security Council. In this respect, in
accordance with the proposal made by France in the
Council in April, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the Spanish chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee provided, in the programme of work to be
submitted to the Council by the end of November at the
latest, an account of the major difficulties encountered
in the implementation by States of resolution 1373
(2001). That report should, we believe, allow the
Security Council - which is, and must remain, the
parent body of the CTC - to take the necessary
political measures with a view to supporting the action
of the CTC in such a way as to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). What is at
stake here is the credibility of all of the actions
undertaken by the Security Council in the priority area
of combating terrorism.

