Mr. Londofio-Paredes (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): May I first of all congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
at this important stage. We wish you every success. We
know you, and we are certain that as you have always
done, you will be guiding deliberations in this important
organ of the United Nations in a brilliant and most
constructive way.

It is very gratifying for my delegation to speak in the
discussion of this item, at a historic moment in the process
of seeking and consolidating peace in Guatemala. The
signing of the peace accords on 29 December 1996 is of
enormous significance for the peoples of Central America
and for an entire hemisphere that has had to face the
terrible reality of armed confrontation.

Colombia has always maintained close bonds of
friendship and cooperation with the countries of Central
America, several of which are neighbours and bordering
States with which we share the Caribbean Sea. During the
complex period of the Central American conflict, our
country, together with Mexico, Panama and Venezuela,
formed the Contadora Group, and were later joined in our
efforts by four other brotherly countries of Latin America.
Three years of great and constant efforts prevented the
conflict from spreading and sowed the seeds for bringing
peace to the region.

We also actively participated in the peace process in
El Salvador and acted as promoters of the first dialogue
between the Government of that country and the leaders of
the Frente Farabundo Marti guerillas. In a small town in the
north of El Salvador, somewhere between the jungle and
the mountains, we were witnesses to that historic first step.
Later we became members of the Secretary-General's
Group of Friends of the Guatemala Peace Process. We are
therefore proud to have contributed to the quest for peace
and the consolidation of genuine democracy in that region,
of which we feel we are a part.

With the signing of the Guatemala peace accords, not
only is one of the most painful and long-standing
confrontations on the continent being ended, but, with this
closing of the chapter on the last of the Central American
conflicts, it is clear that today, more than ever, violence is
an outdated instrument of political struggle. Peace among
the Guatemalan people is the result of an arduous process
that was not free of vicissitudes, but which had the virtue
of reflecting the feelings and determination of the people
of Guatemala regarding peace as the only way to bring
down the barriers that limit their economic and social
development.

We believe that the negotiation process has been
rigorous with regard to substantive issues and pragmatic
with regard to operational aspects, and has the necessary
legitimacy to contribute to the building of a new
Guatemala. That is why we want to express our
appreciation and praise to the Government of our sister
Republic of Guatemala, and to the Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) for their brave and
sincere approach, as well as to the United Nations for the
intelligent and tireless mediation work that it carried out.

Now is the time for a delicate and complex process
of step-by-step demobilization of the guerilla forces and
verification of the peace accords. We know that the entire
international community, and, of course, members of the
Security Council, will do all in their power to achieve the
desired result, which will also be a great achievement for
the United Nations, as it participates in one of the major
endeavours that the world expects of it following the end
of the cold war.

We are convinced that this process will help
consolidate democracy and promote and strengthen
relations between Guatemala and all the States Members
of the United Nations.

