Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me first express my
delegation's appreciation to the Egyptian presidency for
convening today's open debate and to all the briefers
for their respective remarks.

I wish to align myself with the statement just
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The world is now faced with peace and security
challenges that are more diverse and complex than
ever before. That is particularly true in the context of
Africa. The three major peace and security reviews in
2015 called for deepened and strengthened partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), as well as its regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, with a View to better utilizing the
comparative advantage of regional actors in addressing
such challenges. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations is a recognition that certain situations
could be more appropriately dealt with by regional
actions. At the same time, it also provides a basis
for operationalizing the partnership and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional arrangements.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption today of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8.

We recognize the valuable contribution of the
African Union to the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, in particular through the African Peace and
Security Architecture (APSA). The new APSA road
map 2016-2020 is an aspirational document aimed at
taking a more holistic approach that gives primacy to
conflict prevention, political solutions and sustaining
peace. In our view, the experiences in the following
areas of United Nations-AU partnership should feature
prominently in the future direction of APSA:

The first is peace operations. From supporting
the African Union Mission in Somalia to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
there is a wealth of lessons and best practices that can
be drawn from the United Nations-AU cooperation in
peace operations.

The second is peacebuilding. Africa is at the
heart of United Nations peacebuilding efforts. Last
month, the General Assembly and the Security
Council adopted parallel resolutions (70/262 and 2282 (2016), respectively) on the review of peacebuilding,
emphasizing the role of the AU.

The third is women, peace and security. Taking
forward the aspirations of resolution 1325 (2000), the
African Union Gender, Peace and Security Programme
(2015-2020) is designed to achieve the increased
participation of African women in the peace process
and to enhance the protection of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

The fourth is counter-terrorism. The atrocities
committed by Boko Haram are a stark reminder that
Africa, too, is affected by terrorism. Responding to
such threats requires the concerted effort of countries
of the region. Earlier this month, the Council, in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/7, commended
such efforts in the fight against Boko Haram.

As part of our contribution to the debate, we
would like to suggest the following as the possible way
forward in advancing the United Nations-AU peace and
security cooperation:

First, the United Nations undertook three major
reviews of the peace and security architecture in 2015.
That process continues this year with the upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. One important consideration for the AU
is whether reviews of or adjustments to the APSA
mechanisms should be undertaken to align them with
the outcome of the aforementioned United Nations
review processes.

Secondly, the United Nations-AU partnership should
be geared towards conflict prevention and laying a firm
foundation for sustainable peace. This means addressing
the root causes of conflicts, including socioeconomic
disparities, social injustice and marginalization, as well
as ensuring capacity-building and strengthening State
institutions. Resources are required to realize these
objectives. The AU should be supported with adequate
and predictable funding, especially when acting under
the authorization of the Security Council. At the same
time, as we are mindful of the limited resources within
the United Nations system, other avenues of funding
partnerships - including intergovernmental assistance,
international and regional financial institutions, and
domestic resource mobilization - should also be
explored. In this regard, we recognize the generous
contributions made by several countries in support of
peace and security in Africa.

Thirdly, in order to ensure coherence and
complementarity among different United Nations
agencies and partnership mechanisms on Africa, we
see an important strategic and coordinating role for
the United Nations Office to the African Union and
the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa. The two
Offices should work closely with the AU Commission
to generate renewed momentum for strengthening
peace and security in Africa, in particular in
developing a joint United Nations-AU framework for
enhanced partnership in peace and security. We share
the assessment contained in the concept note before
us (S/2016/428, annex) that this joint United Nations-
AU framework will transform the United Nations-AU
collaboration into a more holistic partnership capable
of comprehensively responding to the contemporary
peace and security challenges in Africa.

To conclude, I wish to reiterate that African
problems require African solutions, and that the United
Nations can play a role in this regard. Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations gives us a framework
for the Organization to cooperate with regional
arrangements. We should take this forward and turn
such cooperation into a true partnership, especially
in the context of Africa. Only by pooling together our
resolve and resources can we realize the full potential
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.

