The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and
her presentation on the proceedings and investigations
being conducted by the International Criminal Court in
Darfur on the basis of resolution 1593 (2005). I should
like to make three comments.

First, based on the mandate entrusted to it by
the Council, the Court has done its work: analysis of
national judicial proceedings in the Sudan - or, rather,
the lack thereof; investigations; the issuing of arrest
warrants against four individuals; judicial proceedings
at The Hague against rebel leaders who have decided
to voluntarily surrender; and witness protection efforts.
The beginning of the first trial, against Abdallah Banda
for attacks against peacekeeping troops, is an important
milestone. That first public trial will make it possible
to concretely raise the massive crimes committed in
Darfur.

My second observation is somewhat darker. As
the Prosecutor said this morning, impunity persists
in Darfur and the most vulnerable - women in
particular - remain the first victims. Four senior
officials accused of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and, one of them, of genocide continue to
evade the efforts of the Court despite the arrest warrants
issued against them.

My third point is: what can the Council do? There are
courses of action. The first is to support the International
Criminal Court. This meeting provides an opportunity
to reiterate our confidence in the Prosecutor and to
express our conviction that the Court contributes to the
solution of conflicts in Africa and the world. It would
undoubtedly be useful to demonstrate that support by
ensuring that the next Council resolution on Darfur
reflect the concerns of the Prosecutor concerning aerial
bombardments, controlling and disarming militias,
sexual violence, and the need for cooperation from the
Sudan with the International Criminal Court.

On a parallel track, there is support the peace
process. Since our last meeting (see S/PV.6974), the
security situation has deteriorated again. Clashes
between the Government, armed groups and now tribes
are increasing, with the number ofvictims and displaced
persons also increasing. There has been no progress in
the peace process. Reconstruction is at a standstill and
the resources being transferred to the Darfur Regional
Authority are too scant. Under those conditions, people
do not benefit from improvements, which is the only
way to ensure their adherence to the peace plan. The
reason is simple: the Darfur problem cannot be isolated.
It is an integral part of national reform, which is the
only way to provide lasting solutions to the people
and encourage rebel groups to participate in genuine
negotiations. We must support the African Union in
that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to say once again how
much we appreciate the involvement of the Secretary-
General and the Office of Legal Affairs for the sake
of international criminal justice and the International
Criminal Court. In particular, the directives of the
Secretary-General on limiting contact with defendants
are an essential tool. Those guidelines should be applied
consistently. The image of the Organization and the
effectiveness of international justice depend upon it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda to respond
to questions and comments made.

