Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is gravely concerned about the
prospects for peace in the Middle East. It is vital that
both sides realize exactly how much is now at stake.
The United Kingdom is committed to the Quartet's
road map as the best way ahead to implement the
vision of two States, living side by side in peace and
security. It is essential that the two sides implement the
obligations contained in the road map.

To that end, the United Kingdom supports the
Palestinian efforts to form a stable and empowered
Government which can be a genuine and unconstrained
partner for peace. Prime Minister Qurei is a long-
standing supporter of the cause of peace. It is
imperative that his new Government acts decisively to
tackle the scourge of terrorism, including by unifying
control over the Palestinian security apparatus. And in
parallel, the domestic reform process must continue.
The rest of the world will judge the Palestinian
Authority by the results it achieves.

The United Kingdom has consistently condemned
the morally repugnant and intolerable suicide bombings
that Israel has suffered. We unreservedly condemn the
acts perpetrated by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade. Their tragic impact
has been all too obvious. We recognize, in return,
Israel's need to take security measures against the real
threat of terrorism which it faces. The United Kingdom
Government has always defended Israel's right, acting,
consistent with international law, to protect its citizens.
But disproportionate use of force by the Israel Defence
Forces only fuels the cycle of violence.

At a time when the international consensus on a
two-State solution is firm, it is alarming that the
practical basis for this is in jeopardy. We are therefore
deeply concerned about the route of Israel's fence that
is being planned and built inside the occupied
territories. Normally, one does not build walls on
someone else's land. So, any such wall should be built
on the green line or in Israeli territory.

But more important is the impact of the wall. The
separation wall undermines the trust between the
parties that is necessary for negotiations. It has a
negative impact on the daily lives of Palestinians and it
calls into question the two-State solution. We are
particularly alarmed by Israel's issuing of a military
order declaring the land between the fence and the
Green Line a closed zone, where Palestinian residents
must apply for permits to remain in their own villages.

Facts on the ground created by Israeli settlement
activity also threaten the viability of a Palestinian State
and make the possibility of a negotiated settlement
more difficult to reach. The humanitarian and
economic consequences of closures and curfews on the
Palestinian people result in hardship and
unemployment and only fuel hatred and violence.
Palestinian people need to see a real improvement in
their lives on the ground. That is why the United
Kingdom believes that the international community has
a direct stake in the peace process. A continuing,
strong international commitment to the road map-based
process is imperative. A strong and determined Quartet
can play a vital role, closely following road map
implementation through reports of monitors and
making an extra effort where it detects problems or
deficiencies.

But, ultimately, Israel's security can only be
achieved through a just and lasting settlement
negotiated between the parties. A Palestinian State will
not be created by acts of terrorism. The road map offers
the region the best opportunity for peace. In that
context, we look to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians to move forward in implementing their
obligations under the first phase.

The task is to create a virtuous cycle. On the
Palestinians' part that means stopping the terrorists and
meeting the obligations of the road map, especially in
terms of the commitment to tackle the sources of and
those perpetrating terrorism. For the Government of
Israel, in parallel, it means a move on settlements, the
fence, freedom of movement and an end to
extrajudicial killings. The United Kingdom, for its part,
stands ready to help in that process.

