Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me to make
this statement on behalf of the three African States
members of the Security Council, namely, Angola,
Chad and Nigeria. The African group also associates
itself with the contents of the present resolution and
vote.

Let me begin by acknowledging the efforts
deployed by the Lithuanian presidency and by you,
Madam President, with a View to reaching consensus on
this critical resolution. We note the advancements the
resolution provides by focusing on the human cost of
small arms. This morning, you, Madam, emphatically
referred to that focus, particularly with regard to
civilians, women and children; on the devastating
impact on development, education and health; and on
conflict prevention and avoiding relapse into conflict.
We also note the advancement in positioning the United
Nations to better support arms embargoes and other
international obligations, such as Security Council
support for the Arms Trade Treaty.

Although, in our view, this resolution should,
above all, contribute to bringing about a lasting
solution to the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons - namely, to theatres of instability and
conflict, including a halt to the supply of those weapons
to non-State actors - unfortunately, our proposals and
concerns regarding the issue of proliferation and access
to small arms and light weapons to non-State actors
were not sufficiently considered in the resolution.
Together with other members of the Council, we made
considerable efforts to address this daunting challenge
to the African continent, namely, the indiscriminate
supply and illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, which are fuelling the
spread of several conflicts in Africa and the world.

Eleven years ago, by adopting resolution 1540
(2004), the Council clearly defined the concept of
non-State actors in a particular context. Currently,
our main concern relates to non-State actors to whom
small arms and light weapons are supplied to fuel
conflicts, destabilize countries and promote policies
of regime-change, with the tragic consequences we
are witnessing today where despicable crimes against
humanity are committed.

As a country that has gone through a very painful
experience, it would be politically unacceptable not
to seize the opportunity that the discussion of this
resolution provides to address the problem of the
supply of weapons to non-State actors. Our position of
non-support of the resolution is based on the assumption
that the illicit supply of weapons to non-State actors
amounts to a threat to international peace and security,
which the Council must consistently address. Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab; militias in Libya, Syria
and Iraq; insurgents in Mali, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and other countries; and the non-State actors to
whom large amounts of weapons have been supplied,
which are out of control, are the main promoters of
terrorism, instability and armed conflict in many parts
of the world.

In the search for a compromise during the
negotiation of the resolution, we accepted a definition
mentioning non-State actors as terrorists, armed groups
and criminal networks. Additionally, we proposed to
explicitly mention in the resolution the exemption of
armed private contractors and others similarly engaged
in carrying out security missions. Unfortunately, all
these efforts were to no avail.

Finally, Madam President, we remain engaged with
you and other members of the Council with regard to
the adoption of a resolution that would deal with the
problem of the spread of small arms and light weapons,
and would not leave such an important question
unresolved for the future.

