Ms. Lee (Singapore): We thank Mr. He'di Annabi
for introducing the interim report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), which
Singapore fully supports. His further updates on the
situation in East Timor were also very helpful. We
warmly welcome Mr. Xanana Gusmao to the Security
Council, and we are also pleased to see Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta in this Chamber again. Having tasked
UNTAET with progressively delegating further
authority to the East Timorese people, it is appropriate
that the Security Council increasingly hears directly
from East Timorese leaders as a clear demonstration of
the Council's commitment to the Timorization efforts.
Their appraisal of how UNTAET is performing will be
an important reality check on whether the United
Nations is moving on the right track. More importantly,
their vision for the future of East Timor will be
instrumental in shaping Security Council deliberations
on the post-independence phase, providing a valuable
input for the next report, on which the integrated
mission task force for East Timor at United Nations
Headquarters and the working group in Dili are no
doubt working hard.

The people of East Timor must now harness the
determination that carried them through the long years
of struggle as they make the transition to
independence. They must now apply their stamina to
the long-term goal of making East Timor a viable and
sustainable country. Rowing a small boat in rough seas
requires unity of purpose and direction and the
collective strength and determination of each and every
East Timorese. Reconciliation among all East Timorese
is therefore important. A tolerant and cohesive East
Timorese society and a reinvigorated East Timorese
national identity would also encourage the much-
needed East Timorese diaspora to return to East Timor
and contribute to its independence efforts.

Singapore completely agrees with the Secretary-
General's conclusion, in paragraph 33 of the report
(S/2001/436), favouring

"a prudent approach, which seeks to safeguard
the international community's considerable
investment in East Timor's future."

A stable and lasting foundation for East Timor
cannot be built overnight. UNTAET, with the support
of the international community, has made significant
progress in important areas in East Timor. We should
concentrate our efforts on consolidating and advancing
the gains made by UNTAET and focus on helping East
Timor to safely set sail on its own.

As the United Nations begins the process of
thinking through its future role in East Timor, it is
crucial that we bear in mind the broader political
context and security implications that East Timor has
for the region. East Timor's future is intimately and
inextricably intertwined with that of Indonesia, its
closest neighbour. Both countries are undergoing
painful transitions and adjustments, and how they
eventually fare will have an important and far-reaching
bearing on the region. Special care must be taken to
support - not jeopardize - the development of sound
and lasting democratic institutions in both countries.
We strongly believe that the United Nations and
the international community have an important
responsibility and obligation to remain engaged in East
Timor to help maintain peace as well as rehabilitate the
country. Indeed, much of what UNTAET has achieved
would not have been possible without the resources and
political support provided by the United Nations and
the international community. The exit of the United
Nations should be neither precipitate nor based on
unrealistic time-frames. Instead, it should be predicated
on key objectives or benchmarks relating to what we
hope to achieve in East Timor, all of which must
contribute to laying a firm foundation for a stable and
viable independent East Timor. In this regard, we look
forward to the July report of the Secretary-General that
will deal with this issue.

Until then, the continuing militia and refugee
problem, and the domestic violence, which might
heighten in the lead-up to the elections, clearly show
the need for a continued strong United Nations
peacekeeping presence in East Timor. At a recent
informal meeting of countries contributing troops to
UNTAET, some of us heard about how the
peacekeeping force is helping to provide internal
security in East Timor in cooperation with the civilian
police component. It is certainly true that a strong and
visible peacekeeping presence plays an important
pre-emptive and preventive role in maintaining
stability in the territory. In addition, we believe that a
stable and secure environment is essential to improve
the investment climate in East Timor. By sending
positive signals to international investors, we would be
helping to bolster the economic development of East
Timor, thus contributing to its long-term viability,
which would eventually reduce its dependence on
international assistance.

The refugees of East Timorese origin still
remaining in West Timor is an important outstanding
issue which should be resolved urgently. We therefore
note with great interest Indonesia's efforts in preparing
for the registration exercise currently scheduled for 6
June this year. That would be an important first step
towards helping these refugees. This is not just a
simple technical affair, but one involving many delicate
issues. As such, we believe that that the United Nations
should also be involved in all aspects of the exercise.
Singapore had hoped that the United Nations Security
Coordinator could have dispatched the inter-agency
security assessment mission to West Timor sooner. It
could potentially have paved the way for a larger
United Nations field presence to help facilitate the
registration process, followed by the resettlement or
repatriation exercises.

We are aware of and fully understand the
disappointment and indignation that have been
expressed by others with regard to the sentences that
have been handed down in connection with the killing
last year of three staff members of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Singapore has always been a strong advocate for the
safety and protection of United Nations and associated
personnel. The brutal killing of unarmed United
Nations personnel cannot go unpunished. However, we
believe that Indonesia's judicial process should be
allowed to run its course. In this regard, we are also
heartened by the decision of the Indonesian prosecution
to appeal the sentences. We are confident that
Indonesia understands both the seriousness that the
international community accords to this matter and the
importance of dealing with it in a credible way that is
commensurate with its scope. In this light, we also
welcome the first steps that have been taken against
suspects accused of crimes against humanity and other
serious crimes committed during the violence in 1999,
including the establishment of an ad hoc tribunal to
deal with post-ballot violence. We hope that further
concrete steps will be taken by Indonesia, including
working closely with UNTAET, to bring those
responsible to justice.

Ultimately, the success of East Timor depends on
the East Timorese themselves. Up to this point, the
determination and commitment displayed by the East
Timorese people have been reassuring and have given
much cause for hope. If I may develop the maritime
analogy that I used at the beginning of my statement,
the international community is helping East Timor to
prepare for the next phase of its sea journey. External
elements, like weather conditions, are clearly beyond
our control; they are difficult for us to predict.
However, we have the capacity to take steps that help
enhance the seaworthiness of the East Timorese vessel,
and we must do so. These include putting up the mast,
repairing the hull and providing the crew with
navigational and other necessary skills to steer the
vessel. If we succeed, we will help launch the flagship
ofa true United Nations success story.

