We would like to welcome the initiative of the German presidency to convene this high-level debate, and to thank it for the concept note (S/2020/571, annex) that invites us to reflect on the importance of strengthening the integration of the human rights perspective into peace operations as a fundamental way of ensuring the protection of civilians in conflict zones. We particularly welcome the presence of the German Federal Minister of Defence and the lucid presentations of the speakers. Peacekeeping is a process that is constantly adapting to the way in which conflicts develop. In recent decades, we have witnessed and participated in major changes in the international system, which have brought about greater complexity in matters of peace and security. That has required the United Nations to rethink the way it organizes peacekeeping operations. In this evolutionary process, Peru strongly supports efforts to strengthen the role of peace operations in the defence, promotion and protection of human rights in the various scenarios in which they operate. I would like to highlight some elements that could help in that regard. First, with regard to interaction with civil society, we consider it essential to bring contingents closer to local communities and civil society organizations in order to understand their needs in detail and to cultivate a relationship of trust. Only a close link with the population will allow a more comprehensive knowledge of potential or actual situations of human rights violations in conflict contexts. Secondly, we must emphasize the importance of preventive approaches by strengthening the analytical capacities of operations. To that end, it may be particularly useful to hold periodic informal meetings within the Council to learn about and examine in greater depth, from a regional and rotational perspective, possible scenarios of human rights violations. Thirdly, we stress the importance of training. Respect for and the promotion of, human rights is a cross-cutting issue in all mandates, and Peru believes that it should be considered in all field missions when it comes to policy, guidance and training of civilian and military personnel. It is crucial that contributing countries provide specialized training to contingents that are ready to be deployed in the areas of international humanitarian law, promotion of the rule of law, human rights and sexual violence, in line with the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy. Similarly, troop-contributing countries must have up-to-date and accurate information on the expectations, challenges and specific requirements of a given operation. Fourthly, we also believe that it is essential to create oversight and accountability mechanisms that will make it possible to duly investigate and punish those responsible for violations in this area. Impunity only exacerbates conflict and contributes to the normalization of contempt for human rights. Fifthly, we underscore the importance of women. We would like to emphasize that the necessary interaction with the civilian population and the promotion of preventive and inclusive approaches make greater participation by women personnel in peace operations indispensable. Peru has been increasing the presence of women in the seven missions in which we participate, which today represent about 20 per cent of the personnel deployed in the field. We continue to work to make further progress in that area. In conclusion, I reaffirm our commitment to United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as our willingness to continue contributing troops that are duly trained, disciplined, respectful of the populations of the countries that host them and committed to the promotion and protection of human rights.
