Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Anny Tenga Modi,
Executive Director of Afia Mama, for their informative
briefings this morning. I will focus my intervention
on four issues: human rights; the political situation;
the humanitarian situation; and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

Helping survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence is a priority of the United Kingdom in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome
the opportunity to hear from Ms. Tenga Modi this
morning, whose non-governmental organization does
vital work to empower women, particularly those who
are survivors of violence.

In that context, I would like to very briefly raise
a project that United Kingdom aid has funded in
15 villages in the Ituri region, which is working to
challenge the social acceptance of violence against
women and girls. Over just two years the percentage of
women experiencing domestic violence fell from 69 per
cent to 29 per cent and the percentage of men reporting
that they had carried out domestic violence dropped
from 68 per cent to 24 per cent in the same period. Those
results show that sexual and gender-based violence can
be tackled effectively, even in conflict-related settings.
The United Kingdom remains concerned that rape,
including mass rape, continues to be used as a weapon
of war by armed groups and State actors. The United
Kingdom condemns all acts of sexual and gender-based
violence, including conflict-related sexual violence. We
call on the new Government to deliver on its promises to
bring perpetrators of sexual and gender-based violence
and other human rights abuses to justice.

This morning several other delegations have
raised the situation in Yumbi. The United Kingdom is
deeply concerned about the violence that took place in
Yumbi territory in December 2018. The latest report
of the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo indicates that
as many as 890 people were killed and thousands
more displaced. We echo the comments made by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Michelle Bachelet. We condemn all such violence and
call for the perpetrators of those abhorrent crimes
to be brought to justice swiftly. Our Embassy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has raised our
concerns with the Government authorities in the region
and with local United Nations representatives.

The United Kingdom remains concerned over the
reported discrepancies in the official results for the
presidential, parliamentary and provincial elections.
Continued efforts for increased transparency and
inclusive dialogue with all political parties remain vital
as the electoral process in Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues towards local elections in late 2019
and 2020.

The Congolese people clearly voted for change.
The United Kingdom will engage with President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi and his team to understand
their plans for improving stability and prosperity in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A stable and
prosperous Democratic Republic of the Congo is vital
for the Congolese people, the region and the rest of the
international community.

Turning to the Ebola outbreak, the United Kingdom
commends the response to date, particularly given the
challenging environment in which humanitarian and
medical workers are operating. We deplore the recent
attacks on Ebola treatment centres and those responding
to the outbreak. We once again strongly urge all parties
to the armed conflict to fully respect international law
and to full, safe, immediate and unhindered access for
humanitarian and medical personnel. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo just set out its
Ebola response plan until the end of July. It is crucial
that the international community steps up to support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and cure the
outbreak as quickly as possible. The United Kingdom is
making significant contributions to that plan and urges
others to do the same.

Finally, as we approach the renewal of the
MONUSCO mandate, the United Kingdom agrees
that now is the time for the Mission to refocus on an
exit strategy. It is incumbent upon all of us to ensure
a responsible and sustainable exit of MONUSCO.
Therefore, a fully consultative strategic review of the
Mission will need to be undertaken before the Council
makes a decision on the shape of MONUSCO's exit.

