Mr. Baja (Philippines): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open meeting to discuss the report
of the Secretary General (S/2004/888) on
developments in Timor-Leste. I also wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hasegawa, for his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General and its recommendations.

My delegation commends the continuing and
sustained efforts of the Government of Timor-Leste to
take on greater responsibility in the preservation and
maintenance of peace and security there. The
Government has been taking steps to resolve the
veterans issue and to curb the recent upsurge of violent
incidents between martial arts groups. That has
allowed the Timor-Leste Government, together with
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and the funds, programmes and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and
other development partners, to address the multifaceted
challenges associated with its nation-building and
institution-building processes during the transition
period.

Concrete achievements have been realized. To us,
the most important is the fact that Timor-Leste is
continuing to nurture its relations with its neighbours.

A number of important bills have been presented
to the National Parliament. The holding of local
elections before July 2005 appears to be a realizable
goal, the recruitment of Timorese counterparts to
certain key posts has been improving, and the
development of the national police and the Timorese
defence force is progressing. Furthermore, the Timor-
Leste economy is starting to show signs of recovery,
with inflation moderated and real gross domestic
product projected to post a 1 per cent increase in 2004.

Notwithstanding that modest progress, my
delegation notes the Secretary-General's caution that
much remains to be done in key areas, from good
governance and institution- building to security-sector
reform. He also noted what he described as a striking
17.4 per cent increase in the total population, with the
population of Dili district growing by 39.3 per cent in
three years, indicating a dramatic rate of urbanization
that will pose many challenges for the Government, not
only in providing basic social services but also in
ensuring peace and order in the city.

As Germany has pointed out, continued
international assistance to Timor-Leste is needed,
particularly after UNMISET leaves. Bilateral or
multilateral assistance should be identified early on to
ensure a seamless transition as part of UNMISET's exit
strategy. The Secretary-General's report cited such
specific areas as the development of the Timorese
public administration; institutional capacity- building
in certain areas; and further training, infrastructure,
equipment and logistical support for the law
enforcement and security agencies of Timor-Leste.

Taking into account the Secretary-General's
conclusion, given all recent developments and the
findings of the recent technical assessment mission that
Timor-Leste had not yet reached the critical threshold
of self-sufficiency, my delegation supports his
recommendation to retain UNMISET with its current
tasks, configuration and size for a further six-month
period, to allow for a completion and consolidation
phase and to map out an exit strategy for UNMISET.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
creation by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Hasegawa, of eight working
groups to assist in the timely identification of activities
for the transition period from the peacekeeping and
peace-building operation of UNMISET to institution-
building and sustainable developmental assistance.
However, the report does not specifically indicate what
those areas are. My delegation believes that it would be
useful if participants in this open meeting could be
informed as to which areas are covered by these eight
working groups.

We also welcome the early scheduling of the
donors' conference in March, given its potential
contribution to a smoother transition with respect to the
forthcoming bilateral and multilateral partners of
Timor-Leste.

Finally, my delegation notes the Secretary-
General's call for the full cooperation of Member
States to ensure that the perpetrators of the serious
crimes committed in 1999 in East Timor be brought to
justice. My delegation believes that this should be done
in the most practical, appropriate and effective manner,
taking into consideration the views, sensitivities and
cooperation of the parties concerned.

