Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me start
by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/133) and his statement this morning. We
welcome back to the Council Special Representative
Jan Kubis. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his contribution to today's debate, as well
as to thank Foreign Minister Carr and the delegation
of Australia for their leadership in the Council on the
issue before us.

The United Kingdom welcomes today's adoption of
resolution 2096 (2013), which renews the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for a further 12 months. Let me take this
opportunity to note the continued leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the hard work of his staff throughout the past year.

I would like to focus my comments today on four
areas, namely, the transition of security responsibility
to the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), the
progress on, and prospects for, peace and reconciliation,
the preparations for elections in 2014, and, more broadly,
the international community's long-term commitment
to Afghanistan.

Turning first to the security transition to the
Afghan National Security Forces, let me pay tribute to
all the women and men of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) mission in Afghanistan and
to the members of the Afghan National Security Forces
who work alongside them. They continue to carry out
their duties with great professionalism and courage.
The United Kingdom is grateful for their outstanding
contribution to the peace and security of Afghanistan.

ISAF has continued to transition security to the
ANSF on schedule. This year, with the announcement
of the fifth tranche, the ANSF will take the leading
responsibility for the security of the whole Afghan
population, approximately 27 million people. As the
ANSF continues to grow in confidence and operational
experience, so will the confidence that the Afghan
population has in them grow. We remain convinced
that they will be ready, willing and able to effectively
manage Afghanistan's security after 2014, and to tackle
any residual insurgent threat. They will have the full
support of the United Kingdom and of the international
community in doing so.

But tackling security concerns is only part of the
picture. Tangible and lasting progress on peace and
reconciliation must go hand in hand with that. In recent
months, we have seen strong consensus emerge that
a broad, inclusive political settlement offers the best
prospect for peace and stability in Afghanistan.

We particularly welcome the efforts of Afghanistan
and Pakistan to strengthen their relationship and their
common understanding of the Afghan peace and
reconciliation process. In February, the leaders of
both countries agreed to increase cooperation between
military and intelligence establishments, to strengthen
coordination on Taliban prisoner releases from
Pakistani detention, and to support the opening of an
office in Doha for the purpose of peaceful negotiations
between the Afghan High Peace Council and authorized
representatives of the Taliban. That sends a clear
message to the Taliban: now is the time to participate in
a peaceful political process.

Another pillar in a sustainable peace will be credible
elections that reflect the will of the Afghan people.
Afghan-led preparations for presidential and provincial
council elections in 2014 have started, and decisions
have been taken on issues such as voter registration.
The time is short, and the Afghan parliament should
now prioritize consideration of electoral reforms.
It is also important that the Independent Election
Commission and Afghan authorities work to establish
credible mechanisms to deal with complaints and to
prevent fraud.

I have on many occasions emphasized the United
Kingdom's long-term commitment to the Afghan
people. Let me do so again. The United Kingdom will
deliver on all our commitments to Afghanistan, now
and beyond 2014. The United Kingdom's support for
Afghanistan will be defined by more than just security.
We will pursue a relationship built on prosperity,
diplomacy and development, as set out in the enduring
strategic partnership document signed in 2012.

The Afghan Government, with the support of the
international community, should continue to make
further progress in the areas that underpin sustained
economic growth and development. Those include,
in particular, areas such as education, health and
other basic services for women and girls, as well as
strengthened respect for human rights so that all can
play a full part in the collective life of a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.

Mutual accountability is of paramount importance
in order to achieve our shared objectives. The United
Kingdom attaches great importance to that and will
seek to play a major role in supporting our shared
responsibilities, holding each other to account for
the promises that we have made. We look forward to
co-chairing the first ministerial review of progress
against the Tokyo commitments in 2014.

As Afghanistan moves from transition into the
transformation decade, we are focused on the great
opportunities and challenges that lie ahead. A stable,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan is in all our
interests, and it is nothing less than that the Afghan
people deserve.

