Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
All me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this debate. I also thank Mr. Robert Serry,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the general situation in the region.
I also welcome Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Palestine, and Ambassador Ron Prosor of
Israel.

More than six decades after the creation of our
Organization and the establishment of the State of
Israel, the members of the Security Council are called
upon once again to review their collective conscience
concerning peace in the Middle East. Obviously,
Rwanda is concerned over the political status quo in
Israel and Palestine, and over the deteriorating security
and humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank.

Like the African Union, Rwanda reiterates that only
a political, two-State solution is Viable for those two
nations. It will require the creation of an independent
and sovereign Palestinian State living side by side in
peace and security with the State of Israel. In that regard,
Rwanda is deeply concerned over various statements
issued by the Israeli Government following the vote
by the General Assembly on 29 November, according
Palestinian the status of observer State to the United
Nations. These statements include announcements of
the construction of more than 7,000 new housing units
in the West Bank, including 3,000 in the E-l area of
East Jerusalem.

Not only is this settlement policy a violation of
international law, in particular the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, but it will also and above all
divide the West Bank and make unviable the Palestinian
State we all wish to see. Moreover, Rwanda calls on
Israel to end all witholding of Palestinian tax revenues,
which has already exacerbated an already critical
humanitarian situation.

Nevertheless, Rwanda believes that the security
of Israel and its people is critical to finding a political
solution. In that respect, we condemn rocket fire and
terrorist attacks on Israeli territory, as well as any
disproportionate and indiscriminate response against
the people of Gaza. We hope that the ceasefire achieved
in Gaza thanks to the actions of Egyptian President
Morsy will endure. We condemn any rhetoric from the
Hamas leadership negating the very existence of Israel
and calling for its destruction.

Rwanda firmly supports the Palestinian Authority,
under President Abbas, and calls for the unity and
reconciliation of the Palestinian people and its leaders.
Rwanda supports Egypts efforts to that end. Such
reconciliation is a prerequisite for political consistency
in upholding Palestinian interests. Nevertheless, any
reconciliation among Palestinian leaders must go
hand in hand with an unequivocal renunciation of
terrorism on the part of certain Hamas leaders and their
irreversible recognition of Israel's right to exist.

Our country reiterates that only direct politial
dialogue between Israel and the Palestinian Authority
will lead to a lasting solution to the conflict. We hope
that, following yesterday's elections in Israel, contact
will resume between the two parties. In that regard,
while strongly committed to the right of peoples to
self-determination, Rwanda recalls that there is no
shortcut to peace. Regrettably, history has taught that
any unilateral activity can only exacerbate an already
tenuous situation. On the other hand, we support the
Quartet's mediation efforts, although we regret the
current diplomatic stalemate. We therefore call on the
Quartet and other countries that have influence on the
two parties to the conflict to redouble their efforts to
devise new initiatives for peace in the Middle East.
Allow me to say a few words on the conflict in
Syria. Rwanda condemns the violence in that country,
which has led to more than 60,000 deaths in 22 months,
according to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We recall that the responsibility
to protect in Syria is borne primarily by the Syrian
Government, whose army, according to many reports, is
guilty of crimes ofwar and crimes against humanity. We
also condemn the crimes committed by the opposition,
including attacks committed by terrorist groups.

As with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we believe
that a resolution to the Syrian conflict requires open
and direct political dialogue. As Gandhi said, strength
does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an
indomitable will. We therefore call on all Syrian parties
to demonstrate their strength and will by engaging in
political dialogue, which is the only way to end the
suffering of the Syrian people. In that regard, Rwanda
pays tribute to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, for his untiring efforts on behalf of peace
in Syria. We also believe that any political solution
must be based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) and ensure that justice is served to the Syrian
people. We nevertheless reiterate our belief that Syrians
must be masters of their own destiny and that any
foreign intervention, be it may military, political or
legal, can only complicate an already difficult peace
process.

In conclusion, it is clear that the status quo in the
Middle East will have devastating consequences not
only for the region, but also for the world as a whole.
We recall that the current situation has for some time
now empowered Islamic terrorism and promoted the
spread of weapons of mass destruction. We therefore
call on everyone to shoulder their responsibilities.

