The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now proceed to the election of five
members of the International Court of Justice, in
accordance with Article 13 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, to fill the five seats
which will become vacant on 5 February 2009 on the
expiry of the terms of office of the following Judges:
Judge Ronny Abraham (France), Judge Awn Shawkat
Al-Khasawneh (Jordan), Judge Rosalyn Higgins
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Judge Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) and Judge Raymond Ranjeva
(Madagascar).

The list of candidates indicating the national
groups by which each candidate was nominated is
contained in documents S/2008/503 and Add.l and
Add.2. In that connection, I should like to draw the
attention of members to the note by the Secretary-
General contained in document S/2008/503/Add.2, in
which he reports that the national group of Colombia
decided to withdraw its nomination of Mr. Rafael Nieto
Navia as a candidate. Since Mr. Nieto Navia was
nominated only by the national group of Colombia, his
name is not included on the ballot papers.

I should like to inform the members of the
Council that I have received a letter addressed to me by
the Legal Counsel, dated 4 November 2008, informing
me, on behalf of the Secretary-General, that after the
established deadline for the filing of nominations,
namely 30 June 2008, several national groups
submitted nominations to the Secretariat. I should like
to draw members' attention to the fact that all such
additional nominations relate to candidates already
nominated by other national groups, whose names
therefore already appear in documents S/2008/503 and
Add] and Add.2. The Legal Counsel recommended
that, in accordance with established practice, I inform
Council members orally on the day of the election
about the decisions of the aforementioned national
groups. I am also informed that the Legal Counsel
2
made a similar recommendation to the President of the
General Assembly.

The nominations of the aforementioned national
groups are as follows: for Mr. Ronny Abraham, Italy,
the Russian Federation and Uruguay; for Mr. Awn
Shawkat Al-Khasawneh, Italy, Paraguay and Uruguay;
for Mr. Antonio Augusto Cangado Trindade, Chile,
El Salvador, Paraguay, Spain and Uruguay; for
Mr. Christopher Greenwood, Italy and the Russian
Federation; and for Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, Italy
and Uruguay.

The Security Council has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2008/502, describing the present
composition of the Court and setting out the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.

If, in the first ballot, the number of candidates
obtaining an absolute majority is less than five, then
pursuant to rule 61 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, the Council will
proceed to a second ballot on the remaining vacancies.
Balloting will continue in the same manner until five
candidates have obtained the required majority of
votes.

If, on the other hand, more than five candidates
obtain the required majority, according to established
practice and as set forth in paragraph 13 of the
Secretary-General's memorandum, a new vote will be
held on all the candidates. That rule will also apply to
any subsequent ballots if the number of candidates
obtaining the absolute majority is greater than the
number of vacancies remaining.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot containing the names of all the
candidates. No candidacy withdrawal will be accepted
once the ballot papers have been distributed. However,
08-59012
it will be possible to withdraw a candidacy between
ballots.

Members of the Council will be requested to
place an "X" in the boxes next to the names of the
candidates for whom they wish to vote. Only those
candidates whose names appear on the ballot are
eligible for election.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 10
of the Secretary-General's memorandum (S/2008/502),
which specifies that "Each elector may vote for not
more than five candidates on the first ballot". Any
ballot paper containing votes for more than five names
will be considered invalid.

I should like to inform Council members that, in
accordance with established practice, the ballot papers
in the Security Council will not be counted until it has
been verified that the ballot papers in the General
Assembly have also been collected. The Council will
remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.

Only when five candidates have obtained the
required majority of votes in the Security Council shall
I communicate the result to the President of the
General Assembly. I shall request the Council to
remain in session, pending the receipt from the
President of the General Assembly of the result of the
voting in the Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations to serve as tellers.

The delegations of France and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland will
not be considered to serve as tellers because candidates
of those two nationalities have been nominated.
Because my delegation this month occupies the
Council presidency, it will also be excluded from
serving as a teller.

In this box are the names of the 12 other
delegations that can serve as tellers. I will now draw
two.

The delegations of China and Belgium have been
chosen. I invite those delegations to appoint one of
their members to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zhou Yong
(China) and Mr. Van Kemseke (Belgium) acted as
tellers.

08-590] 2
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that the Council is now ready to proceed with the
election of five members of the International Court of
Justice?

It is so decided.

We will now take a brief pause to inform the
President of the General Assembly that the Council is
ready to vote.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
told that in the General Assembly ballot papers have
already been distributed. I request the conference
officer to distribute ballot papers in the Security
Council.

I remind members to place an "X" in the boxes
next to the names of the five candidates for whom they
wish to vote.

>l<*>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): I take it that
all the members of the Council have now voted. I ask
the conference officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): All the ballot
papers have been collected. I should like to remind the
Council that, in accordance with the established
practice, the ballots will not be counted until it has
been verified that the ballot papers in the General
Assembly have also been collected. The Council will
remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
informed that the ballot papers have been collected in
the General Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. I would like to remind Council
members that, in accordance with the established
practice, I must wait for the counting to be finished in
the General Assembly before I announce the results of
the voting in the Security Council.

The tellers will be counting the ballots. As agreed
in our consultations, there will be two independent
countings of the ballots.
I understand as well that the President of the
General Assembly has proposed that the Assembly
suspend its meeting until 11.30 am, when it will
resume. I propose that, with the consent of the
members of the Council, we do the same, and that we
return here in 45 minutes, at 11.30 am.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The meeting was suspended at 10.50 am. and
resumed at 11.40 am.


The President (spoke in Spanish): Given that the
procedure that governs the election presumes that the
results of the votes will be announced in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council at the same time,
we are waiting for the Assembly to confirm to us that
they are also ready to read out the results.

It is a matter of just one or two minutes, and I
would ask members to be patient.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
inform the Council that five candidates obtained an
absolute majority in its first vote. The result of the
voting in the Security Council is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Ronny Abraham 13
Mr. Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh 13
Mr. Sayeman Bula-Bula 1
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade 14
Ms. Miriam Defensor-Santiago 5
Mr. Christopher Greenwood 15
Mr. Maurice Kamto 6
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf 8

Accordingly, the five candidates who obtained
the required majority of votes in the Security Council
are Mr. Ronny Abraham, Mr. Awn Shawkat
Al-Khasawneh, Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade,
Mr. Christopher Greenwood and Mr. Abdulqawi
Ahmed Yusuf. I have communicated the result of the
voting to the President of the General Assembly in
writing.

I wish to inform the Council that I have just
received from the President of the General Assembly
the following letter:

"I am writing to inform you that at the 39th
plenary meeting of the General Assembly, which
was held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following five candidates received an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Mr. Ronny Abraham, Mr. Awn Shawkat
Al-Khasawneh, Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado
Trindade, Ms. Miriam Defensor-Santiago and
Mr. Christopher Greenwood."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on four candidates, the jurists
Mr. Ronny Abraham, Mr. Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh,
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade and
Mr. Christopher Greenwood have been elected to the
International Court of Justice for a period of nine
years, beginning on 6 February 2009. I should like to
congratulate them warmly and to wish them every
success in the high office to which they have been
elected.

As a result of the voting that has taken place in
the Security Council and in the General Assembly, four
members of the Court have been duly elected. In
accordance with Article 11 of the Statute of the Court,
the Council will now proceed to hold a second meeting
to elect a candidate by further ballots for the seat
remaining to be filled. Accordingly, I shall adjourn this
meeting, and call to order the second meeting to elect a
candidate by further ballot, after a brief recess to allow
for the preparation of new ballots.

The meeting was adjourned at 12.05 pm.
08-59012

