Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I
should like, on behalf of my Government, to express
our condemnation of the suicide bombing that took
place earlier today in Hadera, Israel. I should like also
to take this opportunity to express our deep
condolences to the representative of Israel as well as to
the families of the victims of this horrific act of
terrorism.

We appreciate the regular updates given by the
Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), who
briefed us this morning. We appreciate also the
opportunity to contribute to the discussion in the
Council.

At the most recent open briefing, we referred to a
request made by Liechtenstein to the Taliban and
Al-Qaida sanctions Committee that the list of States
having made notifications regarding humanitarian
exemptions in accordance with resolution 1452 (2002)
be made accessible to all Member States. That
exemption regime is a very important feature of the
sanctions mechanism which facilitates national
implementation of sanctions measures in accordance
with applicable constitutional and international human
rights standards.

Since the Committee must be involved in every
single case of humanitarian exemption under resolution
1452 (2002), the ability of States to apply that regime
would greatly benefit from increased transparency in
its handling by the Committee. We would thus find it
desirable for the Security Council to grant interested
States access to all Committee decisions on that matter
in order to better understand the Committee's practice.
This would help them to assess the chances of success
of potential applications from listed persons or entities
residing in their territories.

Far from full disclosure of Committee practice,
however, we simply requested that the list of States
whose notifications under the humanitarian exemption
regime were received favourably by the Committee be
made accessible to interested States. That would have
enabled us to contact those States bilaterally and to
discuss their experience with them directly. We noted
with regret - and reference was also made to this fact
by the Chairperson of the sanctions Committee this
morning - that the Committee, after deliberating the
topic for many weeks, decided not to make the list
available, and also that no explanation was offered for
that decision. We have sent a written reply to the
Committee and understand that the letter will be
circulated as an official document of the Security
Council.

Since the last briefing, the third report of the
Monitoring Team supporting the 1267 Committee has
been released to States that are not members of the
Council. We would like to thank Mr. Richard Barrett
and his experts for their thorough analysis and
recommendations, some of which have already been
taken into account by the Council in resolution 1617
(2005). We appreciate the progress made in the
strengthening of the sanctions regime but remain
concerned that the strengthening of procedural
safeguards for individuals and entities affected by
sanctions is not yet keeping pace. Both the Monitoring
Team's report and the resolution point to the need to
continue to work on improving listing and delisting
procedures. That was also confirmed by the world
summit, which mandated the Council to ensure that fair
and clear procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them, as
well as for granting humanitarian exemptions. It is our
understanding that the term "fair" entails ensuring that
those affected by sanctions enjoy real rights and have
access to appeals procedures which come close to
standards of criminal justice. This is required by the
severity of the sanctions measures, which include
restrictions on freedom of movement and the
quasi-permanent and uncapped freezing of funds.

Such procedural improvements have,
furthermore, become more relevant since the Council,
in its resolution 1617 (2005), adopted a broad
understanding of the term "associated with" Al-Qaida,
Usama bin Laden or the Taliban which does not require
knowledge on the part of the person or entity
concerned. We are confident that Council members will
continue to work hard on these matters, and we stand
ready to make our contribution.

Efforts to strengthen the sanctions regime and its
procedures must be seen in the context of the bigger
picture of global cooperation to fight terrorism. We
must place equal emphasis on the different aspects of
that endeavour, as reflected in the various elements of
the Secretary-General's proposal for a global counter-
terrorist strategy. We are confident that such a strategy
will be helpful in promoting a holistic and coordinated
approach to the fight against terrorism.
In that respect, we welcome in particular the
initiative to streamline the work of the Security
Council and its respective Committees and are
encouraged by positive developments in the work
undertaken in the General Assembly to conclude
negotiations on a comprehensive convention on
terrorism. We will continue to do our utmost to
contribute to the success of those efforts.

