Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open
debate on threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. Today, terrorism is a global
phenomenon that no country or society can remain
immune or indifferent to. According to authoritative
accounts, 2,850 people have lost their lives, and nearly
4,000 more have been injured, in terrorist-related
violence in 38 countries during the first three months
of this year alone. In effect, terrorism is extracting a
deadly price. We therefore welcome your initiative in
holding this debate as one step in a global approach to
a collective challenge.

While the international community has made
progress in evolving a rule-based order for managing
many aspects of globalization, it still has some way
to go in addressing evolving security threats such as
terrorism. Today terrorists are globally networked.
They have expanded their footprint and mutated
into hydra-headed monsters. Alas, the international
community's counter-terrorism efforts are still in an
embryonic form.

The United Nations is uniquely placed to provide
the platform necessary for real cooperation and
coordination in our common fight against terrorism.
Such cooperation should include establishing standards
and making rules as well as formulating practical and
specific ways to counter terrorism. That is why we feel
that the actions of the Security Council alone, however
effective they may be in responding to identified
threats, cannot provide a sufficient response to the
global scourge of terror.

To put the counter-terror efforts that many
Governments now undertake in a broader normative
construct, the adoption of a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism is an imperative. It would
put in place a framework that enables local action to
fit with global norms. It would generate coherence in
national responses against what is a challenge to all
of us collectively. Even as we work to advance the
prospects of a normative framework in the form of a
comprehensive convention, there are several other steps
that can be taken to delegitimize terrorism.
First, we agree with the proposition in the
concept note (S/2016/306, annex) that all terrorist
acts are criminal, no matter whenever, wherever or
by whomsoever they are committed. The world today
does not accept any cause as justification for terrorism.
Every outcome document referring to terrorism
therefore needs to reinforce this approach. Statements
of solidarity when attacks happen and expressions of
policy independent of happenings have a value that is
often underestimated.

Secondly, frameworks such as the Financial
Action Task Force, which sets standards with respect
to combating money laundering and terrorist financing
or the Egmont Group, which is an informal network of
financial intelligence units, are important elements in
degrading and defeating terrorist organizations.

Thirdly, we need to effectively control upstream and
downstream activities associated with terrorism and
also address the ecosystem that spawns terrorism. We
therefore support the formulation of a legal framework
to criminalize foreign terrorist fighters.

Fourthly, in terms of tangible support, the Security
Council's sanctions committees need to foster greater
responsiveness to Member States' requests for
preventive listings to counter terror. They also need
to follow up complaints against violations by listed
individuals and entities more vigorously.

Fifthly, the procedures of unanimity and
anonymity of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), need
to be revisited. Currently, they result in a lack of
accountability under the cloak and garb of unanimity
and anonymity. Each of the 15 members now has a veto
and none except these 15 members is told which it is
that has wielded the veto in a specific instance. The
general membership of the United Nations is never,
ever formally informed of how and why requests for
listing terrorists are not acceded to. Counter-terror
mechanisms such as the sanctions committees, which
act on behalf of the international community, need to
build trust, not engender impunity by the use of this
form of a hidden veto.

I hope that deliberations of this debate will feed
in positively to the ongoing consolidation of the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and the upcoming discussions on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Although we have
made progress on some fronts, forging a broad-based
consensus on an issue like countering terrorism is a test
we have yet to pass at the United Nations. Yet, it is also
a test that none of us can afford to fail.

