Ms. Grau: | thank the Security Council for the invitation to brief it on our efforts to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The work of the Trilateral Contact Group has intensified in recent months. The summit of the Normandy Four leaders held in Paris on 9 December acknowledged that new dynamism. The common agreed conclusions of the summit presented a list of follow-up measures and injected additional energy into the process. The Normandy Four leaders have agreed to meet again within four months. Let me first speak about the security situation. Council members may have seen the joint statement issued today by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Edi Rama, and OSCE Secretary General Thomas Greminger, in which they express their deep concern about the surge in heavy fighting and urge all sides to exercise maximum restraint and honour their commitments. More generally, with regard to the security situation, the sides recommitted to the ceasefire on 17 July 2019 in Minsk and confirmed that decision on 18 December 2019. The number of ceasefire violations in 2019 remained below the 2018 average. That represents relative calm, not complete silence, but it has led to fewer civilian victims. There were about 40 per cent fewer civilian casualties in 2019 than there were the year before, and 70 per cent fewer than in 2017. This is an important positive development, but, at the same time, I have to stress that every single victim is one too many. In thatregard, I would like to draw the Council's attention to the contamination of land by mines and unexploded ordnance, which remains an acute problem that continues to cause civilian victims. Since July 2019, disengagement of forces and hardware has finally taken place in three areas: Stanytsia Luhanska, Zolote and Petrivske. That is an important step. In Stanytsia Luhanska, the only crossing point in the Luhansk region, disengagement has allowed the reconstruction of a pedestrian bridge across the Siverskiy Donets River. Before, rain or shine, the upwards of 11,000 mostly elderly people who crossed the line per day had to walk down and up steep and slippery wooden ramps. Moreover, ambulances can now use the bridge. Ambassador Cevik will provide further details on the ceasefire and disengagement areas. The opening of additional crossing points, as promoted by the four leaders in Paris, would be of great importance to the civilian population. Discussions on several options are now ongoing. For the people living in the Luhansk region in particular, it would be important to have additional crossing points opened, since, so far, Stanytsia Luhanska is the only open crossing point in the region. On 29 December, an exchange of approximately 200 detainees took place. It was the first such exchange in two years. It gave new impetus to the humanitarian working group. Additional exchanges of detainees are under discussion. Looking ahead to completing the exchange of all for all, the sides are aware of the need to put in a place a mechanism to search for and identify missing persons. Let me now present a brief look at the political dimension. On | October, the sides accepted the so- called Steinmeier formula, which details the sequence of steps to be taken with regard to local elections in the non-Government-controlled territories and the entry into force of the special status for those territories. On 12 December, Ukraine extended the law on special status for another year. The political working group continues to have substantial discussions on the incorporation of the Steinmeier formula into Ukrainian legislation. The economic working group addresses issues related to the delivery of public goods vital for the population in the conflict-affected area: pensions, water, electricity and telecommunication services. Among other things, the sides have agreed on measures to maintain water supply on both sides of the contact line. In that context, I would like to reinforce what Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo said before: attacks on civilian infrastructure are by no means acceptable and must stop. The Trilateral Contact Group and its working groups will continue in their efforts to reach a sustainable solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. I am convinced that, with trust and political will from the sides, this is possible.
