Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): First, I would like to
thank Mr. Tom Koenigs for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's latest report on the situation in
Afghanistan and on the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
including its new mandate. I take this opportunity also
to wish Mr. Koenigs every success in his important and
demanding duties as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Afghanistan.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union. Furthermore, I would
like to make the following remarks.

The report of the Secretary-General
comprehensively covers all major developments that
have taken place in Afghanistan during the past six
months. The holding of the parliamentary and
provincial elections on 18 September and the
inauguration of the new parliament on 19 December
brought the Bonn process to a successful conclusion.
The adoption of the Afghanistan Compact at the
London Conference on 31 January, and its endorsement
by the Security Council on 15 February, set in motion
the new process for attaining full-fledged political and
socio-economic development in a peaceful, stable and
secure environment, under the leadership of the Afghan
Government.

UNAMA's contribution to these overall positive
political developments has once again been
indispensable and commendable.

However, we are well aware of the many and
serious challenges still facing Afghanistan. We agree
with the observations made by the Secretary-General
regarding the need to complete reforms in the security,
administration, justice and humanitarian sectors, as
well as to establish the rule of law and full respect for
human rights, especially in those provinces where
warlords and drug networks continue to reign.

In particular, we are gravely concerned by the
recent escalation of violence against civilians, aid
workers, the Afghan military and international security
forces, moderate politicians, Government employees
and educators. If such incidents continue, all efforts
and activities aimed at the implementation of the
Afghanistan Compact will be at great risk.

We look forward to the amelioration of the
security situation, mainly through the further
strengthening of the Afghan National Army and police
forces and the launching of the programme for the
disbandment of illegal armed groups. In addition, we
believe that the expansion of International Security
Assistance Force forces in the south and the
strengthening of the work of provincial reconstruction
teams will lead to improving security and facilitating
reconstruction and economic development in the
countryside.

Of course, the underpinning of the armed attacks,
violent clashes, suicide bombings and burning of
schools is the narcotics industry. The Afghan
Government and the international community have
undertaken serious measures to tackle the problem, but
so far to no avail. If the links among large-scale
poverty among farmers, poppy cultivation, the
narcotics trade, corruption and terrorists are not
severed, all our efforts, including the money spent, to
consolidate peace, democratic institutions,
reconstruction, stability, economic growth and social
development in Afghanistan will continue to be
undermined.

The people and the Government of Afghanistan
have made remarkable progress and are determined to
overcome the remaining challenges, however daunting
they might be. The further engagement of the United
Nations and the contributions of individual countries,
as well as those of non-governmental organizations, are
needed in order to meet the clear benchmarks set out in
the Afghanistan Compact for the new five-year Afghan
development phase.

In this respect, we welcome the Secretary-
General's proposal for the continued presence of the
United Nations in Afghanistan through assigning new
tasks to UNAMA, in accordance with the coordination
and monitoring role of the United Nations, in
implementing the provisions of the Afghanistan
Compact regarding security, governance, the rule of
law and human rights, economic and social
development, as well as the cross-cutting issue of
counter-narcotics.

Greece supports the new mandate and structure of
UNAMA proposed by the Secretary-General and is
ready to participate constructively in consultations on a
draft resolution of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country's commitment to continuing its political,
military, economic and humanitarian involvement in
Afghanistan. Let me just mention that, at the London
Conference, Greece pledged $5 million in development
projects. In parallel, we have undertaken the
restoration of the Museum of Kabul as an indication of
our commitment to the preservation of the unique
Afghan cultural heritage.

Afghanistan and its people deserve a peaceful and
prosperous future, and they have our full support on
the long road ahead.

