Mr. Fowler (Canada): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and our colleagues on the Security Council
for organizing this open briefing of the Council on a subject
that I think is of significant interest to the broader
membership of the Organization.

As I mentioned in informal consultations yesterday,
what I hope to do this morning is to briefly recap the work
that I have undertaken as Chairman of the Angolan
sanctions Committee since January, specifically to refer to
the visits I have made and to refer to my plan of work for
the coming year, so that members of the Council and the
broader membership of the Organization will have an
understanding of that plan and so that they could fit any
input that they might wish to make into those plans.

I might begin with a statement of the blindingly
obvious and note that the Angolan sanctions Committee is
somewhat of a misnomer. The Committee was formed to
apply the sanctions passed by the Security Council against
UNITA; there are no sanctions against the Government of
Angola. I think it is important to avoid any confusion on
that point.

The purpose of the sanctions against UNITA is to
help establish the conditions for a resumption of the
political dialogue within Angola so as to achieve a
durable end to a civil war that has lasted for over two
decades. That civil war has seen the death of more than
a million people. There are now over 1.7 million
internally displaced persons within Angola, 900,000 of
them displaced only since last December, and all this out
of a population of less than 11 million people.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), there are more than 2
million war-affected people within Angola, and that is 2
million people washing back and forth across battle lines
and across minefields laid by both the Government of
Angola and UNITA. The sanctions against UNITA are
not punitive in intention or by design, and they can be
calibrated, as noted very specifically in Security Council
resolutions, to reflect geopolitical change.

A premise of our work in the sanctions Committee
is that this war can be ended only through political
dialogue, and our intention is to do everything possible to
limit the ability of UNITA to pursue the war option. We
are not aiming for perfection; rather, our aim is to
diminish UNITA's capacity to wage war, that is, to
diminish UNITA's revenues derived from the sale of
diamonds and to increase the cost of UNITA's arms
procurement.

Our objective is to give teeth to hitherto ineffective
sanctions and to make very clear that sanctions violations
are no longer cost-free - to end the culture of impunity
that has surrounded sanctions in this area for some time.

We wish to establish very clearly the fact that there
is a broad consensus within the Council and within the
Organization at large about these intentions and about our
collective commitment to see these sanctions applied
forcefully, effectively and specifically to make very clear
that people do care and that they are watching.

To recap, the sanctions in question were put in place
beginning in 1993, and they encompass prohibitions on
the sale and supply of arms and other forms of military
assistance to UNITA. There are sanctions against the
representation abroad and travel by UN ITA and the adult
members of the immediate families of the UNITA

 

leadership; sanctions against the sale or supply of petroleum
products to UNITA; sanctions against the provision of
funds or financial resources to UNIT A; and, a year ago,

very specific sanctions against the export of diamonds by
UNITA.

I will now comment on the steps that the Committee
is taking to give these sanctions teeth. First, David Angell
and I, as Chairman, have made two visits abroad to Africa
and Europe. Secondly, we are about to announce the
creation of the two expert panels which the Council
authorized by resolution in early May. Those panels will
provide the Committee for the first time with an
independent research and investigation capability.

In mentioning my colleague David Angell, I should
note that David is providing the brains and energy behind
everything I am doing to give life to our collective efforts
to end the civil war in Angola, and I find his assistance
absolutely invaluable in this matter.

In May I spent 20 days in central and southern Africa
visiting Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Namibia, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In
each I was enthusiastically welcomed and encouraged to
make these sanctions work. Those African leaders with
whom I met expressed real concern at the prospect of a
never-ending civil war in Angola. There was concern that
the Angola-Democratic Republic of the Congo nexus could
significantly destabilize the region and that within it there
were implications of a widening conflict.

I encountered real cynicism at the impact of sanctions
to date and indeed with regard to the commitment of the
Security Council in this respect. I also encountered a clear
willingness to consider practical steps to give the existing
sanctions teeth and effectiveness. Bombs going off in
Lusaka this spring reminded everyone of the urgent need to
dampen Angolan-Zambian tensions. In this regard, I would
note the enormous commitment of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Swaziland, Albert Shabangu, who has pursued
persistently efforts to defuse those tensions, and who from
my perspective has achieved significant success. That
success, I think, was very evident at the recent Organization
of African Unity summit meeting in Algiers.

In making these trips, my purpose was to explore
measures to improve the effectiveness of the sanctions
against UNITA, to urge Governments to enact legislation,
regulations, Orders in Council and so on to give force of
law to those sanctions within the national jurisdiction of all
Member States and to appeal to all those we encountered
for information, particularly hard intelligence on the
matter of sanctions-busting. There is an absolute dearth of
hard intelligence in this area, and without it we simply
cannot do our job.
My purpose, then, was not to investigate specific
allegations, a task I had neither the time nor the
qualifications to accomplish. Our African trip resulted in
a set of 14 preliminary recommendations, which were
included in a report that we submitted to the Council in
early June. The more substantive recommendations -
recommendations that will be taken up by the panels to
pursue them further - raise the prospect of sanctions
monitors on the ground in the region, address the issue of
air surveillance and interdiction, and propose a close
collaboration with the International Criminal Police
Organization (Interpol) and other international
organizations.

Our trip also included extensive discussion of the
effective application of sanctions against UNITA's trade
in diamonds. In this regard, we met repeatedly with
executives from De Beers and with the parastatal diamond
corporations in Angola, Namibia, Botswana and South
Africa, and our preliminary conclusions from that trip
were that the industry indeed does wish to be part of a
solution in this matter, not just because it is the right
thing to do nor because it is the law, but because to do
otherwise is so manifestly not in the business interests of
the diamond industry.

Our objective, of course, is not to inflict any
collateral damage on the legitimate diamond trade.
Botswana and Namibia, for instance, are countries that
have an enormous dependence on the diamond industry,
which accounts for almost half of their gross domestic
products. Therefore it is in nobody's interest to see
damage inflicted across the board on the diamond
industry as we seek to specifically manage the tiny
proportion of the business that relates to UNITA's trade
in diamonds.

That said, Mr. Savimbi is generally deemed to have
raised somewhere between $3 and $4 billion in diamond
revenues over the last eight years, and we believe that
practical steps can be taken to limit the profit he derives
from that trade. Bearing in mind that diamonds are the
single greatest concentration of value that exists in the
world, we know that diamonds will come to market
somewhere, somehow. What we want to do is ensure that
when do come to market and the profits are derived by
UNITA, those profits are as limited as we can make

 

them. We hope that we can do this by standardizing import
and export procedures and by introducing standardized,
credible certificates of origin. The panels - in conjunction
with the industry, exporting and importing countries and the
markets - will look into this in much greater detail over
the next few months.

I hope that any solutions that we do devise with regard
to managing the export of and trade in illegal diamonds
could have useful applications elsewhere, for instance with
regard to Sierra Leone, should that be necessary.

My second visit took place just a couple of weeks ago.
It included Visits to Europe and included the diamond
markets in Belgium and the United Kingdom. We visited
Ukraine as one of several Central and Eastern European
countries alleged to be sanctions-busting, and the
headquarters of the International Criminal Police
Organization (Interpol) in France. With the help of the
President of the Council for last month, Ambassador J agne,
we sought permission and were invited to address the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) at its meeting in Algiers a couple of weeks ago.

From my perspective, this second Visit was extremely
useful. The results of it are outlined in a report that we
issued yesterday evening and which I believe is before
members of the Council and will be available through you,
Sir, once it has been fully translated, if that has not already
happened.

For this latest trip we had three overriding objectives.
The first was to convey the fact that many people in many
places are now much more aware of both the fact and
purpose of these sanctions and are taking them seriously.
We brought this message to the OAU, to the Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council at the headquarters of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Brussels, and to
many others. We are grateful for the forceful endorsement
adopted by the OAU and the European Union of the
importance of sanctions against UNITA.

Secondly, we explored opportunities for further
collaboration with other organizations, including Interpol,
the World Customs Organization, the European
Commission and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), to name but a few.

Thirdly, we discussed specific measures to implement
existing sanctions. An example of this would be the steps
taken by Ukraine to ensure compliance which are outlined
in the report we produced yesterday evening.

We continued our discussions with the diamond
industry by spending a day with the Central Selling
Organization in London and by meeting in Antwerp with
the International Diamond Manufacturers Association and
with the World Federation of Diamond Bourses and
others. We received further evidence and assurance that
the industry still wishes to be part of the solution and is
committed to that end. This will, I hope, be demonstrated
through the industry's cooperation with the expert panels
in the coming months.

The report before the Council contains further
recommendations, including a call for assistance to SADC
for capacity-building for sanctions implementation and a
recommendation seeking EU and NATO cooperation -
which is already significant - to reaffirm their inclusion
of compliance with Security Council sanctions resolutions
among the criteria those two organizations use as they
consider applications for accession.

Further recommendations include collaboration with
the World Customs Organization; creation of a working
group between Interpol and the panels to examine further
methods of identifying sanctions-busters, sanctions-busting
activities and the effective application of sanctions; and
further collaboration among interested Member States,
particularly diamond importers and exporters, with a view
to harmonizing procedures and documentation for the
export and import of rough diamonds, possibly in
conjunction with the World Customs Organization, with
a View to establishing new customs procedures and
standardized documentation.

The next step is the creation of the expert panels,
which, of course, we mandated in resolution 1237 (1999)
in early May. The purpose of these panels, I would recall,
is to collect information on sanctions violations and to
recommend measures both to end those Violations and
improve the implementation of sanctions. One panel,
which will have six experts, will address the sources of
revenue, funding and petroleum supplies of UNITA -
the resources that enable UNITA to continue to make
war. The other panel, which will have four members, will
address the sources of military support for UNITA and
the way Mr. Savimbi gets that support to the part of
Angola that he controls.

My hope is that these panels will work very closely
together, effectively as one, during their six-month
mandate. I expect to nominate the panel members in the
next few days and to appoint them - following, of
course, consultation with Council members. I will be

 

nominating a former Ambassador to Angola as chairman
and a senior military officer from the subregion to head the
second panel. Nominations for panel one will include
experts in each of the four non-military areas covered by
sanctions - that is, diamonds, petroleum, funding, and
travel and representation, as well as a brilliant rapporteur.
Nominations for panel two will include two customs experts
with experience with the Rwanda Commission of Inquiry
and a recognized expert on small arms.
In addition, I have asked several Governments in the
region to give the panels access to their technical expertise
on diamonds - expertise which will simply be fundamental
to the success of the panels in that area. No two experts
will be from the same country. As set out in the conceptual
framework for the panels, the sanctions committee's two
Vice-Chairman - that is, Ambassador Petrella of Argentina
and our current Council President, Ambassador Hasmy of
Malaysia - have agreed to contribute to the panels' work.

In conclusion, I am greatly encouraged by the
response we have received so far. Sanctions are beginning
to be taken seriously. I am especially encouraged by the
unanimity and support within the Security Council, and I
thank all colleagues on the Council deeply for this support.
I think this is an area - and maybe these days there are
not too many of them - but this is an area where we are
absolutely ad idem on an issue, and I think we are all
committed to this work and to seeing if we cannot therefore
bring an early end to this murderous war in Angola.

To do that we will, of course, require the active
cooperation of all Member States - that is, of Member
States beyond this Council. We need that cooperation to
assist us with the enforcement of sanctions and with the
provision of information relating not only to specific
instances of sanctions-busting but also to offer us Views and
advice on how we might look at things differently or
consider different approaches. And of course we need the
assistance of all the Member States in the Organization to
demonstrate through their words and actions that they too
want these sanctions to work.

We also, of course, look forward to putting in place
collaborative partnerships, such as the one I mentioned with
Interpol, that will last as long as these sanctions remain in
place, but which also might serve our collective interests in
the Council with regard to other sanctions regimes in other
places.

Mr. President, thank you for making this meeting
possible and allowing me to make this report.

