Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on the increasingly complex
situation in the Middle East in the light of the recent
developments that constitute a challenge to international
peace and security. I would like to commend the able
leadership of your friendly delegation in managing the
work of the Council during the month of October. I
would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
valuable briefing.

Achieving peace requires the consistent
implementation of the Charter of the United Nations
and its noble purposes, in particular non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, respect for
good-neighbourly relations, the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the implementation of United Nations
resolutions to preserve the sovereignty, dignity and
stability of countries. All countries must refrain from
any policies that threaten or undermine regional and
international security, whether directly or indirectly,
while working collectively to counter terrorism and
achieve sustainable development.

A just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region cannot be achieved without resolving the
Palestinian question and without granting the fraternal
Palestinian people their legitimate right, in line with
that of other peoples, to establish an independent State
within the borders of4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That would be in accordance with the
Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and the
relevant international resolutions. The Kingdom of
Bahrain will spare no effort to ensure the development
and prosperity of the fraternal Palestinian people.
The international community must also shoulder its
responsibilities and compel Israel to implement all
relevant international resolutions.

With regard to the sisterly Syrian Arab Republic, the
Kingdom of Bahrain stresses the need to safeguard the
independence of Syria, while rejecting the occupation
of any part of Syria by any foreign force. We underscore
the need to reach a political solution, in line with the
first Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and the
relevant United Nations resolutions. We reiterate that
the Golan is occupied Syrian Arab territory pursuant to
relevant international resolutions.

Along with other fraternal countries in the Arab
coalition to support the legitimate Government in
Yemen, the Kingdom of Bahrain will continue to make
every effort to establish security and stability in the
sisterly Republic of Yemen. We also express our great
appreciation for the efforts of the sisterly Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia to bring together all national parties and
the legitimate Government in Yemen with a view to
combating the Iran-backed Houthi militias, as well as
all other terrorist groups threatening the security and
stability of the country. The aim is to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis, in line with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
resolution 2216 (2015), with a view to ensuring the
unity, territorial integrity and regional neighbourhood
of Yemen.

In July, the Kingdom of Bahrain hosted an
important international military meeting on scaling up
international efforts to promote regional security. This
month, together with the United States and Poland, we
hosted a meeting of the Warsaw process and its working
groups on maritime and aviation security with the aim
of limiting the worst threats to stability and security
in the Arab Gulf region and around the world. That
meeting took place following attacks on maritime routes
in the Arab Gulf and the region by States and terrorist
groups, including attacks on commercial vessels and
oil facilities in the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
which posed a serious threat to the regional and world
economies. That meeting was also part of a wider
international cooperation to protect maritime and air
navigation by identifying effective means to address the
increasing threat levels and ensure the security of the
regional countries and the stability of global economy.

In conclusion, ensuring peace, sustainable
development and prosperity for all peoples of the world
requires all of us to prioritize our supreme interests
and be committed to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, which was founded to save all peoples
from the scourge of war and ensure the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and the achievement of peace
and security throughout the world.

