Mr. Donwahi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
With the permission of the Security Council, I shall
now present Cote d'Ivoire's national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme. It
is important to note that the programme was prepared
with the participation and consensus of the Forces
nouvelles de C6te d'Ivoire, the Forces armees nationals
de C6te d'Ivoire (FANCI), the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Mission in C6te
d'Ivoire (ECOMICI) and the forces of Operation
Licorne, as well as with the support of experts from the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), and with the sanction of Cote
d'Ivoire.

The programme is based on measures put forth by
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. The measures consist
of six elements, namely, amnesty, grouping,
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
restructuring. It is also important to note that these
measures have made it possible to develop activities
with the participation of all forces, which will facilitate
the implementation of the programme.

The national programme for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration is being pursued on
three fronts, with the goal being peace and stability.
That will be achieved through the establishment of a
Government of national reconciliation and by
reunifying the army by restructuring it to make it a
force devoted to republican values. The national DDR
programme is therefore the key to restructuring Cote
d'Ivoire.

The DDR process in C6te d'Ivoire will take place
during four phases: grouping, disarmament,
demobilization, cantonment and reintegration.

Those measures have enabled us to prepare a
timetable. The first element of that schedule involves
preconditions, which will be addressed during a two-
and-a-half-month period, that is, from the beginning of
June to the middle of August. That will be followed by
grouping, which will take place during a two-week
period, from 13 August to early September.
Disarmament will then start at the beginning of
grouping and continue through the middle of
September. That will be followed by demobilization,
which will take place during a one-month period
ending on 19 October. Cantonment will then take place
during a two-week period, ending in the first week of
November. Lastly, the most important component,
which is reintegration, will take place during a period
of 12 to 24 months.
The forces involved have reached consensus to
define 17 conditions, which we have summarized in the
document we have circulated among the members of
the Council. They include the five following points.

First is the signing of a comprehensive ceasefire
agreement, which took place on 3 May.

Secondly, there is the establishment of a buffer
zone, which took place on 1 June. That zone, which
can be seen on the map attached to the document we
have circulated, runs east to west for about 40
kilometres. It includes the impartial forces of Operation
Licorne and MINUCI. There are no weapons or, of
course, belligerents, within the zone.

Thirdly, there was also a joint communique
declaring the end of the war, which was signed by the
Forces armees nationales de C6te d'Ivoire and the
Forces nouvelles de C6te d'Ivoire at a solemn
ceremony at the presidential palace in the presence of
the entire Government and the ambassadors accredited
to C6te d'Ivoire. In addition, the ceremony was
broadcast live on national television.

Fourthly, an amnesty law that will enable us to
begin the grouping programme will be presented to a
parliamentary commission on 4 August, and to a
plenary meeting of the National Assembly on 6
August.

Fifthly, the restructuring of the Forces armees
nationals de Cote d'Ivoire will be based on the law on
military planning that has already been drafted and
which will be strengthened in the light of the current
situation.

Lastly, grouping will begin with the identification
of cantonment areas, which started on 8 June. As
members will see from the map before them, the
cantonment areas in the south include Abidjan,
Yamoussoukro, San Pedro, Daloa, Guiglo, Bondoukou,
Daoukro and Duekoue. The cantonment areas in the
north include Bouake, Man, Seguela, Odiene, Korhogo,
Ferkessedougou, Bouna, Ouangolodougou and Vavoua.

Once the grouping begins on 20 August, the
Forces armees nationales de Cote d'Ivoire will return
to their barracks and the grouping of former
combatants at the designated sites in the northern area
will be carried out. Once the grouping has begun, we
shall proceed to the identification and the verification
of the identities of combatants. In that context, it
should be noted that, thanks to support from the United
Nations Development Programme, forms have been
prepared to identify and assess the skills of ex-
combatants. Those forms were designed on a
consensual basis with the participation of all existing
forces and have therefore been accepted by them all.

After grouping, disarmament will begin. It has
four principal elements. The first element is to sort
arms and munitions, for weapons must be separated
from munitions. The arms recovered will the be sorted
according to whether or not they are listed by the
national army of C6te d'Ivoire. We will then proceed to
destroy weapons. A symbolic arms destruction
ceremony will take place at the end of the disarmament
cycle. Finally, new legislation will be adopted on arms
possession in order to prepare the second part of the
disarmament process: the disarmament of the civilian
population.

We need to combat the proliferation of small
arms, and it is therefore important to disarm the
civilian population. We will begin with an information
and awareness campaign on the collection of weapons.
That will be followed by voluntary arms collections,
followed by incentives and, finally, coercion. At that
time, we will need to renew or issue new weapons
permits and punish violators.

The third stage is demobilization and cantonment.
We must identify the cantonment areas, which will be
different from the grouping areas because in the
cantonment areas former combatants will be assembled
without their military equipment. Once the cantonment
of former combatants has been completed, we will
proceed to identify the candidates for demobilization,
according to jointly agreed criteria and using the
prepared forms. The status of the demobilized
combatants will be decided by decree for non-
commissioned officers and by legislative order for
other combatants. Cantonment is the period before
reintegration. It will enable us to compile the socio-
economic data entered on the forms, to issue
demobilization identity cards and to reorient those
individuals towards civilian life, with all the necessary
support.

The final and most important stage of the
programme is reintegration. As we have already stated,
it will extend over a period of 12 to 24 months. To that
end, we need to make preliminary studies to define
reintegration activities. Those activities will be
supported by vocational training, appropriate
organizational structures and an appropriate civic
service, since we now have a new ministry of youth
and civic service, which will enable the annual
graduation of 19,000 persons who can then be
reintegrated into economic life. Special projects will be
prepared for vulnerable groups such as child soldiers.
We will also prepare education and follow-up relating
to the HIV/AIDS pandemic.

That is a summary of the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in C6te
d'Ivoire.

