Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
extend condolences to the delegation of China on the
disaster that has just struck that country.

I thank Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing, and the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

I wish to raise three points. First, our principal
objective today is the urgent relaunch of the peace
process. There is no alternative to the resumption of
negotiations towards the creation of a viable and
contiguous Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace and within secure and recognized
borders, on the basis of Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. That is also the position
of the European Union, as the acting head of the
Union's delegation will indicate in his statement, with
which France associates itself.

On 19 March, the Quartet set out a two-year
deadline for the conclusion of negotiations. But if the
parties continue to be incapable of engaging in
negotiations of some kind, the international community
will have to commit itself to assisting the negotiations
in order to guarantee the terms of a final agreement,
with a view to emerging from this impasse. To that
end, we are working in close cooperation with United
States and Egyptian authorities at all levels to define
the terms for international assistance making possible
the relaunch of the negotiations, something for which
we sincerely hope.

Secondly, parallel to efforts to relaunch
negotiations, developments on the ground are
necessary. Here, I shall touch on two sectors: first, of
course, settlement activity and, secondly, Gaza. As to
settlement activity, we all know that this remains a
major obstacle on the path to a settlement. The Israeli
Government's decision to impose a 10-month
moratorium on new construction and the issuance of
new construction permits in the West Bank are a step in
the right direction and should be implemented. There
can be no peace without a complete end to construction
in the settlements, which are illegal.

As the President of the French Republic has
noted, by making the prospect of a Palestinian State
more difficult, settlement activity does not contribute
to Israel's security. Indeed, it increases the threats.
Such threats - in Jerusalem more than anywhere else -
are a sensitive matter, and we find developments in the
holy city are most alarming. We affirm that all
provocative acts must be avoided in so sensitive a city.
The European Union has therefore condemned recent
Israeli announcements on the construction of new
housing in Ramat Shlomo and in Sheikh Jarrah.

Settlement activities in East Jerusalem, such as
the demolition of houses and other expulsions, are
morally unacceptable and politically dangerous. There
can be no peace without Jerusalem, which as the French
President said in his statement to the Knesset on 23 June
2008, is to become the capital of two States.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority must
continue its efforts to strengthen the security sector, to
establish the rule of law and to fight mercilessly
against terrorism. Those should remain its priorities.

Another matter on the ground to which we must
devote attention is the situation in Gaza. Beyond the
humanitarian issues, it would be a political mistake to
ignore Gaza. We call for full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009), including the immediate
unconditional lifting of the blockade which has
affected the territory in the areas of humanitarian
assistance and the movement of commercial goods and
individuals. At the same time, we call for an end to
weapons smuggling into Gaza.

Israel's commitment to easing restrictions on
certain United Nations projects following the
Secretary-General's visit to Gaza is a step in the right
direction. The announced measures must now be
implemented and expanded.

The immediate cessation of all violence,
especially the firing of rockets into southern Israel, is
also necessary. Finally, we call for the immediate
release of Gilad Shalit, which is a matter that France
has been following with close attention.
Thirdly and finally, the international community
must lend strong support to the Palestinian Authority in
order to strengthen Palestinian State institutions. Israel,
for its part, should work with far greater determination
to help in that regard. Steps have been taken on the
ground but remain insufficient. Palestinians must be

able to see that developments on the ground are in the
direction of an end to the occupation, including with
respect to movement and access. Here, we reaffirm our
full support for the plan of Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad, which is in line with the outcome of the 2007
Paris conference, which is intended to lead to the
establishment of a Palestinian State in accordance with
an agreed timetable.

Let us not forget the other regional tracks of the
peace process. We are working to create conditions for
the resumption of talks between Syria and Israel.

We are also continuing our efforts with respect to
Lebanon, and we welcome the fact that the situation
there has remained calm. But we must remain vigilant
and continue to urge the parties to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006). Here, there is no lack of
matters of concern. In this context, we reaffirm the
crucial role played by the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon.

The international community and the Security
Council have a major role to play, for the situation in
the Middle East is of concern to us all. France is ready
to play its full role in this effort, and it was to that end
that President Sarkozy put forward the idea of a peace
summit to back United States efforts and to
complement resumed peace talks, and to be prepared in
cooperation with all stakeholders.

