Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate, because the issue of natural resources and
conflict is important to Switzerland. We also thank you
for the high quality of the document (S/2007/334) with
which you have provided us.

There is no doubt that natural resources are
among the principal factors causing many armed
conflicts. The issue is broad and complex. Different
types of natural resources give rise to different
challenges, which also vary in terms of the local or
regional context and the actors involved. I shall thus
confine myself to highlighting a few aspects, and my
statement will focus on six points.

First, if we want to resolve a conflict, we must
know its root causes. The Security Council should thus
have a well-informed discussion and identify the
sources of a conflict before taking a decision. The
Secretary-General should inform the Council about the
links between natural resources and conflict in general
and, if necessary, examine that relationship in country-
specific reports.

Secondly, conflicts are often financed through the
exploitation of natural resources. The Security Council
has made much progress in formulating sanctions
capable of reducing the revenue of armed groups in
specific conflicts. It has imposed embargoes on some
resources, such as oil, diamonds and timber. The case
of Liberia has shown that the parties to the conflict rely
on various resources to finance their activities. The
Security Council must thus be prepared to react swiftly
to changes in the way in which armed groups obtain
their revenue.

Thirdly, the Security Council could considerably
strengthen its sanctions regimes by always providing
its experts and monitoring groups with clear mandates
and precise terms of reference, as well as adequate
administrative support from the Secretariat. It should
devise tools to improve coordination among those
groups, establish institutional memory, create best
practices and take advantage of lessons learned.

Fourthly, sanctions are not a panacea. The link
between conflict and natural resources generally arises
in States with weak institutions. Therefore, sanctions
must include a comprehensive strategy to fight
corruption, rebuild institutions, re-establish the rule of
law and diversify the economy.

In addition, when establishing a United Nations
peace mission, the Security Council should examine
the usefulness of creating an environment and natural
resources management unit, as in, for example, the
case in Liberia. Moreover, new legal and economic
instruments may have to be developed to specifically
target the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
Existing instruments such as the Kimberley Process
and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
have set good examples in this regard.
Fifthly, wealth-sharing is a pivotal question in
peace negotiations. Prime examples are the wealth-
sharing clauses in the Sudan Comprehensive Peace
Agreement or the Aceh Memorandum of
Understanding. The question of wealth-sharing in
peace processes is essential to ending conflict, and also
in providing the signatories with the necessary means
for beginning post-conflict reconstruction. As such, it
should facilitate the transformation of war economies
into peace economies for beginning the benefit of the
civilian population, which pays the highest price in
conflicts.

Political power-sharing without wealth-sharing
will lead to a fragile peace agreement that is likely to
fail. Therefore, greater efforts are needed to pool
experience on the role of wealth-sharing, especially at
the local and community level where the exploitation
of natural resources happens. Here, the Mediation
Support Unit within the Department for Political
Affairs could play an important role, on condition that
it is provided with the necessary resources and support.

Sixthly, Switzerland is concerned about the risks
arising from overexploitation of renewable natural
resources. Water and soil should receive greater
attention in the context of conflict prevention. Scarcity
of these resources and their mismanagement, and lack
of equitable access to them, can lead to famine, forced
migration, poverty, political instability and eventually
to armed conflict. We must develop measures to deal
with those potential causes of conflict. One measure
could be to promote integrated water resources
management rather than focusing mainly on increasing
the availability of water. Another measure relates to the
promotion of property rights. We should further
explore lessons learned in setting up and implementing
suitable property rights systems, which must also take
the local customary practices into account if they are to
be effective. The work of the Commission on Legal
Empowerment of the Poor, and in particular of its
Working Group on Property Rights, should be taken
into consideration in this undertaking.

Let me conclude by underlining that consumption
patterns in industrialized countries can result in
scarcity and in price increases of natural resources.
This in turn raises the risk of conflict and is an
incentive to the illegitimate control or illegal
exploitation of these commodities. Therefore, efforts
must be made to reduce global consumption of those
particular resources, such as oil, gas, and water, to an
equitable and sustainable level.

