Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): In my statement today,
I would like to address both failed draft resolutions
(S/2018/516 and S/2018/520), as each has failed in a
different ways. I would like to thank and express our
appreciation to Ambassador Joanna Wronecka and
her colleagues in the Polish mission for the excellent
leadership they provided to the Security Council
until yesterday. We look forward to a very successful
Russian presidency this month. Of course, we count on
your wisdom, Mr. President.

Ethiopia is a friend to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians, and the ties we have with both peoples
have deep sociological and historical roots. Our
position on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has always
been consistent and principled.

With regard to the recent developments surrounding
the escalation of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the events that took place in Gaza, we
have had the opportunity to express our position on the
matter a number of times recently. We have called on
Israel to show maximum restraint and expressed our
deepest sorry and sympathy for the loss oflives. As we
said last time (see S/PV.8272), we believe that Israel's
right to self-defence is a right that carries with it the
responsibility to ensure proportionality.

On the other hand, we are also deeply concerned
by the indiscriminate firing of rockets by Palestinian
militants from Gaza towards southern Israel and
underscored that Hamas and the leaders of the
demonstrations have the responsibility to prevent all
violent actions and provocations. We know - and
everyone knows - that these rockets did not cause
much damage, either in terms of lives lost or property
destroyed, but they compromise the clarity of the
Palestinians' legitimate protest for justice, which we
support wholeheartedly. We are second to none in
this regard.

These latest developments undoubtedly undermine
the serious efforts by the international community
to improve the situation in Gaza. We have engaged
constructively in the negotiation process on the Kuwaiti
draft that was vetoed earlier, and we have presented
input that we thought was important to balance the text.
We thank and appreciate all of Kuwait's efforts to
address most, if not all, of our concerns. That said, we
still feel it would have been appropriate to explicitly
condemn recent actions by Hamas, particularly in the
light of the most recent developments. Unlike Sweden,
we felt that more should have been done to balance
the draft resolution in that regard. This is what has led
to the situation we find ourselves in today, having to
vote on two competing draft resolutions. Our proposal
would have helped to avoid this situation. The draft
resolution submitted by the United States was circulated
yesterday, and was put in blue without giving us the
opportunity to provide the necessary input with a view
to maintaining the right balance. While it certainly
addresses the concerns we had with regard to Hamas, it
shifts the whole narrative in another direction that we
do not believe is proper, fair or helpful. As we said the
day before yesterday (see S/PV.8272), it is crucial to get
the narrative right. If we miss that, we miss everything.
What matters is the narrative.

In that regard, it is absolutely critical to stress that
the Palestinians' quest to assert their rights and ensure
their self-determination by establishing an independent
State must not be overshadowed by a narrative that
seeks to focus on terrorism. We trust that the Council
is aware of that and will not lose sight of that very
critical point, which is more important than supporting
a draft resolution that ends up being vetoed. That
partly explains why we abstained in the voting on both
draft resolutions.

We believe that it would have been better to narrow
the differences and enable the Council to send the right
message by adopting a consensus resolution in response
to the most recent developments in Gaza. There is no
denying the fact that those developments have once
again brought the Israeli-Palestinian dispute back to

the fore, underscoring the urgency of reinvigorating
the peace process without further delay. It remains
absolutely imperative to work towards de-escalating
this dangerous situation in order to protect civilians,
break the cycle of violence and resume the much-needed
peace process so as to save the two-State formula,
which is a long-held position of the United Nations and
the international community.

