The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

Let me start by thanking and welcoming His
Excellency Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to this meeting,
together with his high-level entourage. We appreciate
his commitment and availability to brief the Council
each time the agenda item of Colombia is discussed. He
has South Africa's full support in his country's quest to
achieve long-term and sustainable peace. In the same
spirit, we also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his informative briefing and his perseverance in
dealing with the peace process in Colombia.

South Africa fully supports the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, signed between the Government of Colombia
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) in 2016. We welcome the mechanisms of
the Final Agreement, such as the Commission for
the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, which can
be used to address the gaps and challenges related to
the implementation of the Agreement. We encourage
both parties to use the peace agreement as a basis for
strengthening dialogue.

South Africa welcomes the recent positive steps
taken by the Government of Colombia, which lay the
foundation for the Government to continue its initiative
to integrate the former FARC-Ejercito del Pueblo
(EP) combatants and to ensure that they can live full
and decent lives in their communities. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of President Duque Marquez
and his Administration to implement the "Peace with
legality" strategy, which has made way for the approval
of various projects for former combatants, the beginning
of the implementation of the development programmes
with a territorial focus and his visits to former territorial
areas for training and reintegration, which can be seen
as confidence and trust-building efforts between the
Government and former combatants.

We welcome the Government's efforts with regard
to the transformation of those territorial areas for the
purposes of training and reintegration, as well as the
constructive role and responsive attitude of the FARC.
Those positive efforts can help to return the lives of
8,000 former combatants to normalcy so that they
can contribute to a prosperous Colombia. We agree
with the Secretary-General's assessment in his latest
report that that is "an example for overcoming hurdles
in implementation through dialogue" (S/2019/780, para. 101), which South Africa supports, as it contributes
to addressing the concerns and uncertainties of the
FARC combatants regarding their future in Colombian
daily life politically, socially and economically.

That is important, as it relates to rural and political
reintegration and reform, the development of territories,
transitional justice and the rights of victims, who
should remain at the centre of the full implementation
of the peace agreement. We welcome the role of the
Truth Commission and the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace in that regard. South Africa's own experience
with its Truth and Reconciliation Commission affirms
that it is crucial to achieving national unity. Hearing the
different views and the various versions of events of all
communities in Colombia will ensure that the road to
peace is based on an inclusive political process.

The consolidation ofpeace after decades of conflict
and mistrust is not an easy task. In that regard, we are
concerned about the announcement made in August by
a group of former FARC-EP commanders regarding
their decision to take up arms. Such narratives have
the potential to reignite violence in territories and
undermine the political progress that has been made
and the foundations for trust that are being established,
as well as the prospects for long-term peace for all who
live in Colombia.

We agree with, and wish to join, the United Nations
Verification Mission in commending the resilience of
Colombian society and its institutions and encourage
them to remain committed to the peace process that has
saved many lives to date. We also wish to commend
the Government of Colombia and the FARC party
for swiftly responding to that potentially damaging
announcement and rejecting it by expressing their
commitment to the peace process on behalf of former
combatants across the country. Former combatants
who laid down their weapons in good faith must
remain part of the reintegration process, which must be
respected, honoured and realized, because their efforts
remain important to the work of the comprehensive
system of truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition.
We call on all political parties to fully respect and
remain committed to the agreement and to continue
to desist from any actions that may undermine its
comprehensive implementation.

We remain concerned about the security of all
stakeholders. That includes the recent killings of various
political candidates, community and social leaders,
human rights defenders, former FARC-EP combatants,
persons participating in the implementation of the
peace process, rural communities, including people
living with disabilities, indigenous peoples and Afro-
Colombian communities, particularly in the context
of the upcoming elections expected to take place later
this month.

It is also important to be cognisant of the specific
threats to female candidates and leaders and to urge
the Government and all stakeholders across Colombian
society to double their efforts to promote peace and
tolerance so as to ensure the safety of all in the context
of the elections and beyond. It is important that the
Government and all stakeholders in Colombian society
encourage the participation of young people and women
at the grass-roots and all other levels, whose voices and
perspectives can significantly contribute to the long-
term plans for the integration and stability of Colombia.

We note the joint communique issued on
9 September by Cuba and Norway, guarantor countries
of talks between the Government of Colombia and the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo, and we commend them for their willingness
to continue supporting and accompanying efforts to
achieve a stable and lasting peace in Colombia.

Let me conclude by stating that South Africa
urges Member States and the international community
to support and encourage the people of Colombia to
persevere and fully implement the Final Agreement in a
comprehensive manner in order to address the concerns
and rights of victims, access to justice, reparation,
guarantees of non-repetition, inclusive dialogue and a
peaceful settlement. Colombia has come a long way.
The road to peace is near.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.

