Over the past two years, I had the honour of chairing the Security Council Committee pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. Today I would like to provide a brief update on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh, Al-Qaida and affiliates, and report on the work and activities of the Committee since the joint Council briefing on 20 May 2019 (see S/PV.8528). This briefing will also satisfy the requirement of resolution 2368 (2017) to report to the Security Council at least once a year on the overall work of the Committee. The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team notes that the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on terrorism has varied between conflict zones and non-conflict zones, and between short- and longer-term threats. Terrorist groups are using the outbreak to advance propaganda and fundraising. While for the moment ISIL represents an entrenched rural insurgency without the reach to threaten urban areas on a sustained basis, the group has increased its operations in the core conflict zones of Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Al-Qaida is further consolidating its presence in regions beyond its historical stronghold in Afghanistan. The relationship between ISIL and Al-Qaida remains fraught and idiosyncratic, depending on regional dynamics. Regional and country visits are a key element of the mandate of the Monitoring Team. The COVID-19 pandemic has imposed stringent travel limitations, and various trips previously approved by the Committee could not take place. Notably, the Monitoring Team was forced to postpone its visits to the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq. The Vienna regional meeting also could not take place. On exceptional basis due to COVID-19 in order to reduce exposure to health risks, since mid-March we have managed to hold informal virtual meetings, as a creative solution, where Committee members had nonetheless an opportunity to discuss a number of issues, including the reports of the Monitoring Team on the global threat posed by ISIL and Al-Qaida. In total in 2020, the Committee held three in-person informal consultations; two joint in-person consultations with the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); four virtual informal informals; one joint 1267-1988 Committee virtual briefing for interested Member States; and one joint informal informal with the Counter-Terrorism Committee on the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team's joint report on actions taken by Member States to disrupt terrorist financing, pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019). I extend my appreciation to all Council members for their constructive engagement and cooperation to make sure that the Committee can continue to fulfil its mandate despite the challenging situation. The Committee, in partnership with the Secretariat, continues to dedicate significant efforts to making sure that its sanctions list is accurate and as up-to-date as possible. Since the beginning of the year, the Committee has agreed to add to its sanctions list four individuals and five entities. The Committee also removed three individuals from the list. Moreover, since the last joint briefing to the Security Council in May 2019, the Committee has considered seven comprehensive reports of the Office of the Ombudsperson. Three of the reports were presented to the Committee in 2020. Currently, four requests for delisting are pending with the Office of the Ombudsperson. In total, there are currently 262 individuals and 89 entities on the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list. I should also like to mention that, building on the 2018 annual review, the Committee mandated the Secretariat to implement technical amendments to 85 list entries on its sanctions list in 2019, as well as amendments to 11 list entries and narrative summaries on its sanctions list in 2020. The Committee also recently concluded the 2019 annual review of its sanctions list, and we received a record number of more than 40 responses from Member States. A written briefing by the Coordinator of the Monitoring Team on the status of the 2019 annual review was shared with Committee members on 15 October 2020. In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring Team updates list entries based on information provided by Member States. I would like to thank Member States that have engaged with the Committee, and I hope that the wider membership will continue to engage with the Committee and the Monitoring Team. The contribution and cooperation of Members States are crucial both to maintaining the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list up-to-date and ensuring the effective implementation of sanctions measures. Lastly, I would like to urge those Member States that have not done so to submit the implementation reports mandated under the relevant Security Council resolutions. The Council and international community can target their response effectively only if they have reliable and up-to-date information.
