Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, let me
join others in condemning the recent terrorist attack in
Mogadishu and express our condolences to the families
of victims of that heinous act.

I would like to start by expressing our gratitude
to the presidency of the Security Council for having
convened today's open debate on the very important
issue of conflict prevention and natural resources. I
would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, and all other speakers for their
insightful briefings.

It has been widely acknowledged that the illegal
exploitation and ineffective management of natural
resources, particularly non-renewable ones, can raise
serious challenges to international peace and security
by triggering, escalating or protracting conflict around
the global. Often coupled with increasing competition
over scarce renewable resources, the phenomenon
is exacerbated by problems like environmental
degradation, population growth and climate change.

Natural resources play different roles at different
stages of conflict. In one instance, rivalry to control
or gain access to natural resources increases domestic
tensions and weakens social cohesion. A number of
factors, including the systematic marginalization and
exclusion of local communities from the management
of resources, inadequate institutional capacity and legal
frameworks, lack of transparency and equitable sharing
of benefits and the inability to channel revenues into
development programmes are powerful conflict drivers
which can easily turn a country's resource blessing into
its curse. Today, natural resources are often exploited
by armed groups to fund war and undermine efforts
to build peace. Meanwhile, the natural resources trade
mechanisms, such as the Kimberley Process, are unable
to meet their primary goals.

Addressing the underlying causes of natural
resources-driven conflicts requires a multifaceted and
comprehensive approach that entails the spheres of
governance, legislation, economic development and
capacity-building. Immediate and long-term steps
should be taken to avert the occurrence of conflicts
and reduce the impact that exploitation of natural
resources can have during a conflict. Those steps
can include ensuring inclusiveness, transparency and
accountability, establishing mechanisms of equitable
benefit sharing, building proper institutional capacity
and introducing robust legal frameworks. The potential
of natural resources can be fully utilized for post-
conflict rehabilitation efforts, such as the creation of
conditions for economic recovery, confidence-building
and promoting dialogue.

Transparency and accountability are critical
to the effective and responsible management of
natural resources. Extractive industries generate vast
revenues which, if improperly managed, can lead to
corruption and cause severe economic losses. In that
regard, we emphasize the important role of various
multi-stakeholder voluntary mechanisms that involve
Governments, the private sector and civil society,
including in particular the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI). Being the first EITI-
compliant country, Azerbaijan believes that setting
high standards of transparency and accountability in
the extractive industries is an imperative for preserving
macroeconomic stability and achieving long-term
economic growth and sustainable development in a
country.

Natural resources-related problems must for
the most part be addressed in the context of internal
conflicts. Through the Sanctions Committees and
panels of experts, the Security Council has been
consistently seized of the matter in some countries
on its agenda. But it is essential that the impact of
natural resources on inter-State conflicts, particularly
the illegal exploitation of such resources by States
in violation of international law, also receive the due
consideration of the Council within its thematic work.

In the case of foreign military occupation by
one State of the internationally recognized territory
of another, the former tends to actively exploit
natural resources of the country that is the victim of
aggression, resulting in colossal damages to property,
the environment and the economy. That practice and
other illegal activities in occupied territories are
carried out with the sole aim of consolidating military
gains, preventing expelled populations from returning
to their homes and obstructing ongoing efforts aimed at
achieving peace.

Such violations become more flagrant when foreign
companies seek to participate in illegal activities
in contravention of their countries' international
legal obligations. Therefore, the United Nations
and its Member States must exert vigilance and take
all necessary measures, including through targeted
sanctions, in order to preclude the involvement
of State-owned and private entities in the illegal
exploitation of natural resources located in territories
under foreign military occupation.

