Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes Japan's initiative to convene this meeting,
which gives us the opportunity to consider different
national perspectives on the current challenges facing
the international community, within a context of a
United Nations reform that could make a significant
difference for the Organization's Member States. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on
this important topic.

It is accepted that, in addition to the traditional
challenges to international peace and security, there
are now increasingly complex global challenges that
are affecting the security of our citizens, unravelling
the social fabric, undermining and delegitimizing
institutionalism and stoking conflict.

An example is the impact of climate change,
which is frequently observed in different parts of
the world, in generating natural disasters and in the
scarcity of essential resources, such as water. Those
have the potential to generate conflicts and subsequent
humanitarian crises due to, for example, migration, food
insecurity and overpopulation in certain territories. We
can also mention transnational organized crime with its
many facets: the illicit trafficking of arms, drugs and
cultural goods, illegal mining and logging, trafficking
in persons, and cyberattacks, among other crimes,
many of which are linked to terrorist groups.

In that context, there is no greater remedy than
strengthening our commitment to multilateralism and
rethinking the best ways to deal with those new threats.
Addressing the traditional causes of violence requires
a broad consensus on the need to sustain peace through
economic growth, respect for human rights, the rule of
law, access to justice and policies of social inclusion
and reconciliation. Thus we are aware of the continuing
need to prevent conflicts from springing back in ever
new forms.

It is clear that our response to those threats
should not be one of denial but of adopting a new
focus - multidimensional, participatory, cooperative
and integrated, one that that identifies such threats,
explores their influence in any given conflict and
attacks them on various fronts, with the Security
Council being a fundamental one. In that context, we
support the reforms that Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres has been promoting to render the Organization
more coherent, effective, efficient and coordinated,
as well as able to flexibly respond to the security and
development needs of States.

Implementing reforms that promote prevention
as a central element, with the appropriate tools for
taking timely action, is a primary responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations. That, however,
must be complemented by cooperation - aimed at
strengthening greater capacities and firm institutional
structures for States - among the various agencies
and programmes throughout the system to make the
Organization's response capacity more effective.

In conclusion, I underline that Peru will accord
high priority to focusing on those challenges in its
upcoming capacity as a non-permanent member of
Security Council during its two-year term from 2018
to 2019.

