Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate on a subject that is vital to current
discussions in our Organization. I should like also to
thank Ambassadors Rosenthal, Kamau and Skoog for
their very valuable contributions to today's debate.

The year 2015 was key to refocusing the actions of
the United Nations in the areas of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, through the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, the work of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations and the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(8/2015/716), all of which constitute key tools in
refocusing the strategies of the United Nations for
action on and support for the process of reform that we
have undertaken.

I should like to highlight three actions in
that context.

First, there is a need to expand the scope of the
concept of peacebuilding to include sustainable peace,
as Ambassador Rosenthal said, on the understanding
that each case is different, because not all processes are
equal, and the United Nations must tailor its actions to
the particular requirements of each situation.

The strategy of reacting to crises in an international
situation that is increasingly complex is neither sufficient
nor sustainable for the United Nations; peacebuilding
must be a focus before, during and following conflicts.

Secondly, preventive action accompanied by
inclusive national ownership is the best alternative for
countries that find themselves on the verge of conflicts
and that decide to seek the support of United Nations.
This helps to prevent the human and economic toll of
a confrontation. In that respect, we would reiterate the
importance of institutionalizing women's participation
in peace and reconciliation processes.

Thirdly, we need to promote coherence in terms
of peacebuilding strategies and resources throughout
the United Nations system and its principal organs,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. Ambassador
Rosenthal has called for action to break down silos
so as to strengthen support for and the advisory role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission, with the
assistance of the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund.

Ensuring that there is an impact on the ground,
as has been described very clearly by some speakers
here, and responding to expectations and mandates will
be possible only if we have sufficient, predictable and
sustainable resources for peacebuilding on the very long
road travelled by countries emerging from conflict. We
must adjust our priorities if we truly wish to achieve
sustainable peace and deepen our associations with
various actors, including the international financial
institutions and regional and subregional organizations,
which must play a more relevant role in peacebuilding.
That is what we are doing today in the context of our
own regional organization, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, in the peace process
in Colombia, for which the Security Council fittingly
expressed its support.

Colombia is convinced that in order to enhance
the impact of the Organization's peacebuilding
efforts, peacebuilding must go hand in hand with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1). The
universal, indivisible and comprehensive nature of the
Agenda is a reflection of the fact that there can be no
sustainable development without peace and no peace
without sustainable development.

We nations that know full well the difficulties
involved in achieving peace are well aware that the
road is not easy, but we are convinced that we will
be able to reach our goal. My country, Colombia, has
undertaken a number of innovative, sometimes risky,
political processes and actions, in a sort of collective
endeavour aimed at achieving a sustainable peace after
some 50 years of conflict. It is Colombia's hope that it
will be one of the many success stories in the context
of achieving peace and that the lessons that we have
learned will make a contribution to those that, like us,
are on the path towards peacebuilding.

