Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): This
is a very welcome discussion and our particular thanks
are due to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union, which
actually embody, in this afternoon's discussion, why it
is that our relations with the African Union matter so
much. The Somali people deserve stability and
security, and we all have our collective interest in
creating a Somali State with institutions based on the
rule of law and the prospect of enduring stability and
prosperity. We should therefore welcome the progress
made recently with the appointment of a transitional
federal Government and the opportunity that is now
offered.

I very much appreciate the contributions we have
heard so far this afternoon. The starting point, of
course, is as close to zero as you can get. Trying to
build peace, establish stability and end conflict is
pretty difficult in most cases, and we have to recognize
that in the case of Somalia it is about as difficult as it
comes.

Listening to the request for a stability force, I am
struck, really, by the question: to stabilize what? And if
we have a peacekeeping force, what peace are we
going to keep? And that is not a question I ask lightly.

We have to think very carefully about deploying troops
to do that sort of job in today's Somalia. I suspect,
therefore, that there is a precondition to the
deployment of a large force, and that is that a degree of
stability has to be restored - perhaps through a clan-
balanced Somali security force, but in any case a
process of in-country dialogue needs to be established.
However, there should not be confrontation, but rather
cooperation, which will build upon and not undermine
the existing areas of tranquillity in Somalia,
particularly in Somaliland.

The key is a comprehensive ceasefire agreement
that is binding on all parties. Here, the Security
Council may well have a role to play in endorsing such
an agreement. It seems to me that if the Transitional
Federal Government can adopt the sort of positive and
constructive agenda we have heard spoken of, it will
deserve the strongest support from the international
community - a support that is tailored, of course, to
what is practical and possible on the ground. We
believe that the draft declaration of principles and the
proposed coordination of monitoring arrangements
discussed in Stockholm offer a sound potential
framework for engagement. They need to be discussed
with the Transitional Federal Government as soon as
possible.

I do not want to sound negative in what I am
saying because, fundamentally, this is one of those
cases where the United Nations has to take a strong
lead role, particularly on the ground, in the proposed
coordination arrangements for the international
community, and be in a position to deliver whatever
help is possible and is needed by the people of
Somalia. So I would concentrate at this stage on
providing maximum help for the observer mission, if
that is to be put in place by the African Union - as
much help as we can muster on the whole question of
reconstruction and development.

And I believe we should try to help the
Transitional Federal Government to move towards
establishing the institutions that it will need, and the
rule of law, in order to tackle the issues that are
associated with the rule of law in the context of a
growing stability and security. We should then look to
be as ambitious as possible, because the lesson of
history must be that failed States are something we
should avoid, and that where States are close to failure,
we must do our utmost to pick them up and give them
every assistance, especially when they are as prepared
to help themselves as the Transitional Government
appears to be.

