Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Mahiga, for his comprehensive statement to the
Council this morning, and we congratulate him on his
appointment. I also thank him for the gusto and energy
he has deployed as he begins his work. He enjoys the
unequivocal support of Uganda.

I wish also to welcome the Foreign Minister of
Kenya, Mr. Wetangula, and to thank him for his down-
to-earth statement on the situation in Somalia. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
helpful statement.

I fully endorse the Views of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya and the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, which call for parity in the
treatment of peacekeepers in Somalia vis-a-vis
peacekeepers elsewhere in the world. In fact, these
peacekeepers, who face the harshest conditions, end up
getting the least care and being poorly treated by the
international community. Hence, we need to do more
than we are doing.

Uganda reaffirms its support for the Djibouti
peace process, as it represents the best opportunity for
lasting peace in Somalia. We commend the efforts
made by the Transitional Federal Government (TF G) in
advancing the political process in that country. We are
encouraged by its continued commitment and efforts in
reaching out to opposition groups in the search for
lasting peace. We therefore call upon all parties in
Somalia to engage in the political process.

The security situation in Somalia remains fragile.
During the holy month of Ramadan, instead of
observing the edicts of Islam - which call, inter alia,
for peace and generosity during the time of fasting -
Al-Shabaab and other extremist groups launched an
offensive with the aim of overthrowing the TFG.
Moreover, they carried out these attacks, as they
always do, from civilian-populated areas and facilities
such as markets and hospitals. Al-Shabaab holds the
people of Somalia hostage to its extremist views,
obstructs the delivery of humanitarian supplies to the
needy and grossly violates human rights.

The recent attacks on TFG forces and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the use of
civilian facilities to carry out those attacks have left
scores of people dead and many more injured. Hence,
Al-Shabaab and its allies and sponsors bear sole
responsibility for the continuing suffering and death
endured by the Somalia people and by our
peacekeepers.

The launch of the recent offensive by armed
opposition groups is a clear indication that they are still
receiving support in various forms from their sponsors.
In addition, we are concerned about the large numbers
of foreign fighters coming into the country.
Al-Shabaab's activities and methods increasingly
mirror those of Al-Qaida in their nature and objectives.
There is therefore an urgent need to strengthen the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions dealing with spoilers and terrorist groups.

The continuing conflict and the deterioration of
security have led to the worsening of the humanitarian
situation, have increased the number of displaced
persons and have negatively affected the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in the country. We commend
the humanitarian agencies and workers continuing to
operate in Somalia in these very difficult conditions,
and we call upon the international community to
redouble its efforts and increase its support to those
agencies.

The primary responsibility for maintaining peace,
security and stability in Somalia ultimately lies with
the TFG and the people of Somalia. However, without
effective, working State institutions, this will remain a
major challenge. We call upon the international
community to support the rebuilding of State
institutions in Somalia, especially in the security and
justice sectors. Supporting the Government in
improving service delivery will enhance its authority
and legitimacy.

Without unity of purpose within the TFG, the
support provided by the international community for
the people of Somalia will be in vain. We therefore call
upon the TFG and the other transitional institutions to
work in harmony in addressing the challenges that are
facing the country. We commend the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Mahiga, to promote cohesion and
understanding within the TFG. The Special
Representative's work should also help galvanize
cohesion among United Nations agencies and the
international community so that they can focus on
streamlined action.

At the recent African Union summit, held in
Kampala, heads of State or Government reaffirmed
their commitment to support the people of Somalia in
their quest for peace and stability. Thus, we call upon
the international community to support AMISOM. in
effectively fulfilling its mandate. There is now a
window of opportunity in Somalia for laying the
foundation for peace and stability that we cannot afford
to waste.

Finally, we welcome the convening by the
Secretary-General of the mini-summit on Somalia on
23 September, which is really next week. We expect
that this summit will help to further mobilize the

10-5364]
international community to support the efforts and
actions aimed at stabilizing Somalia.

