Mr. Filali (Morocco) (interpretation from Arabic):
I wish on behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom of
Morocco to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. We are certain that the work of the Council
will be crowned with success thanks to your diplomatic
skill. I wish also to convey our congratulations to your

 

predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Germany, on
his presidency of the Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting as Palestine faces a
grave, explosive situation that jeopardizes everything that
has been achieved since the Madrid Conference. Everyone
expected that the Israeli provocation and aggression over
the past two days would result in bloodshed and innocent
victims. Today's situation is the consequence of the Israeli
Government's closure of Gaza and the West Bank, imposed
upon Palestinians living there, its rebuff of the peace
agreements reached with the Palestinian Authority, and its
decision to pursue its policy of expansion into occupied
Palestinian territories, in addition to the continuing
provocations carried out by the Israeli police and army
against the Palestinian people.

Since the 1970s and even before, my country has
always been in the vanguard of States participating in the
peace process. My country has taken innumerable initiatives
to bring about a just, lasting and equitable peace that would
ensure the rights of all and that would be universally
respected. We welcomed the Madrid Conference, which
was based on the same principles and foundations that
underpin our foreign policy with respect to the Israeli-Arab
conflict in general and to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in
particular. We welcomed the Oslo Agreement and travelled
to Washington, DC, to participate in the signing ceremony
for the agreement between the Israelis and Palestinians
sponsored by the United States and the Russian Federation.

Like all other States, we were optimistic about the
peace process based on the Oslo Agreement, which laid
down the principles of land for peace and respect for the
rights of all parties to the conflict.

We supported all these initiatives, and have used every
possible diplomatic, political and other means to help
realize them, in the conviction that the dawn of a just and
lasting peace was at hand despite the length of the
negotiations. But then the Government of Benjamin
Netanyahu came to power and all of that came to an end.
There was retreat from all the principles unanimously
approved by the participants in the Madrid Conference,
including Israel itself. Negotiations on all matters hit
obstacles, and the new Israeli Government began to drain
the Oslo agreement of its content and significance. That
was the first time a Government based on principles of
democratic succession had refused to honour international
commitments undertaken by the previous Administration -
which is contrary to the principles of democracy and to
international norms.

We cannot fail to deplore and reject this situation,
and vigorously and urgently to appeal to the Israeli
Government to honour its commitments under
conventions and agreements concluded, to bring about a
just, lasting and equitable peace with the Palestinian
Authority and with its Arab neighbours.

Yesterday His Majesty King Hassan II, as President
of the seventh Islamic Summit Conference and as
Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, and on behalf of the Islamic
world, addressed a letter to the Secretary-General
deploring the provocations carried out by Israel towards
Arabs and Muslims in flagrant violation of all
international resolutions calling for safeguarding the
character of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Those actions are
aimed at creating a new situation in defiance of
everything that was agreed at the Madrid Conference and
in agreements between the Palestinian Authority and
Israel, in particular with respect to the ultimate status of
the city of Jerusalem. His Majesty the King requested the
Secretary-General to circulate that letter as a document of
the General Assembly at its fifth-first session and of the
Security Council, with a view to urging the international
community to shoulder its responsibility to ensure that the
rule of law prevails, to challenge any action that infringes
upon legitimate Islamic rights and laws, and to respond to
the Israeli policy of imposing a fait accompli by force.
That Israeli policy can only lead to stalemate and return
the region to the old cycle of instability and violence.

It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
demand that Israel respect and honour all agreements into
which, before the recent elections, it entered with the
other parties concerned.

