Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome High Representative Inzko. We
must unfortunately note that his analysis today and on
previous occasions has not been objective. His analysis
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still
tainted by a biased criticism of the leadership of the
Bosnian Serbs.

For a more objective picture of the processes
taking places in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we would
recommend that members of the Security Council also
read the seventh report of the Republika Srpska to the
Security Council, in which the Bosnian Serbs'
commitment to international law and the spirit of the
Dayton Peace Agreement is self-evident. The points
cited in the document clearly confirm the significant
contribution made by Banja Luka to the positive
progress made in the country, as noted in the High
Representative's report (see S/2012/307). They also
show that, in comparison with the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Republika Srpska has developed
more successfully in all areas, ranging from the
economy to inter-ethnic reconciliation and respect for
human rights.

We believe that the main responsibility of the
international community at this stage of the Bosnian
settlement is to transfer responsibility for the fate of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Bosnians themselves. In
practical terms, this means abolishing the Office of the
High Representative, and to that end, returning to the
five objectives and two conditions established by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.

We note that, for several years now, the security
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained
stable. This also reflects the maturity of the Bosnian
State. In recent months, progress has been made in
intra-Bosnian dialogue. The establishment of Bosnia-
wide institutions has been completed. A compromise
has been reached on the 2012 budget. The political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have agreed to the
terms and timetable for the allocation of property,
including defence property, between the State and the
entities. Of particular importance is the recent
agreement that the issue of ownership of State property
is, in essence, the main condition that has yet to be met
under the international community's five objectives
and two conditions agenda, the implementation of
which will enable the Office of the High
Representative to be closed.

Despite the ongoing differences, dialogue is
moving forward. This proves the Bosnian leaders'
ability to find compromises to current problems on
their own, without external involvement. In this
context, we would underscore the Russian Federation's
principled opposition to interference by the
international community in the internal Bosnian
negotiation process. Any external support to one side
could undermine the fragile political balance in the
country. This fully pertains to the demands made by the
leaders of the Bosniak parties to amend the Electoral
Law through a decision of the High Representative,
bypassing the Dayton-mandated procedure. This is an
attempt to extend the term of the temporary
arrangements, enabling those citizens who do not live
in the enclave of Srebrenica to vote in municipal
elections in October 2012.

We are categorically opposed to the arbitrary use
by the High Representative of his Bonn powers. Our
fundamental position is that the use of emergency
measures can be justified only in exceptional
circumstances of gross violations of the Dayton Peace
Agreement that are likely to destabilize the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We consider it realistic to contemplate the end in
the near future of the supervisory regime in the Brcko
district and the closure of a separate office of the High
Representative. We believe that the pertinent decision
should be taken at the forthcoming meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
on 22 and 23 May.

In this regard, we are concerned by the recent
step taken by Mr. Izetbegovie, current Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to ask the
representatives of the member countries of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council for a
decision not to be taken in May on the closure of the
mission in Brcko under the specious excuse that the
district is apparently not able to function
independently. This is acceptable neither in form or nor
in substance. Mr. Izetbegovie, in violating the Dayton
Peace Agreement, has put forward his personal
opinion, which does not conform to the positions taken
by the other Governments of the constituent entities
and conflicts with both the international and the intra-
Bosnian dialogues.

We consider the possibility of strengthening the
European Union (EU) military operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a step in the direction of closing down
the Office of the High Representative. We welcome in
this context the partition of the post between the High
representative and the EU Special Representative. We
are convinced that a precondition for the successful
work of these two international presences in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be the strict respect of their
mandates. We believe that they should not overstep
their respective responsibilities.

We acknowledge the importance of incorporating
amendments to the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in line with the ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights on the Sejdic-Finci vs. Bosnia
and Herzegovina case. A compromise is possible in
this matter. We consider that decisions on key
settlement issues should be taken in international
forums such as the Security Council and the Steering
Board of the Peace and Implementation Council.

