Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, we would like to thank you
and your delegation for convening this meeting. We
would also like to welcome the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, and to
congratulate him once more for his active efforts on
behalf of civilian populations, especially the most
vulnerable sectors. We are happy to have him once
again with us. We attach great importance to the
information that he regularly provides to the Security
Council.
06-52438
With regard to his statement today, we take note
of the positive tone of some of his comments on his
recent visit to Africa, in particular his cautious
optimism with regard to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in northern Uganda. We
know that that region has been the epicentre of the
worst humanitarian tragedies that our generation has
experienced. We trust that both countries will be able
to start to follow a path that will take them to
democratic normalcy after so much suffering and so
many mistakes. However, we are still concerned, in
particular, about the issue of sexual violence and we
think that urgent steps need to be taken on that
problem.

On another issue, the situation in Darfur, as we
know and as the Council knows in depth, continues to
be an urgent one. We cannot add much more to what
we have recently heard from Mr. Egeland. Almost 3
million people in the region, without counting those in
Chad, could be deprived of humanitarian assistance to
enable them to survive, due to the re-escalation of
violence in recent months. In this context, we would
like to repeat that it is absolutely imperative to
implement the provisions of resolution 1706 (2006)
without further delay.

With regard to the Juba peace process and the
slow progress that has been achieved, we think that it
is necessary once again to support this process and
invest in peace and reconciliation so as finally to put
an end to this long and painful conflict that has
afflicted the Acholi people for so many years. In this
context, we think that one cannot negotiate impunity
for the perpetrators of so much suffering for the
civilian population. So that there can be peace, there
needs to be accountability for those who have carried
out massive violations of human rights. The
Government of Uganda has voluntarily submitted the
situation to the International Criminal Court, and we
believe that the process, once initiated, should not stop.
We support the actions of the Court, and we agree with
Mr. Egeland that the international community, and in
particular the mediators that are assisting in the Juba
process, should seek innovative solutions that will
harmonize the traditional systems which are common
in reconciliation among the local civilian population
with the requirements of international law. Once again,
we state that peace cannot be achieved at the price of
justice.

Finally, my delegation would like to state its
condemnation of attacks on humanitarian personnel, in
particular, the death of 12 humanitarian workers in the
last two months in Darfur, and the constant physical
aggression and harassment to which they are subject
and that the Secretary-General has so vividly described
in recent days. Attacking humanitarian personnel or
preventing their activities not only violates
fundamental principles of humanitarian law but it also
imperils the means of survival of the 3 million people
dependent on humanitarian aid. It is urgent for the
violence to cease. The international community cannot
allow innocent civilians to continue to die in the name
of the right to self-defence.

To conclude, we would like to state our
appreciation for Mr. Egeland's efforts in seeking to
improve the situation of civilian populations. We value
his commitment and we reaffirm that Argentina
supports him in his daily task of protecting civilians in
armed conflict.

