Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): I too,
would like to thank Sir Kieran for his briefing, which
gave us a basic understanding of recent developments
in Somalia. I would also like to thank very sincerely
the Ambassador of Djibouti for his very detailed
presentation on the creative and innovative efforts
made by Djibouti to guide the peace process in
Somalia. We are aware of the logistical and substantive
difficulties and complexities that these efforts pose and
we welcome the resolve with which they are being
pursued.

Canada remains deeply concerned by the
continuing instability in Somalia and by its negative
impact on the security and well-being of the civilian
population. We are convinced that concerted action and
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Organization of African Unity and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
are essential to guarantee the effective participation of
the international community in efforts to resolve the
conflict in Somalia. This open meeting will be a useful
contribution to the process.

We firmly support the lead role being played by
IGAD as well as the initiative taken by the President
Guelleh to negotiate a peaceful resolution to the
conflict in Somalia. We are happy, therefore, to be able
to support the draft presidential statement which was
submitted by Mali on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and which I hope the Council will soon
adopt.
We urge President Guelleh to continue to give
high priority to activities aimed at convincing Somali
civil society to support this peace initiative despite the
resistance of those who have no interest in seeing
peace restored to Somalia.

(spoke in English)

Canada welcomes the sanctions committee's
decision for the Chairman to undertake a fact-finding
mission to neighbouring countries to assess the
difficulties encountered in implementing the arms
embargo.

We are deeply concerned by the ongoing abuse,
with impunity, of human rights in Somalia. We
continue to call upon Somali faction leaders to promote
and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all Somali citizens.

Attacks perpetrated against humanitarian
workers, particularly within southern and central
Somalia, are unacceptable and only further inhibit the
ability of the international and local organizations to
assist and protect already vulnerable populations. We
remind Somali faction leaders of their obligation to
ensure the freedom of movement, safety and security of
those seeking only to assist, including locally engaged
staff, and to facilitate their access to affected
population.

