Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Let me begin by thanking Ms. Hennis-
Plasschaert for her briefing.

Iraq is at a crossroads in its history. Much progress
has been made, but many challenges remain. Belgium
welcomes the establishment of the federal Government,
now nearly complete. To meet the many challenges, Iraq
needs a strong and inclusive Government, supported by
robust institutions and well-functioning public services.
Belgium also calls for the appointment of women to
decision-making positions.

Belgium encourages the Government to continue
its efforts to implement its programme. Executive Order
237, which stipulates that the popular mobilization
forces should be under the exclusive control of the
Government, is an important step forward in particular.

Belgium looks forward to the rigorous
implementation of that order by all parties concerned.
Moreover, as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, Belgium encourages the
Government of Iraq to develop, sign and implement an
action plan on this issue, with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). That
would be a significant step towards delisting Iraq from
the annex to the Secretary-General's annual report.

We also welcome the Government's efforts in the
fight against corruption. Other important challenges
remain, namely, the economic situation and the business
environment. Providing basic services to the population
and creating jobs are important factors to ensure the
continued support of the people. The apparent calm
in the south of the country, compared to recent years,
is a positive development, but continued attention is
needed. In addition, given the strong influence of the
effects of climate change on Iraq and its population, it
is desirable that UNAMI step up its role in that area.
As Iraq looks to the future, reconciliation is
of paramount importance. That must continue and
families must be allowed to return to their communities
and resume normal lives. We support UNAMI's
important mission to promote justice and the protection
of human rights.

Lastly, the security sector and its reform remain
a challenge for the Iraqi authorities. Although the
Islamic State has been defeated militarily, the causes
that allowed it to develop remain. We must therefore
do all we can to prevent the re-emergence of the
terrorist group.

Finally, Iraq and its people can only flourish anew
in a context of domestic and regional stability. The
fundamental principles of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity should guide actions. To that end,
we call for the joint commitment of the region and the
international community.

