Ms. Soder'berg (United States of America): The
United States strongly endorses this proposal to continue
the Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) until 15
March 2000. This action gives the United Nations the
valuable time needed to recruit the technically skilled
personnel required to fulfil the mandate of the follow-on
mission, the International Civilian Support Mission in
Haiti (MICAH). The creation of the new mission
represents a new stage in the international community's
partnership with Haiti. It carries forward the work of
MIPONUH and its predecessors to build a highly
professional police force, begun after the 1994 restoration
of democracy. But it also moves this partnership in new
directions.

 

The transition over the next several months from
MIPONUH to MICAH reflects the changing realities in the
type of international help most suitable for today's Haiti.
The difficult work of creating a professional police force is
now behind us, as the nearly 6,000 recruits of several years
ago have matured into seasoned officers. We must now
focus on ensuring the long-term sustainability of the Haitian
National Police. To do this, the international community
needs to concentrate on deepening the mid-level to
senior-level management capabilities of the force, helping
it to better manage programmes, funds, equipment and
personnel.

In this new role, the armed and uniformed
international civilian police currently in Haiti will be
replaced by technical advisors - typically, in their home
countries such advisers are senior police officials - who
will work in Port-au-Prince and in each of Haiti's nine
de'partements to develop a competent cadre of Haitian
police commanders and managers.

We must also be candid in our assessment of the
current situation in Haiti and recognize that the justice
system has failed to keep pace with the progress of the
police. In fact, unless addressed quickly, the weakness of
the judicial sector could undermine our long work with the
Haitian National Police. Additionally, the flaws in the
administration of justice present a long-term threat to the
protection of the basic human rights of the Haitian people.

Therefore, it is appropriate that the pillar of support
that MICAH will provide to the Haitian police will also be
joined by separate, but nevertheless mutually reinforcing,
efforts to strengthen the judicial sector and improve respect
for human rights in Haiti over the long term. Through the
efforts of MIPONUH, its predecessors and the International
Civilian Mission in Haiti, the international community has
helped Haiti to advance in areas critical to any just and
democratic society. But the job is not yet done, and today
we take the next step in our partnership with Haiti.

