The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovic'
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1998/16l, letter
dated 26 February 1998 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/ l998/ 197, letter dated 5 March 1998 from
the Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its concern at
the Croatian Government's lack of compliance with
obligations assumed under the Basic Agreement on the
Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (S/l995/951), the Croatian Government's
letter of 13 January 1997 (S/ 1997/27, annex) and the
agreement of 23 April 1997 between the United
Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES),
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the Croatian Government concerning

the return of refugees and displaced persons. The
Council notes that the overall security situation in
the Danube region remains relatively stable, but is
particularly concerned about the increasing incidence
of harassment and intimidation of the local Serb
community in the region and the failure of the
Croatian Government to apply the process of
national reconciliation in an effective way at the
local level. This worrying situation, together with
recent statements by the Croatian authorities, cast
doubt upon the Republic of Croatia's commitment to
include ethnic Serbs and persons from other
minorities as full and equal members of Croatian
society.

"The Security Council, recalling the statement
by its President of 13 February 1998
(S/PRST/ 1998/3) and having noted the letter from
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Croatia of 5 March 1998 (S/1998/197), calls upon
the Croatian Government publicly to reaffirm and by
its actions to demonstrate its commitment to
fulfilling its obligations under the Basic Agreement
and other agreements in full, including through
progress on national reconciliation at every level. In
particular, the Council calls upon the Croatian
Government to take prompt and unequivocal steps to
ensure the safety, security and rights of all Croatian
citizens and to build confidence among the Serb
community throughout Croatia, including by
providing promised funding for the Joint Council of
Municipalities. These steps should include measures
to create the conditions to allow local Serbs to
remain in the region, to facilitate the return of
refugees and displaced persons and to address
underlying practical and economic issues which
inhibit returns. The Council calls upon the Croatian
Government to: establish clear procedures for the
documentation of refugees from Croatia; issue an
equitable plan for nationwide two-way returns;
implement fully and fairly its legislation on amnesty;
act promptly to pass equitable property and tenancy
rights legislation which would encourage returns and
stimulate additional international reconstruction
assistance; ensure fair employment benefit practices
and equal economic opportunity; and ensure the non-
discriminatory application of the rule of law.

"The Security Council recognizes that, since
the end of the UNTAES mandate, the performance
of the Croatian police has been generally
satisfactory, and in this context expresses its
 

appreciation and support for the work of the United
Nations civilian police support group. The Council
notes, however, that public confidence in the police is
low. The Council calls upon the Croatian Government
to take measures, including through public information
and police preventive action, to improve public
confidence in the police as part of a wider programme
of measures to prevent ethnically motivated crime and
ensure the protection and equal treatment of all
Croatian citizens, regardless of ethnicity.

"The Security Council stresses that, following the

termination of UNTAES, responsibility for the

full reintegration of the Danube region lies clearly
with the Croatian Government. The United Nations
will continue to work closely with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
monitoring the situation and reminding the Croatian
Government of its obligations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.05 pm.

