Mr. Moriko (Cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the briefing on the situation in
Darfur and the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
commend Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peace Operations, and Mr. Sma'il Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
on the quality of their briefings.

By adopting resolution 2479 (2019), on 27 June,
which authorizes the technical renewal of UNAMID's
mandate until 31 October, the Security Council granted
itself a four-month evaluation period, at the end of which
it must decide whether or not to withdraw the mission.
Cote d'Ivoire notes with satisfaction the positive
development in the situation in the Sudan since the
adoption of the resolution, as evidenced by the signing,
on 17 August, of an agreement between the Transitional
Military Council and the opposition alliance of Forces
of Freedom and Change on the formation of a new
Government and the institutions responsible for leading
the transition. The establishment of the Sovereign
Council and the appointment and inauguration of
Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as Prime Minister open up a new
chapter in the Sudan's history. Those developments
must be consolidated by the formation of the future
transitional Government.

My country, which believes in the capacity of
the Sudanese people to overcome their differences
and create a political and social environment that is
conducive to the preservation of peace and stability,
welcomes this historic moment and sincerely hopes that
the spirit of dialogue that prevailed in the negotiations
will be maintained. In order to boost that positive
momentum, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the Sudanese
authorities and political actors to work together to
ensure economic recovery, with a view to meeting the
pressing social demands of the people.

My country takes this opportunity to welcome the
mediation and good offices of Ethiopia, the African
Union and the United Nations, with the support of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. That is
a virtuous example of preventive diplomacy and the
result of exemplary cooperation between the United
Nations and regional actors.

My delegation is of the view that the relative
stability in the situation in Darfur cannot overshadow
the persistence of security vulnerabilities, as illustrated
by sporadic incidents between security forces and
civilians, intercommunal tensions and the criminal
activities of armed movements. The humanitarian and
human rights situations in Darfur continue to be of
concern with regard to the obstruction of the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
and the persistence ofviolence against civilians, as well
as sexual violence.

In that context, Cote d'Ivoire once again reminds
the parties to the conflict that reconciliation and lasting
peace in Darfur will be possible only in an environment
marked by definitely silencing the guns and holding
a dialogue-based process to resolve the crisis. We
therefore encourage the new Sudanese authorities
to contribute actively to that process by engaging in
negotiations with the armed movements in Darfur,
with a view to creating the conditions needed for the
withdrawal of UNAMID in June 2020. My delegation
urges regional actors to support the ongoing peace
process by contributing to the effective implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and the
road map emanating from African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.

Cote d'Ivoire especially looks forward to the
recommendations of the joint United Nations-AU
evaluation report to be published on 30 September.
That report should enable the Council to decide on
the withdrawal of UNAMID on the date foreseen. My
delegation hopes that any UNAMID withdrawal will
be orderly, based on a phased approach and take into
account security progress and vulnerabilities. It also
must consider the need to maintain reserve capacities
until the final closure of the mission.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its call to the
Sudanese parties to continue the dialogue and urges the
United Nations and the African Union to continue to
act together in order to support sustainable peace and
stability efforts in Darfur.

