Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the French presidency for having
convened this open debate.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We thank the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for his comprehensive oral report
pursuant to resolution 2234 (2016) and would once
again underline the need for a written report. We also
align ourselves with the concrete points made by the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.

In this fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian and Arab territories, we reiterate the need
for the Security Council to demonstrate its resolve to
address the Palestinian question as a matter of urgency.
It is worth noting that this year also marks the fiftieth
anniversary of resolution 242 (1967).

As Bangladesh is currently overwhelmed by the
massive, unprecedented influx of forcibly displaced
people from Myanmar's Rakhine state, we cannot but
remain profoundly concerned over the protracted illegal
occupation and humanitarian situation faced by the
Palestinian people. Bangladesh has been dealing with
the Rohingya situation for the past three decades and is
seeking the Security Council's collective and decisive
initiative to lend support to the bilateral diplomatic
efforts pursued by Bangladesh with Myanmar. It is
crucial that the Security Council demonstrate the unity
of purpose to find peaceful, just and lasting solutions
to all of these protracted crises, which will otherwise
continue to pose serious threats to international and
regional peace and security.

The continued breaches of international
humanitarian law and the systematic human rights
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories have
given rise to an egregious culture of impunity. In the
absence of effective international accountability, the
occupying Power continues to enforce violence against
Palestinian citizens, imprisoning and abusing scores of
Palestinians in its detention centres and dispossessing
and displacing thousands ofPalestinian families through
its construction and expansion of illegal settlements.

We share the concerns over the reported lack of
progress in implementing resolution 2234 (2016). It is
obvious that the illegal Israeli settlements as well as the
wall in and around occupied East Jerusalem are being
deliberately pursued in order to fundamentally change
the character, status and demography of the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The Council has a moral obligation to prevail upon
Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, lift the blockade in the
Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms of occupation.
Immediate priority must be given to ensuring
international protection for the Palestinian people,
who have suffered for decades from Israel's policy
of collective punishment. The hunger strike recently
observed by thousands of prisoners in Israeli detention
centres underscores the need for the international
community's sustained efforts to address their
grievances and plight.

Under the guidance of our Honourable Prime
Minister, the Government and the people of Bangladesh
remain steadfast in our support for the just and legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in the framework of a two-State solution.
Bangladesh acknowledges the developments on
political unity and reconciliation in Palestine, which we
consider to be a step in the right direction.

Bangladesh looks forward to positive signs
emerging from the various regional and bilateral
initiatives being pursued to address the Palestinian
question in the context of the two-State solution. We
continue to urge all key actors to continue their efforts
to pursue a comprehensive solution to the Palestinian
issue, consistent with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and in accordance with the Arab Peace
Initiative, the Quartet road map and the principle of
land for peace.

We also echo the need to ensure enhanced,
predictable and sustainable funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order for it to effectively
carry out its humanitarian mandate in support of the
Palestinian refugees.

