Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to welcome my brother Foreign
Minister of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
this meeting.

The Government of the United States, with the
irresponsible complicity of several countries and actors,
staged a dangerous provocation that sought to violate
the sovereignty of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
through the use ofpressure and force, which endangered
the lives of thousands of people. The attempt to enter
Venezuela by force, under the pretext of delivering
and distributing supposed humanitarian assistance,
constitutes a serious violation of international law and
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and such actions are to be condemned.

The United States continues to try to invent pretexts
for military aggression against Venezuela. It has openly
declared the validity and application of the Monroe
Doctrine, which for the nations of Latin America and
the Caribbean implies the imposition of Governments
designed in Washington, DC, or totally subjugated to
the will of United States imperialism.

The Cuban Government has already denounced the
escalation of pressure and actions of the Government
of the United States to prepare a military adventure
disguised as humanitarian intervention in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and called on the international
community to mobilize to prevent that from taking
place. Those actions are aimed at provoking acts with
unpredictable consequences that serve as a pretext for
a military adventure to overthrow the legitimate and
democratic Government of the constitutional President,
Nicolas Maduro Moros. The decision to set a deadline to
force the entry of so-called humanitarian aid constitutes
a serious violation of international humanitarian law,
reveals the political manipulation of that aid and lays
bare the pretext for launching a foreign intervention
in Venezuela.

We reiterate that the United States is laying the
groundwork for military action under a humanitarian
pretext. The Presidents of Costa Rica, Guatemala
and Peru and the Vice-President of Brazil declared
yesterday that the solution to the current situation is
not military intervention. The Foreign Minister of
Spain and the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica
Mogherini, among others, also echoed that sentiment
over the past few hours.

Nevertheless, Vice President Mike Pence said the
following yesterday in Bogota:

"As we continue to bring economic and diplomatic
pressure on the Maduro regime, we hope for a
peaceful transition to democracy, but as President
Trump has made clear, all options are on the table."

I wish to emphasize that we have heard the phrase
"all options are on the table" repeated over and over
again in recent weeks by various senior officials of the
Government of the United States. Similar behaviour
and pretexts were adopted by the United States in the
prelude to the wars it launched against Yugoslavia, Iraq
and Libya.

Numerous United States sources have detailed
how the coup is to be coordinated in order to put into
power in Venezuela a Government at the service of
Washington. In addition, a great communications and
political operation is under way - generally a prelude
to actions of greater magnitude by the Government
of the United States, which are possible only with the
complicity of the large corporate media.

We strongly condemn the attempted coup d'etat in
Venezuela and the attempt to impose on that country a
Government at the service of the United States. We also
condemn the recurring calls to the Bolivarian military
to join this onslaught and attempts to infiltrate the
Embassies and Consulates of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abroad, in violation of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

United States military transport aircraft have
conducted flights from their bases at United States
military installations that house special operations
forces and marine infantry units used to carry out covert
actions, including against leaders of other countries.

The mode of operations of the White House National
Security team and various State Department officials
and United States Embassies is well known. That
Government is exerting overwhelming pressure against
other countries in an attempt to force them to recognize
the so-called President, self-appointed and proclaimed

by Washington, or to call for new elections in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in open disregard for
the popular will and the institutional integrity of that
country, as expressed in the 20 May elections.

Those who claim to be concerned about the so-called
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela are the same ones
who increasingly apply and strengthen unilateral, and
therefore illegal, coercive economic measures against
the sisterly Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela - by
seizing or freezing its financial assets in third countries;
pressuring Governments that supply Venezuela, the
Venezuelan oil industry and third-country banks to
prevent them from carrying out legitimate financial
transactions, even in third currencies; and confiscating
and stealing the subsidiary of Petroleos de Venezuela in
the United States.

Cuba rejects and condemns the hypocritical calls
for the provision of humanitarian aid by those who
apply measures that violate international law and
international humanitarian law, thus causing hardship
and human suffering and depriving the Venezuelan
people and Government of more than $30 billion.

The accusation made by the representative of the
United States against my country is disgraceful. Our
Government rejects such slander in the most energetic
and categorical terms, while, at the same time, we
reaffirm the duty and commitment to continue providing
our modest cooperation with the brotherly Venezuelan
people, in which more than 20,000 Cuban aid workers
are participating, 94 per cent of them in the area of
health care and the rest in the area of education -just
as we are doing in 83 countries around the world. To
contradict those facts is an offence to the truth and
demonstrates how little respect its Government has for
the Security Council and the United Nations.

Our country reiterates its unshakable solidarity
with the constitutional President, Nicolas Maduro
Moros, with the Bolivarian and Chavista revolution and
with the civil-military union of the Venezuelan people,
and affirms that, in the sisterly Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, we must defend today the tenets of the
Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a
Zone of Peace. Today we must defend the sovereignty,
independence and sovereign equality of every State in
the region.

Cuba has called on the international community to
act in defence of peace and avoid, by pooling the efforts
of all actors without exception, a military intervention
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Cuba
has called for an international initiative to bring peace
to Venezuela in opposition to war and the military
intervention of the United States, which would harm
the independence, the sovereignty and the interests
of the Latin American peoples from the Rio Bravo
to Patagonia, and in favour of the supreme good for
humankind - peace and the right to life.

Let us not allow a repetition in Venezuela of the
sad and painful history of United States military
interventions, on more than one occasion, in Mexico,
Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, more
recently in Grenada and Panama, and in our own
country, Cuba. Given the urgency of the situation, we
encourage the Montevideo Mechanism, especially the
Government of the United Mexican States, the Eastern
Republic of Uruguay, the Governments of the Caribbean
Community and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, to
continue to spare no effort in moving towards achieving
a solution based on dialogue and absolute respect for
the independence and sovereignty of Venezuela and the
validity of the principles of international law, especially
the principle of non-intervention.

At this moment, as we decide to ensure the validity
of the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, that the basis of any Government's
legitimacy resides in the support and vote of its people
and that no foreign pressure can replace the sovereign
exercise of self-determination, in such circumstances,
one can only be for or against war.

We hope that the Security Council will fulfil its
role and responsibility as the primary guarantor of
international peace and security and will not lend its
support to military adventures. We call on Security
Council members to act in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law and not to intervene, directly or
indirectly, in the internal affairs of any other State,
while respecting the principles of national sovereignty,
equal rights and self-determination of peoples in
upholding peace, which is precious for humankind, our
America and the Venezuelan people.

