Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his comprehensive briefing on the Middle East
peace process. We agree with the main assessments
that he presented to us. We were interested to hear the
statements of the Permanent Observer of Palestine and
of the Permanent Representative of Israel.

Today, the international community must think
about how to provide new impetus to the search for
peace in the Middle East. The impasse in that area
undermines efforts to stabilize the situation in the
region. Much will depend on how the Government of
Israel conducts itself following the election of Prime
Minister Binyamin Netanyahu. We are convinced that
negotiations with the Palestinians must not be resumed
from scratch; they should be pursued taking all
previous achievements and agreements into account.
The main thing is to ensure that the new Israeli Cabinet
stays the course of settling the crisis on the basis of the
concept of a two-State solution and resolves itself to
the necessity of freezing settlement activity, including
in East Jerusalem.

Strengthening the fragile ceasefire in Gaza,
making it stable and reciprocal, and further action to
restore a fully fledged peace process are urgent tasks.
We cannot allow a recurrence of the tragedy of the
peaceful inhabitants of Gaza, where thousands of
people, including children, fell victims of the violence.
It is also necessary to free the citizens of southern
Israel from the permanent threat of rocket attacks on
their homes. The best way to do that is for all sides
fully to implement resolution 1860 (2009).
Clearly, it is important to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1850 (2008), which
supports a comprehensive peace process in the Middle
East. The efforts of Egypt in that regard are of key
importance. The international community must
continue energetically to support them and we cherish
the hope that its mediation activities will be successful.
The donor conference in Sharm el-Sheikh, at which the
international community expressed its readiness to
pledge more funds than expected for the recovery of
Gaza, contributed positively to that end. For its part,
Russia will continue to provide the Palestinians with
all necessary assistance.

The recent conflict in Gaza has again
demonstrated the importance of an intra-Palestinian
reconciliation on a mutually acceptable legal basis that
includes the Arab Peace Initiative and the Palestine
Liberation Organization platform. Dialogue is complex
but must be continued. There are no alternatives to that
process. We must recognize that the crisis surrounding
Gaza has led to calls to withdraw the Arab Peace
Initiative. That is of serious concern to us. The Arab
Peace Initiative, with the vigorous support of Russia,
has become an integral part of the international legal
basis for progress towards genuine peace in the region.
It is necessary to ensure that we do not go back on that.

We are making preparations for the Moscow
conference, on which there is international consensus,
based on the decisions in the Security Council
resolutions and of the Quartet. We welcome the fact
that Mr. Pascoe referred to that important upcoming
forum. We will continue our interaction with the
Secretary-General and all other colleagues of the
Quartet in preparing the Moscow conference. That
forum will provide renewed impetus to the peace
process and ensure its comprehensive character.
Negotiations must be resumed not only on the
Palestinian, but also on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
and multilaterally. Only such comprehensive settlement
can guarantee the peace and security of all peoples in
the region.

Russia is carefully following developments in the
situation in Lebanon and political efforts to create an
atmosphere conducive to make the June parliamentary
elections peaceful and successful. In that regard, we
are concerned by the reports from Lebanon of a
deterioration in the situation in the Palestinian refugee
camps. We remain convinced that we cannot allow the
political situation in that country to worsen. The
problems of Lebanon must be resolved exclusively
through national dialogue and by seeking mutual
understanding between political forces in the country.
Russia will continue to promote that. We welcome
ongoing progress in the development of bilateral
relations between Lebanon and Syria. That is another
important factor for stability in the region.

