The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Togo.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing, which has provided useful information
on the situation in Libya, which is before the Court
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). I wish also to thank
her for the information she provided yesterday during
the interactive dialogue upstream of her briefing today.

While Togo's position with respect to the Rome
Statute of the ICC has not changed, we nevertheless
feel that that information has allowed us to better
understand the activities of and challenges facing the
Office of the Prosecutor in relation to the situation in
Libya with respect to the principal aspects of the issue:
cooperation, the admissibility of the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi cases, ongoing
investigations and allegations of crimes committed by
the various parties.

Turning to cooperation, Togo welcomes the
resumption of contacts between the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC and the Libyan authorities
following the elections and the appointment, on
17 March, of the new Prosecutor-General, Abdul
Quader Radwan. While we encourage discussions
between the ICC and the Libyan authorities, we believe
that such discussions will be perceived as constructive
and fruitful only if they advocate the prosecution of the
perpetrators of the crimes committed, be it on Libyan
soil or outside the country. A major challenge facing
reconciliation in Libya is that prosecution either by the
ICC or by national courts must not target one single
party but all parties, so as not to give the impression of
a Victor's justice.

The ICC must ensure that its cooperation with
the Libyan authorities correct any adverse effects that
might result from any amnesty law, under the pretext
of promoting or protecting the revolution, or that might
aim to protect the perpetrators of crimes committed in
the framework of the revolution but that fall under the
jurisdiction of the Court and thus the Rome Statute.

On the issue of complementarity, Togo believes
that the prosecution and sentencing of perpetrators
is the responsibility first and foremost of the Libyan
authorities. Togo therefore believes that Libya's decision
to challenge the admissibility of the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senassi cases before the
Court under the Rome Statute is a case in point and
an example of active complementarity. We are pleased
that, unlike in the SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi case, there
seems to be evidence in the case ofAbdullah AZ-Senussi
that could establish that the Government is prosecuting
the same case as the ICC.

Nevertheless, it remains that only reference here
can be the decision of the relevant chambers. That
is why Togo awaits with interest the decisions of the
relevant branches of the Court regarding the cases, in
the hope that those decisions will promote the principle
of due process and national reconciliation in Libya.

Indeed, while decisions regarding the admissibility
exception in the SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi cases will not represent a general assessment
of the Libyan legal system, they will serve as an
indicator of the ability of the national justice system to
guarantee due process, justice for victims and the right
to defence for all, as well as witness protection.

With regard to the ongoing investigations, Togo is
convinced that gender crimes must not go unpunished
and is pleased that the fifth report and that which
preceded it confirm that those investigations are
under way. Togo hopes that those investigations
will be concluded and prosecution begun against the
perpetrators.

Moreover, we are concerned about the recurring
reports by human rights organizations of serious
violations of rights in the form of torture or ill-
treatment, particularly against persons of African
origin on the basis of their alleged association with the
Al-Qadhafi regime.

Togo also expresses its concern about the crimes
committed by rebel forces in Tawergha, near Misrata,
and calls on the Libyan authorities to take measures to
ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes are held
accountable for their actions by national courts, or to
cooperate fully with the ICC. Togo therefore urges
the Libyan authorities not only to draw up a strategy
for past crimes but also to explore the possibilities for
transitional justice to address the impacts of the crisis
and political events, with the aim of promoting peace
throughout the country and national reconciliation.
In that regard, we reiterate our call to all of Libya's
partners to spare no effort in assisting the country on
the path to achieving those goals.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
