Mr. Ntakirutimana (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, at the outset I wish on behalf of my
delegation to extend to you our sincere gratitude for
having invited us to this meeting. I wish also to thank
the delegation of Angola which courageously,
farsightedly and wisely guided the first difficult year of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

My delegation also wishes to offer
encouragement to the delegation of Japan, which has
just taken over the chairmanship of the Commission.
Nor can we forget to thank in particular the Norwegian
delegation, which has been with us since our country
became a beneficiary of the attention of the
Commission. We also wish to thank the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the delegations of El Salvador and
the Netherlands for their work in launching the
activities of the Commission and attaining the first
milestones.

When the Peacebuilding Commission was
created, Burundi was plunged into enormous disarray.
Burundi had experienced 40 years of bad governance.
It had just experienced more than 10 years of a
fratricidal war, of which it bore the scars. There were
new institutions that had just been created and which
were supposed to be functioning: there was a new
general assembly, a new senate, a new army and a new
national police, to mention only a few. In a word, the
entire country had to be reborn, grow, stabilize and
develop.

With the Peacebuilding Commission, we have
now come to the end of a year of useful, laborious and
good work. Together, over the past year, we have
succeeded, as we see it, in holding 4 major gatherings.

First, there was the matter of getting to know
Burundi. Several delegations came from Bujumbura to
New York to participate in the meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Delegations also went
from New York to Bujumbura - to the field - to see
for themselves the reality of the situation there.

Secondly, there was the identification of priorities
and the challenges facing my Government.

Thirdly, there was the development of the
Strategic Framework. Today we are in the process of
finalizing the follow-up mechanism for the
implementation of the Strategic Framework.

Fourthly, for my delegation, there was the
organization - the success even - from 24 to 25 May,
of the round table of development partners and donors.
Today, my country is facing 3 essential
challenges. First, those projects identified by the
Commission are currently being implemented. Twelve
projects are in the process of becoming operational. It
would be our hope that the Commission would remain
focused on the success of these projects. We do not
wish to see their failure. We do not want to see them
fail to achieve a conclusion.

Secondly, we wish to see complete and final
peace on the territory of Burundi. We would hope that
the Security Council will firmly and clearly support the
efforts of the South African facilitators in the search
for final peace in Burundi. The regional initiative put
forward by Uganda is doing its best and deserves
specific and concrete backing from the Security
Council. We should like to reassure the Council that
the Government of Burundi has no kind of hidden
agenda that might in any way delay or jeopardize the
path to peace. The fighters of the Forces nationales de
liberation - Parti Liberation du Peuple Hutu (FNL- PALIPEHUTU) are our brothers, our neighbours and
are people from our own families, and we are ready to
welcome them.

The goodwill of the Government of Burundi
shows that more than 1,400 deserters from the FNL-
PALIPEHUTU movement are now in fact saying that
they want to see the implementation of the agreement
signed with the leadership of their movement. They are
deserting their movement and they are coming to seek
protection from Governmental forces. Here I would
like to request the Council's support in ensuring that
they are fed so as to avoid having them destroy the
villages in which they are now gathered.

Thirdly, peace without bread can go nowhere; we
also wish to have bread. During the round table in May
of 2007 - a successful round table - various
budgetary pledges were made by development partners
present in Bujumbura. Today, as in the past, Burundi
notes with the deepest regret, that few partners have in
fact kept their pledges. My delegation would like here
to see the Security Council and the Commission get
involved in pooling their efforts to ensure that
promises become realities.

I would like to suggest four ideas for the
improvement of the Commission's future activities.

First, there is the need to consider the principle of
national involvement as the cornerstone that must guide
all the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Secondly, the Peacebuilding Commission must
continue to work in a transparent, flexible and inclusive
manner.

Thirdly, the Commission must continue to work
in close cooperation with the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the international financial institutions, as well as
regional organizations.

Fourthly, dialogue should be continued with all of
the interested players: the donor countries, the
recipient countries and the United Nations system as a
whole.

Burundi's success as it moves toward the final
achievement of peace will also be a success for the
Security Council and for the Commission. If we
succeed, we shall succeed together; if we fail, we will
fail together. My Government once again reiterates to
the Commission what it has already said often, namely,
that we hope to see the Commission and the Security
Council one day tell us that we have succeeded in
Burundi.

