Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his first briefing
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). We appreciate the focus
and energy that he and his team are bringing to this
Committee.

The Iranian nuclear issue remains one of the gravest
threats to international security and a top priority for
the Security Council. We meet today at a time of new
opportunities but growing risks. In recent weeks, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Director
General has reaffirmed yet again that Iran continues
to advance its nuclear programme and obstruct the
IAEA's investigation into the programme's possible
military dimensions by refusing to grant the IAEA
access to the Parchin site and to documents, personnel
and equipment requested by the Agency. Those actions,
as well as Iran's continued enrichment and heavy
water-related activities, are in clear violation of the
Council's demands. More alarming still, the IAEA
Director General has confirmed that Iran is now further
contravening Security Council resolutions by installing
hundreds of second-generation centrifuges that could
significantly increase its uranium enrichment capacity.
The installation of those centrifuges, as well as Iran's
stockpiling of 20-per cent enriched uranium and
continued enrichment at the Fordow facility, are cause
for serious concern.

Those actions are unnecessary and thus
provocative. Iran already has enough enriched uranium
to fuel the Tehran Research Reactor for at least a
decade. Increasing that capacity without any clear
civilian use makes no sense. Iran's actions neither
build international confidence nor bring us closer to a
comprehensive and peaceful solution. On the contrary,
they raise the world's concerns. For this very reason,
the work of the Iran sanctions Committee is vital. As
long as Iran rejects its international obligations, we
must be resolute in implementing fully the sanctions
the Council has imposed.

In recent months, we have witnessed troubling new
violations of those sanctions. In January, Yemen seized
a vessel transporting a very large cache of sophisticated
Iranian arms, ammunition and explosives, in violation
of resolution 1747 (2007). Those arms could have
destabilized Yemen's fragile transition. We urge the

Committee, with the support of the Panel of Experts,
to investigate that case rigorously and work with the
Council to craft a worthy response.

We have also observed more public statements
acknowledging Iran's illicit arms smuggling.
Representatives of Hamas, Hizbullah, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and even Iran itself are now publicly
admitting to activities that violate United Nations
sanctions. The Committee should consider those
statements as additional proof of Iran's blatant disregard
for its obligations and follow up to the fullest extent
possible.

The Committee is now also assessing Iranian
missile launches that have violated resolution 1929
(2010). Those launches allow Iran to refine and develop
a technology that, if ever combined with weapons of
mass destruction, would constitute an intolerable
threat to international peace and security. We urge the
Committee, in line with its mandate, to take swift and
sure action in response, including by imposing targeted
sanctions on those responsible for such violations.

Each and every violation of United Nations
sanctions is a serious matter. It is our collective
responsibility to report on those cases, to support
efforts to investigate them, and to act decisively when
investigations are completed. Responding effectively to
those incidents bolsters both the Council's credibility
and the efficiency of diplomatic efforts to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue.

The United States remains committed to a diplomatic
solution. Therefore, we welcome the recently resumed
dialogue between the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany (P5+1) and Iran. But let
us not forget that dialogue is only a means to an end.
Our goal remains a durable and comprehensive solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme, in accordance with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and in
compliance with all relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA Board of Governors.

As a first step, we seek to address Iran's most
significant nuclear activities - the production and
accumulation of uranium enriched to near 20 per cent
and the installation of additional centrifuges at Fordow.
In that event, the P5+1 countries have demonstrated
that we are willing to take steps to respond to Iran's
expressed concerns.

The talks between the P5+l and Iran in Almaty were
useful, but we must see whether real progress towards a
negotiated solution can result from the renewed process.
The process cannot continue indefinitely or be used as
a stalling mechanism. Therefore, we remain committed
to the dual-track approach, mounting pressure on
Iran as we pursue meaningful dialogue in good faith.
Working together we can continue to clarify for Iran the
consequences of its actions and show Iran the benefits
of choosing cooperation over provocation.

