Mr. Pereyra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation for the

valuable briefing given by Under-Secretary-General
Gambari. Peru is pleased that resolution 1701 (2006),
which the Security Council adopted 10 days ago, has
been accepted by the Governments of Israel and
Lebanon. We trust that the cessation of hostilities will
serve as the beginning of the end of the violence that
has caused so much death and destruction.

Violations of the cessation of hostilities, such as
those described in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/670) and the ones committed by Israeli forces
on the night of Friday, 18 August, point to the extreme
fragility of the situation and to the danger of further
crisis. In that connection, we once again reiterate our
call on the parties to fully comply with the cessation of
hostilities.

Strengthening the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is a fundamental element of
implementing resolution 1701 (2006). That should take
place as quickly as possible, in order that UNIFIL can
deploy and fully carry out the mandate entrusted to it
and work jointly with the Lebanese army. In that
regard, my delegation would like to highlight the work
done by the Secretariat and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to promote the strengthening
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and to do
so quickly as possible. We hope that the deployment of
forces will take place in accordance with the three
phases that have been envisaged.

Without disparaging those efforts, the current
situation has once again made it possible to realize how
important it is for the United Nations to have reserve
forces at its disposal. Peru has repeatedly voiced its
support for endowing the Organization with the
necessary capacity to respond through forces with a
pre-established mandate that have been voluntarily and
unconditionally made available to the United Nations
by States that agree with the need for them. In other
words, the Organization should be able to rely on
adequately prepared units that can be deployed
immediately.

It is also important that the Governments of
Lebanon and Israel consider, as soon as possible, the
principles and elements for a definitive solution
included in resolution 1701 (2006). In that connection,
we are pleased to note that the Secretary-General's
envoys Vijay Nambiar and Terje Roed-Larsen are in
the region and have initiated contacts at the highest
level. We look forward to their impressions upon their
return, as well as to the proposals to be made by the
Secretary-General to implement the relevant provisions
of the Taif Accords and resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1680 (2006), especially as regards disarming Hizbollah
and irregular forces that do not recognize the authority
of the Lebanese Government and as regards the
demarcation of Lebanon's international borders,
including the Sheba'a farmlands.

The humanitarian situation continues to require
great attention. We would like to underscore the efforts
made by Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other agencies and organizations, which are
continuing to do everything they can to bring aid to
needy people as soon as possible. The strategy they
have adopted towards their work and the basic
priorities on which they are focusing in these
circumstances merit our gratitude and should be
resolutely supported.

In that regard, we would like to recall what has
been said by Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator
Margareta Wahlstrom, namely, that overcoming the
humanitarian crisis not only depends upon assistance,
but in particular upon the resumption of the economic
and productive activities interrupted in Lebanon. That
aspect should always be taken into account in the
rebuilding effort.

In conclusion, with regard to the situation in
Palestine, Peru once again deplores all acts of violence
and kidnapping and the loss of human lives. We also
deplore the critical situation in which the population of
Palestine has to live. In that regard, it must be recalled
that the Government of the Palestinian Authority has
yet to meet the requirements put forward by the
Quartet. A negotiated solution for the peaceful
coexistence of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
within secure and internationally recognized borders
will remain elusive if one of the parties does not
recognize the other's right to exist.

