Mr. Piot: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000).

When we look at the history of the fight against
AIDS, there is no doubt that resolution 1308 (2000) is
a milestone in the response to the epidemic. By
underscoring the fact that the spread of HIV/AIDS, if
unchecked, may pose a risk to stability and security,
the Security Council, through resolution 1308 (2000),
has transformed how the world views AIDS. I say
"transformed" because many now view AIDS as a
threat to national security and stability, in addition to
being a threat to development and public health alone.
While today it sounds normal to place AIDS in that
context, it was definitely a very bold step five years
ago. It took real leadership. That is why I am happy
that Ambassador Richard Holbrooke is here today. I
would say that without his push, this would not have
happened. From my experience in my advocacy work
to promote the response to AIDS, I can tell the Council
that the debate in the Security Council and the
resolution opened many doors for dealing with AIDS
that previously had been closed.

It is also because of that transformation that I
believe that today, for the first time ever, we have a
real opportunity to halt and begin to reverse this
devastating epidemic, as called for in Millennium
Development Goal 6. Indeed, reversing the spread of
AIDS is crucial if we are to make any progress in
meeting the broader Millennium Development Goals.

Today, there is true momentum in the fight
against AIDS. First, there is undoubted political
momentum. Forty heads of State or Government, or
their deputies, now personally lead their countries'
response to AIDS, including in Council members
Benin and China.

Secondly, there is financial momentum. An
unprecedented $8 billion is likely to be spent on the
AIDS response in low- and middle-income countries
this year, up from $1.5 billion when resolution 1308
(2000) was adopted. That is more than a fivefold
increase, and it is reflected in domestic budgets and the
budgets of the wealthy countries.

Thirdly, there is finally a momentum of results.
Because of stepped-up efforts, there are new successes
in almost every region of the world, with real signs of
success in the Bahamas, Cambodia, Ghana and Kenya,
adding to early achievements in Brazil, Thailand and
Uganda.

So, in sum, in these five years, the global
response to AIDS has entered a new era: the era of the
implementation of large-scale programmes. However,
sadly, it is true that the threat posed by the AIDS
epidemic has not dwindled at all. Last year, more
people than ever became infected with HIV and more
people died of AIDS than in any previous year,
reflecting both a massive failure of HIV-prevention
programmes and of treatment programmes.

That is the broad context within which the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and its partners are now addressing AIDS and security.
I would like to take this opportunity to present the
UNAIDS progress report, "On the front line", which all
Council members have received and which details our
actions in that area.

In response to resolution 1308 (2000), I
established an Office on AIDS, Security and
Humanitarian Response in the UNAIDS secretariat,
which has been working - as we just heard from
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno - with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). I
would also like to thank Denmark, which allowed us to
jumpstart that initiative through support for our offices
in Copenhagen.

The strategy of UNAIDS and DPKO, building on
our formal agreement of January 2001, has been to
ensure that the United Nations sets the highest possible
standards in protecting from HIV both peacekeepers
and the populations with which they are in contact. I
would like to wholeheartedly commend DPKO for its
achievements in mainstreaming AIDS responses into
every United Nations peacekeeping mission. I can just
confirm everything that Mr. Guehenno has said. I will
not repeat what he so clearly noted in his statement,
but I would like to add a few more things.

In addition to what we heard, some 1 million
AIDS-awareness cards have been distributed in 13
languages through peacekeepers and national security
forces. A peer education kit, available in 11 languages,
is becoming an integral part of the military training
curricula in several troop-contributing countries.
With the increasing focus on regional troop and
mission management for peacekeeping, we have
actively engaged with key regional bodies. We have
supported and are supporting the African Union with
its AIDS programmes for African Union peacekeeping
forces, as well as African militaries. We are now
helping the African Union Security and Peace Council
in its AIDS-related programmes for stand-by forces. In
addition, we are now working with the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and the Caribbean Community
secretariat in developing comprehensive AIDS
programmes for uniformed services.

Despite all that has been achieved since 2000, it
is clear that there is still a long way to go, as we just
heard - a fact made evident by the recent reports of
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. The
adoption by the General Assembly last month of a
comprehensive strategy to eliminate sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a major step forward. I would say that
zero tolerance for any violation of the code of conduct
would also go a long way towards stopping the spread
of HIV.

Let me now turn to the wider issue of national
uniformed services, where international peacekeepers
are drawn from and return to. This was not the formal
intention of resolution 1308 (2000), but it has become
clear that, if we do not deal with troop-providing
armies, dealing with HIV only among peacekeepers is
not going to fix the problem. Thus, resolution 1308
(2000) really paved the way for us in UNAIDS to
engage uniformed services as key partners in the
response to AIDS. Today, UNAIDS is assisting 53
Member States with comprehensive programmes to
address AIDS among uniformed services.

As part of that work, we have signed formal
partnership agreements with 15 ministries of defence,
most recently with the Indian Government, covering
about 1.3 million active uniformed personnel. Each
programme includes HIV education, condom
promotion and distribution, the strengthening of
counselling and testing services, and improving the
skills of health personnel to provide HIV-specific care
and treatment.

A small, but nonetheless growing number of
defence, military and political leaders now fully
understands the need to address AIDS and has begun to
make what we hope will be sustained investments.
However, we are still too far from the point at which
responding to AIDS is considered to be a part of core
military business everywhere. That, again, will take
strong leadership not only here in the Council, but in
every single country.

Before concluding, let me highlight a few
challenges. There are two key challenges in working
with uniformed services, as set out in our progress
report.

The first is the need significantly to expand
access to HIV testing and counselling. As we heard,
that is a priority for UNAIDS and DPKO. Our
guidance on HIV testing continues to emphasize the
importance of counselling and testing in every setting.
While national policies vary with regard to HIV testing
during recruitment and active service, the evidence
clearly demonstrates that the provision of voluntary
confidential counselling and testing services is far
more likely than mandatory testing to result in
favourable behaviour change. The problem is that
neither is offered at a scale that is big enough. Troops
and civilians alike must therefore have unrestricted
access to HIV testing and counselling during
deployment, and - crucially - we must step up
efforts to encourage them to do so.

Secondly, there is the need to ensure the
consistent implementation of those AIDS programmes.
We just heard the quite disturbing data from the survey
in Liberia, and it is clear that we still have a long way
to go in making sure that, at every level in the
hierarchy, commanders understand that they will be
held accountable for what they are doing on AIDS as
much as on other essential military operations.

Turning to the future, I would like to outline two
great tasks that I believe we face in relation to AIDS
and security. The first task is to expand our knowledge
of the broader impact of AIDS on human security and
national stability in the most-affected countries, and
also those in conflict and post-conflict situations. How
those challenges will actually play out in countries
over the longer term is not fully known. We must start
today planning for the long-term future in our action on
AIDS. That is one of the big challenges for us at
UNAIDS.

We recently did a study, together with the Shell
oil company, on the development of scenarios for
AIDS in Africa by 2025 - 20 years from now. Those
scenarios clearly show how the worst-affected
countries will be plainly destabilized in all their
aspects by the AIDS epidemic.

As requested by the Council at its last review two
years ago, we are also building and reviewing the
evidence base on the long-term implications of AIDS
on security. This afternoon, for example, I will be
joining the Council for Foreign Relations here to
launch a new report we co-funded that presents some
preliminary evidence of the links between AIDS and
national security, which should help to inform our
policy agenda going forward. We have also
commissioned work from the London School of
Economics and are now collaborating with the
Government of the Netherlands in the development of
a research agenda on the linkages between AIDS,
security and conflict.

Finally, the second great task relates to classic
security matters. The unstated goal underpinning
resolution 1308 (2000) is that all peacekeepers and all
uniformed personnel must be given the knowledge and
means to protect themselves and others from HIV. That
goal has not been achieved as yet, so I hope that the
Security Council will make that an explicit and time-
bound goal and ensure that peacekeeping missions are
given the means to meet their responsibilities with
respect to HIV, and that they will be held accountable
for their performance on responding to AIDS.

