Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing and taking the
initiative in today's important debate. It comes at a
significant moment. The range and nature of threats
to international peace and security are evolving and
multiplying and, as the Secretary-General has told us,
the United Nations must make changes to its "culture,
strategy, structures and operations" in order to respond
to those new challenges.

Peacekeeping is an essential, unique and, by many
measurements, successful instrument in the peace-and-
security toolbox of the United Nations. However, in
this day and age, for the Organization to live up to the
commitment in the Charter of the United Nations to
maintaining peace and security, those operations must
not only become more effective, they must improve the
contribution they make to sustainable peace. We should
also bear in mind that resources are finite and should be
used as efficiently as possible - although the starting
point is about saving lives, not money. And in order
to save lives, we have to prevent and solve conflicts.
For that reason, the focus in today's discussion, on
the political foundations necessary for peacekeeping
operations to succeed, is particularly valuable.

The findings ofthe three 2015 reviews ofthe United
Nations peace and security architecture all agree on the
need for reform and provide a road map to achieve it. It is
now time to follow through on their recommendations.
At the heart of the reviews is a clear understanding that
the United Nations must take a more holistic approach to
maintaining peace and security. We welcome the work
that is already under way, including the internal review
of the Secretariat's peace and security architecture.
We hope it will result in a United Nations equipped to
respond in a system-wide, well-coordinated fashion to
threats to peace and security. We support the nine areas
for focusing on reform that the Secretary-General put
forward this afternoon, and I would like to elaborate a
little on some of them.

First, almost every day the Council hears that
there are no military solutions to a particular conflict,
and in that regard we must recognize the primacy of
politics - meaning that peace can be delivered only
on the basis of political solutions that aim to sustain
peace. That should guide all peace operations and is
also crucial to the protection of civilians. Building
effective political strategies requires a thorough
understanding of a particular conflict and its context. It
means sometimes asking difficult questions for which
the answers will be unique to that particular setting.
The Council must therefore be supported in its work
and receive input from the Secretary-General with
reliable, high-quality conflict analysis, preparedjointly
by the whole of the United Nations system. Secretariat
briefings should give more comprehensive overviews
of a situation, so as to enable the Council to make
better-informed decisions. Strategic reviews conducted
in advance of mandate renewals should include clear
options to help inform Council decisions.

Secondly, the mandates adopted by the Council
should be truly fit for purpose. Agreeing on more
realistic, context-tailored and flexible mandates
will make successful outcomes more likely. Within
mandates, tasks should be prioritized, sequenced and
adjusted over time. Exit strategies and transitional
phases of peacekeeping operations should be analysed
and planned at an early stage, in cooperation with all
the relevant actors. It is important to understand what
success will look like by including clear and measurable
objectives accompanied by benchmarks for progress.
We should not be afraid to review mandates regularly
and make course corrections when needed. Clear
objectives and benchmarks are also an important tool
for dialogue with the host country, which is crucial. A
good example is the Mutual Commitment Framework
between the Central African Republic and the
international community, in which the responsibilities
are clearly delineated and demonstrate what all involved
have to bring to the table to deliver peace.

Thirdly, in order to improve the prevention of
conflict and the promotion of long-term stability,
the Council and the United Nations as a whole must
consider all the tools in the toolbox. They should be
used more strategically in support of identified political
objectives, with the whole of the United Nations system
acting in a holistic manner in support of countries.
Increased coherence between peacekeeping operations
and the United Nations development and humanitarian
systems is therefore critical. Police capabilities play
an essential role, distinct from that of the military,
and should also be integrated. Broader strategies that
address the peace continuum should be inclusive and
based on full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. And, as we all know but still do not
always achieve, and as the Secretary-General rightly
said, the inclusion and effective participation of
women is key. Regional actors that undertake missions
on behalf of the Council, such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia, are indispensable, and must be
supported, including through predictable financing.

Lastly, the dialogue between the Security Council
and the troop- and police-contributing countries should
be strengthened and made more dynamic both for
the design and the implementation of mandates. The
experiences of those countries are an invaluable source
ofinformation for the Council. In addition to listening,
the Council should ensure that United Nations troops
and police better reflect the diversity of the States
Members of the United Nations, meet the requirements
and standards and deliver on the task set out in mandates,
which requires contributing countries to declare any
caveats. Furthermore, the capacity-building needs of
peacekeeping should be assessed and supported.

I wish to stress that every peacekeeper and every
peacekeeping operation must do all they can when
civilians are under imminent threat. And of course,
there must be zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse, as the Secretary-General underlined.

The Charter of the United Nations sets forth our
commitment to join our strengths in order to maintain
international peace and security. Peacekeeping
operations are perhaps the most tangible symbol of
this objective. In this period of new challenges, we
stand ready to work with the Secretary-General, on
the Security Council and with the broader United
Nations membership to ensure the most effective
operations possible.

