The Secretary-General: It is an honour to join
the Security Council for this discussion on the United
Nations role in security sector reform. This issue is of
special importance with respect to the responsibility of
the United Nations, and of the Council in particular, for
maintaining international peace and security.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
Government of the United Kingdom for bringing us
together for this important and timely debate. I also
very much appreciate the tireless efforts of the
Governments of Slovakia and South Africa in
promoting this discussion.

This month we mark the sixtieth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping. Maintaining
international peace and security remains a daunting
challenge for our Organization. Despite our efforts
over these six decades, conflict and Violence continue
to pose a threat to nations and peoples.
Unquestionably, Member States remain central
providers of security for States and their populations.
That is their sovereign right and responsibility, as is the
work to reform their security sectors. It is, however,
the responsibility of the United Nations to determine
how we can best support Member States in delivering
enduring security through effective institutions.

In February 2007, I addressed the Council for the
first time on the issue of security sector reform (see S/PV.5632). The term is a relatively new one, but in
practice the experience of the United Nations in this
area goes back decades, spanning a range of activities
and United Nations departments, offices, funds and
programmes. As early as 1989, the United Nations was
tasked with supporting a newly independent Namibia
in developing preliminary structures for its armed
forces. Since the early 1990s, our peace operations
have assisted national authorities in establishing new
policing institutions and in strengthening the capacity
and integrity of defence structures.

In Angola and Mozambique our mandates
included support for the integration, reform and
training of armed forces, and partnerships with
bilateral donors in the areas of coordination and
delivery. From El Salvador and Cambodia in the past to
Liberia and Sierra Leone today, the United Nations has
08-33544
assisted parties in security reform in the context of
good offices, mediation and peacekeeping operations.
From Guatemala to Afghanistan and from Burundi to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, our experience
in mediating and implementing peace agreements
shows that if these agreements are to succeed and
endure, the work to reform security institutions needs
to be addressed from the outset.

In other words, the United Nations has rich and
varied experience in what has come to be known as
security sector reform. And yet, too often, we have
remained an ad hoc partner for national and
international stakeholders. What has been lacking is a
common framework and a coherent system-wide
approach. Despite our hands-on record, we have only
limited institutional structures to guide engagement on
the ground. We need to strengthen our ability to provide
consistent, well-coordinated and high-quality technical
advice during peace processes and in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. We need to make our
approach less piecemeal and more holistic.

That is why, at the request of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, I issued a report
(S/2008/39) in February entitled "Securing peace and
development: the role of the United Nations in
supporting security sector reform". As many here
know, it was the product of broad consultations with
Member States, regional groupings and organizations,
as well as research centres, academic institutions and
non-governmental organizations. It was also subject to
wide-ranging consultations within the United Nations
system, both at Headquarters and in the field.

The starting point for the report is a broad
discussion of the concept, underscoring its linkages to
many important processes. It makes clear that, in any
context, security reform must be approached both
strategically and holistically. On one level, it is a
highly specialized field. On another level, it is
obviously linked to budgetary questions, economic
development, good governance and sound public
management. On yet another level, it requires prudent,
measured and consistent steps, as well as a well-
functioning understanding with the full range of
national stakeholders and partners.

The report before the Council, therefore, defines
security sector reform as a process of assessment,
review and implementation, as well as monitoring and
evaluation, led by national authorities. The goal is to
08-33544
strengthen the effective and accountable security of a
State and its people, underpinned by respect for human
rights and the rule of law.

Allow me to underscore a few key principles that
will guide our approach. These reflect the discussions
of Member States in the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

First and foremost, the United Nations should
engage in security sector reform at the request of
national Governments, or in response to Security
Council mandates and General Assembly resolutions.

Secondly, Member States are the primary
providers of security, and national ownership is the
cornerstone of our approach. As the Security Council
noted last year, "It is the sovereign right and the
primary responsibility of the country concerned to
determine the national approach and priorities of
security sector reform" (S/PRST/2007/3).

Thirdly, the United Nations should work in
collaboration with key international partners. Such
partnerships are Vital in ensuring expertise and
resources. This is imperative already at the outset of
any peace negotiation and mediation, as successful
security sector reform is a necessary precursor of any
peacekeeping exit strategy and, ultimately, of economic
and social development.

Fourthly, the United Nations approach must be
flexible and tailored to the individual country, region
or environment. States and societies define and pursue
security according to their particular context, history,
culture and needs. There can be no rigid one-size-fits-
all approach.

Finally, our approach must be gender sensitive
and consistent with international law, with particular
attention to sexual and gender-based violence. We must
help ensure that the security sector assumes its
responsibility in eradicating the unspeakable epidemic
of violence against women that has become the
common aftermath of conflict.

Member States have recognized the need for a
coherent system-wide approach to security sector
reform and to the need to avoid duplication by creating
new frameworks. Let us therefore focus, as a first
priority, on professionalizing our approach.

My report proposes a number of straightforward
and pragmatic measures: developing United Nations
3
technical guideline and training in the area of security
sector reform; strengthening field capacity as well as
capabilities and expertise for central backstopping;
enhancing coordination and delivery of security sector
reform support; and establishing a compact security
sector reform support unit at Headquarters, to serve the
whole United Nations, in particular peace operations.

These priorities represent the minimum we must
do to enhance our performance. But, beyond these,
developing effective and accountable security
institutions - including those responsible for the
provision ofjustice - is more thanjust a goal. It is our
shared obligation, especially in countries recovering
from conflict.

It is an obligation intricately linked to our
capacity to respond rapidly and decisively in times of
crisis and to address long-term perspectives. It is
central to our ability to create an interrelated system of
rapidly deployable capabilities, operating under the
United Nations Charter. That is why I warmly welcome
the Council's intention to debate this strategic issue
later this month, with the participation of the Foreign
Secretary of the United Kingdom.

I am grateful for the Security Council's
commitment to our collective endeavour to strengthen
the United Nations role in security sector reform.

