Mr. Lillie: I would like to thank the Council for the
opportunity to brief it on the humanitarian situation in
north-western Syria. I would especially like to thank
the representatives of Kuwait, Germany and Belgium
for their willingness to accommodate me here today.

We have just heard from Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock about the grave humanitarian situation in
north-western Syria. My organization, the Syrian
American Medical Society, is currently conducting
medical-relief operations in Idlib, Hama and Aleppo
governorates. We operate 35 medical facilities ranging
from large hospitals to mobile clinics, and employ about
2,000 staff in the field. Those courageous doctors,
nurses, midwives and support staff work tirelessly to
provide life-saving care for those in need. Since the start
ofthe conflict, my organization has provided 14 million
medical services. Over the years we have helped people
of many different faiths and political affiliations. In our
work, we seek to maintain humanitarian principles and
to help all Syrians in need.

The current situation in north-west Syria continues
to deteriorate. The systematic attacks on health care
have been particularly severe. As the Under-Secretary-
General said, there have been more than 30 health-
care-related attacks since the end of April. Just days
ago, as was mentioned, three ambulance workers were
killed after their ambulance was directly targeted
in an air strike. Those attacks have greatly reduced
the capacity of the health system at a time when it is
already overwhelmed by a large civilian population
with significant health needs. Syrian American Medical
Society facilities alone have received more than 2,200
injured civilians. At the same time, the suspension
of routine services such as vaccinations has greatly
increased the risk of outbreaks of disease, including
measles and meningitis. If there is one word that
captures the current experience of civilians in Idlib, it
is suffering - tremendous human suffering.

We cannot discuss attacks on health care without
highlighting the use of the de-confliction mechanism.
My organization was among those that de-conflicted
many of their facilities in April 2018 by working closely
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and other non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to build trust and consensus that

NGOs and their field staff would supply all needed
information, while OCHA would ensure that the
mechanism would be properly implemented.

It is important to discuss the context here.
For years, NGOs were encouraged to share their
coordinates in order to reduce the risk of targeting
by parties to the conflict. There was resistance from
field staff, who argued that they themselves would be
held responsible by the local population in the event
that the facility was targeted. It was only after last
year's brutal offensive in eastern Ghouta, which saw
13 health facilities systematically targeted in a 48-hour
period - a time when we lost four colleagues - that
the doctors finally agreed to share the coordinates.
After that assault, they felt that their facilities would
inevitably be targeted, regardless of whether or not
they shared their coordinates. Yet only days after
those coordinates were shared, a hospital in Arbin was
targeted by a bunker buster, which landed directly on a
patient in the emergency room. In the current offensive
in the north-west, nine different de-conflicted facilities
have been targeted - nine. In addition, one third of
the facilities targeted by air strikes were constructed
before the war, meaning that their location was already
public knowledge. That begs the question: where is the
accountability? Have we lost our capacity for outrage?

Since April 2018, when many organizations
deconflicted their facilities, not a single investigation
has been completed. Rather than seeking answers
and accountability, some members of the Council
have instead sought to delay, distract and discredit
the mechanism. Yet all that achieves is to further
damage the credibility of this institution, and it only
exacerbates the suffering of the Syrian people. We have
now reached a point where doctors and humanitarian
workers on the ground no longer trust the mechanism.
They have fulfilled their part of the agreement, at great
risk to themselves. Can the Council not meet them
halfway? We should not leave them to feel alone or
abandoned. There are steps that can be taken to improve
both the process and the current mechanism. Council
members should consider granting investigators of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism access to the
data or authorizing a fact-finding mission to investigate
the attacks.

I would also like to briefly discuss the humanitarian
response on the ground. The response of donors
to the recent offensive is significantly below what
is needed. There have been at least 330,000 newly
displaced individuals, with only 110,000 having been
received at internally displaced persons camps. Yet
the Humanitarian Task Force allocated enough funds
for only 5,000 new units of shelter. Be assured that the
civilian population feels completely abandoned by the
international community. How can one blame them?
Doctors cannot help patients when they do not have
essential supplies, such as anaesthetics and surgical
kits. People in remote areas cannot be reached when
there are not enough funds for mobile clinics. The
international community must not only come together to
seek peace in Syria and prevent the continued violation
of international humanitarian law by all parties, but
also use their financial resources to help alleviate the
suffering of all Syrians.

On the topic of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and
extremism in north-western Syria, it is an extremely
significant issue that the Council must consider. The
kidnapping and torture, for ransom, of humanitarian
workers by armed groups are an outrage that must be
addressed, as is the targeting of civilian populations
in the city of Aleppo by armed groups. But let me
be clear: the way to combat terrorism is not through
the bombardment of civilian areas and the targeting
of civilian infrastructure. The subsequent human
suffering is what fuels terrorism. Have we not learned
that over the years? The best way to combat terrorism is
by supporting the civilian population, who long to live
in peace and freedom, not under groups such as Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham. The best way to provide that support is
through humanitarian and stabilization activities.

Not long ago I remember speaking to a doctor from
Idlib just after several donors suspended their aid to
the north-west due to fears of diversion. He made an
impassioned case for continuing to support humanitarian
workers. He said that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham told people
that they were alone and the world had abandoned them
but Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham was there to help them. As
humanitarian workers, we say that that is not true. We
tell people that we are there to help them and that our
donors from around the world are ready to support
them. We impose no ideology and no conditions. We
are present to help and support people. That example

perfectly illustrates the importance of supporting
humanitarian workers. They are the beacons of hope
in a very dark conflict. We must all work together to
support and protect them and ensure that they have
adequate financial resources to carry out their work.

I again thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to appear before the Security Council today. I hope
that, together, we can work towards a peaceful future
in Syria.

