Mr. Siv (United States of America): Businesses
are valuable development partners, providing crucial
investment and employment opportunities. As the
United Nations Commission on the Private Sector and
Development reaffirmed, the private sector is the
engine of economic growth, which in turn reduces
poverty and creates jobs. In our discussion on the role
of business, we should look at ways to promote
economic freedom and create an environment in which
the private sector can grow and prosper, for that is
indeed its role. Conflict is anathema to businesses.
Where conflict prevails, growth and opportunity are
lost and business fails. Companies have a genuine and
abiding interest in promoting peace as the necessary
precondition for growth and market stability.

But businesses do not have the same
responsibilities as Governments in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building. This
distinction needs to be maintained in our discussions
today.

Companies can provide leadership through setting
examples of good corporate citizenship. Companies
have chosen to do this in many different ways. Some
have adopted corporate codes of conduct; others have
chosen to participate in voluntary international codes
regarding corporate behaviour. Companies represent a
vital component of our shared vision of a world of
increasing prosperity and peace.

American companies are providing outstanding
global leadership as good corporate citizens. In many
parts of the world their practices are being adopted by
other companies. The Secretary of State Award for
Corporate Excellence recognizes the important role
United States businesses play abroad as good corporate
citizens. In 2003, ChevronTexaco was recognized for
its commitment to good corporate citizenship and
investments in vital development and poverty
alleviation programmes in one of the most challenging
regions in the world, the Niger Delta. The United
States Steel Corporation received an award for its
positive impact on the economic, civic and cultural life
of the people of Slovakia.

When the Reverend Leon Sullivan created the
Sullivan Principles in 1977 to help end apartheid, he
understood that a partnership between business,
government and civil society was the most effective
way of furthering change.

The United Nations Global Compact has built a
multistakeholder process, based on nine social justice
principles that promote human rights, labour rights and
environmental responsibility. The United States
supports the Compact's voluntary approach, which
joins together companies, United Nations agencies,
labour and civil society in efforts to promote human
dignity in a context of freedom and prosperity.

The United States has also supported policy
mechanisms that specifically focus on businesses in
conflict situations. The United States-United Kingdom
partnership on voluntary principles on security and
human rights urges businesses to conduct
comprehensive risk assessments and to try to ensure
that public and private security forces do not have a
record of past human rights abuses. We also
recommended that companies take steps to ensure that
equipment provided to security forces is used for
defensive purposes only and that private personnel do
not engage in military or law enforcement activities.

Under the Interlaken Declaration and Security
Council resolution 1459 (2003), the United States has
actively supported the Kimberley Process. This is a
multilateral effort that utilizes partnerships between
Governments, businesses and civil society to establish
international standards for the certification of rough
diamonds. The Process will substantially reduce the
opportunity for the trade in conflict diamonds, which
has left such a tragic legacy across Africa.

The United States also supports the guidelines for
multinational enterprises of the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and
ethical standards, including the International Labour
Organization Declaration on Fundamental Principles
and Rights at Work. We had an active role in
developing the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention and the
2003 G-8 Declaration on Fighting Corruption and
Improving Transparency.

We are working to bring market opportunities
through the African Growth and Opportunity Act
(AGOA). AGOA shows the power of trade to lift
people out of poverty. Exports from AGOA nations to
the United States are rising dramatically, and the
benefits are felt throughout the region. In the words of
President George W. Bush, "From Mauritius to Mali,
AGOA is helping to reform old economies, creating
new incentives for good governance, and offering new
hope for millions of Africans".

