Mr. Brammertz: I would like to thank the Council
for this opportunity to address it on our progress
towards the completion of our mandate.

In this reporting period, we have advanced
significantly towards the conclusion of our remaining
three trials. In the Karadeic' case the defence is in the
final phase ofpresenting its evidence. In the Hadeic' case
the Prosecution has finished presenting its evidence
and is preparing for the rule 98 bis hearing later this
month. And in the Mladic' case the Prosecution is in the
final stages of presenting its evidence and expects to
finish by the end of the year. That means that, by early
2014, the Prosecution will have finished presenting
its evidence-in-chief in all trials before the Tribunal.
I acknowledge the tremendous effort of staff members
across my Office, which has facilitated the expeditious
presentation of evidence in our final cases. The trial
teams, with essential support from the Appeals
Division, have coped with a staggering workload and
successfully confronted many challenges throughout
the reporting period.

Contrasting with this positive progress, the Seselj'
case suffered a serious setback. The delivery of the
trial judgement, scheduled for 13 October 2013, was
postponed following the disqualification of a judge
from the Seselj Trial Chamber. Concerns raised by
the Prosecution and by members of the Seselj Trial
Chamber regarding the validity of the disqualification
decision were dismissed. A newjudge was appointed on
31 October, and the parties await the Trial Chamber's
further directions about the finalization of the case.

The Tribunal is now 20 years old. But events during
this reporting period remind us that many people in
the former Yugoslavia are still waiting for answers
about the fate of their loved ones. In particular, since
September this year, the International Commission on
Missing Persons, along with national authorities, has
been exhuming the recently discovered Tomasica mass

grave in north-western Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
one of the largest graves uncovered, with more than
474 bodily remains so far exhumed. That number is
expected to rise before work on the grave is complete.
The size of the grave and the calculated planning that
obviously informed its design, underscore the extent of
the tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Tomasica grave is also a timely reminder that
efforts to resolve the issue of persons still missing
from the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia must be
accelerated. In that regard, I express my full support
for the International Commission on Missing Persons,
which is working hard to provide families of the missing
with long-awaited and desperately needed information,
thereby helping to advance the reconstruction of
communities. We endorse the idea of establishing
the Commission as a permanent institution so that
its expertise can also be made more systematically
available in other regions of the world where work is
needed on missing persons.

When it comes to cooperation between the Tribunal
and the countries of the former Yugoslavia on day-to-
day matters, I am pleased to say there are no problems.
Serbia, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina have
responded as required to our requests for assistance
and have facilitated our work on the remaining trials
and appeals. We thank the national authorities for their
cooperation, and we call upon them to maintain that
positive approach in the next reporting period.

We remain seriously concerned, however, about
the progress of national war crimes cases in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The main issues are threefold.

First, very little progress has been made towards
finalizing 9 of the 13 category II cases transferred by
my Office to Bosnia and Herzegovina between 2005
and 2009. In October this year, I met with the Chief
Prosecutor in Sarajevo to review the outstanding case
files. I received an undertaking that a decision would be
made on the status of each case before the end of this
year, and I await a further update.

Secondly, the national war crimes strategy is
floundering. Measures taken to relieve the bottleneck
of cases before the State Court have not yet been
matched with essential resources for the entity-level
courts receiving the cases. Nor is there currently
an effective strategy for training national personnel
for war crimes cases. As set out in an expert report
prepared on behalf of my Office, a comprehensive
national training programme, implemented by officially
designated central bodies, is urgently required. My
Office appreciates the support of our international
partners, particularly the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and the
United Nations Development Programme, in working
to improve the coordination and quality of training
for war crimes cases in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
hope there will be Visible progress in the next reporting
period.

Thirdly, the implementation of the European
Court of Human Rights' decision in the Maktouf and
Damjanovic' case by the judicial system in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has raised a number of issues. Among
them is the unconditional release from custody of
12 persons convicted by the State Court of serious
crimes - including, in some cases, genocide - pending
correction of their sentences. The release of those
prisoners poses a threat to the proper conclusion of
the cases and undermines public confidence in the
administration of justice. The significance of the
issue is reinforced by the fact that up to 40 additional
convicted persons have appealed their verdicts and
sentences before the Constitutional Court ofBosnia and
Herzegovina. We encourage all concerned to urgently
find coherent ways of addressing the fairness issues
identified in the Maktoufand Damjanovie ruling, while
at the same time safeguarding the proper administration
ofjustice in war crimes cases.

When it comes to regional cooperation between
Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina on war
crimes issues, the picture is mixed. We are pleased to
note that following the recent conclusion of cooperation
protocols, regular meetings are taking place and
information on cases is being exchanged. However,
further reforms are still needed to resolve ongoing
coordination problems, especially the legal barriers
that remain to extradition.

When we survey developments in the field of
international criminal law over the past few years,
it is clear that the future of international justice is,
increasingly, national justice.

While international courts will always be needed
to provide an accountability safety net, building the
capacity of national systems to effectively handle
crimes under international law is the lynchpin of the
justice system. In that respect, the former Yugoslavia
provides an important precedent. There are lessons to
learn from the different models and structures adopted

by the countries of the former Yugoslavia, which have
assumed responsibility for war crimes cases. There
are also lessons to learn from the process by which
the Tribunal has transferred expertise and helped to
build capacity nationally. That is an ongoing process.
Within the limits of our resource constraints, my
Office remains engaged in several innovative capacity-
building projects.

Twenty years after the Tribunal opened its doors
we are yet to fully deliver on our promise of justice
for victims and survivors of atrocities in the former
Yugoslavia. Their expectations are high - and rightly
so. In coming forward to testify in proceedings before
our Tribunal and elsewhere, many have confronted
deep-seated fears and trauma. Without their courage
and commitment to the Tribunal's success, we would
have achieved very little. At the same time, we are
conscious that recent developments have seriously
strained the Tribunal's relationship oftrust with victims
and survivors. My Office reiterates its commitment
to using the last phase of our work to address those
concerns.

