I thank Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for the hard work she is doing with her team in this complex environment. We welcome the representative of Iraq to this meeting. The Niger welcomes the formation of a new Government in Iraq under the leadership of Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. We call on the all political leaders to spare no effort in ensuring good collaboration between the executive and legislative branch to fill in the remaining Cabinet seats. During these difficult times, it is critical to have stable and strong Government that is ready to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, addressing the socioeconomic and security challenges and delivering on the Government's reform agenda, including the fight against corruption. The Niger is concerned that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) retains the capacity to continue its attacks against civilian and military targets such as the ones on the international airport, locations in the former international zone, Camp Taji, where the international counter-ISIL coalition forces are positioned. The persistence of the terrorist activities reminds us of the necessity to continue the support of the United Nations and international partners to Iraq in the fight against the remnants of ISIL in order to thwart its efforts to rebuild. In addition to terrorist threats, COVID-19 is another challenge for the Government. My delegation commends the early and active engagement of the Government of Iraq in joining global efforts to contain the rapid spread of the pandemic, with the help of the World Health Organization and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We echo the Secretary-General's call for more international support to the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan, including for the key activities identified in it for Iraq. We commend the determination of the newly formed Government to protect peaceful protesters and to form a high-level fact-finding committee to investigate the killings of activists and other human right defenders and hold the perpetrators accountable. On the electoral process, UNAMI's support to the Independent High Electoral Commission is crucial to rebuild its institutional and operational capacities. We are happy to see the formation of an expert team to consult with the Independent High Electoral Commission on the establishment of conditions conducive to free, fair and credible early elections. As Iraq takes steps towards a free and inclusive election next year, we call on the international community to support the competent Iraqi authorities to ensure a fair and inclusive election. In the same vein, the Niger remains convinced that a sustainable process must include Iraqi women and youth and, in that regard, we welcome the nomination of women ministers in the new Government. We also urge UNAMI to continue the consultations with the Women's Advisory Group, whose representation at all levels of political and protection processes remains appropriate. Lastly, on the issue of Kuwaiti and third-country missing persons, property and archives from the first Gulf War, the Niger commends the determination of UNAMI, the Tripartite Commission and the International Committee of the Red Cross to advance in this area despite COVID-19 restrictions. We also welcome the recent discoveries, which will give closure to some Kuwaitis and further the relationship between the two countries.
