Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I congratulate you,
Mr. President,- for convening this open debate and for
bringing us together to discuss the serious challenges
that the world faces today in promoting peace and
stability in the Middle East and North Africa. We
also appreciate that the concept note prepared by the
Russian Federation (S/2015/678, annex) encourages
a more in-depth reflection on the primary causes of
conflicts and terrorism.

The threats to international peace and security in
the Middle East and North Africa have been a recurring
topic in the Council. The increase in the number and
complexity of threats in those two strategic regions
attests to our collective inability to solve long-lasting
conflicts and to prevent the outbreak of new ones. As
Brazil has consistently upheld in this Council, we must
address those problems by conceiving an overarching
strategy based on a combination of diplomacy and
peacebuilding efforts.
Last year, we witnessed the third tragic war in five
years in Gaza. The peace process between Israelis and
Palestinians has remained stalled. Violence reached
unimaginable levels of brutality in Syria, and the
prospects for resolving the conflict remain elusive.
The so-called Islamic State took control of large parts
of Iraq and Syria and has been perpetrating the most
barbaric crimes against innocent civilians. Both Libya
and Yemen are falling into a spiral of political disputes
and violence, resulting in destruction and serious
humanitarian crises.

Let me state in no uncertain terms Brazil's utmost
repudiation for all forms of terrorism and extremism.
There are simply nojustifiable grounds for terrorist acts.
The Brazilian Government was appalled by the acts of
provocation that resulted in the senseless destruction of
cultural and historic heritage sites in Syria, Iraq, Mali
and elsewhere. It should be noted that the common trait
to all those situations is the international community's
failure in dealing with the underlying causes of
conflicts. As long as we disregard poverty and the
fragility of national institutions as drivers of armed
conflict, there will be no lasting solution in sight.

Time and again, we have seen the harmful effects
of bending the rules and invoking exceptional rights in
order to justify military interventions. Those strategies
have enfeebled the multilateral system and aggravated
the situation on the ground. Iraq and Libya are two
clear examples of the failure of any approach based
on vicious cycles of threats, sanctions and violence.
Military interventions led only to weak national
institutions, increased sectarianism, power vacuums
and arms proliferation, paving the way for the rise of
radical groups such as the Islamic State. Those groups
thrive in the absence of the State and they benefit from
the flow of weapons to non-State actors.

It is high time that the Security Council assess the

inventory of preventable tragedies and learn from past
mistakes. We should all commit to demonstrate our
resolve to focus on political dialogue and preventive
actions. The use of sanctions and military force should
always be the last resort and, when it occurs, it must be
in line with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. What we really need is better diplomacy to
face the numerous challenges that still lie ahead.

The humanitarian tragedy that emerged from the
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa remains
a matter of great concern. We commend the work done
by the United Nations agencies and its partners to help
millions of people in need, as well as the outstanding
generosity of many countries in the region, including
Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt and Turkey, which have been
receiving the bulk of Syrian refugees.

Brazil has been striving to contribute to these
humanitarian efforts. We have issued more than 7,700
entry visas for Syrian residents affected by the crisis
and provided food and medicine to help alleviate the
dire situation faced by refugees and displaced people in
the region. As President Dilma Rousseff pledged before
the General Assembly at its seventieth session (see A/70/PV.13), Brazil will continue to host those who had
to flee their home country and need a place to restart
their lives. As the home of the largest Syrian diaspora
in the world and a country committed to international
peace and security, Brazil is ready to shoulder its
responsibilities on the diplomatic and humanitarian
fronts.

Even in light of those tragic facts, there is still
reason for hope, hope generated by a renewed belief
in the virtues of diplomacy. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran's
Nuclear Programme, and Security Council resolution
2235 (2015) on Syria's chemical weapons demonstrate
that when political will is present, reaching an agreement
is possible even on complex and highly sensitive issues.
Brazil commends all those involved in those efforts
and their persistence in dialogue and negotiation. That
sets a positive trend that should help us to effectively
address the ongoing conflicts in the region. We should
look up to those examples of successful diplomatic
engagements and redouble our collective efforts to halt
and settle the conflicts in the Middle East.

Peace talks between Israel and Palestine must be
urgently resumed under parameters that could lead to a
two-State solution.

There can be no more delay in achieving an inclusive
political solution in Syria. A first step to encourage
dialogue and avoid the aggravation of conflict should
be halting the flow of arms into the country. We look
forward to a renewed political process, led by the United
Nations, to deal with the situation in Syria. Brazil
wishes for a territorially united, sovereign, plural and
democratic Syria to emerge from the ashes of war.

In Libya and Yemen, the international community
should be united in condemning violence, avoiding the
use of unilateral force and working with the parties
to promote dialogue, bridge differences and reach a
peaceful and durable solution.

Diplomacy, cooperation and multilateralism
should guide us in the quest for a more stable and
peaceful Middle East and North Africa. The Council
has a primary responsibility in encouraging political
dialogue and addressing the root causes of conflicts.
It is our duty to restore the Council's capacity to fulfil
its duty to uphold international peace and security. Its
effectiveness and continued authority require that it be
Viewed as legitimate and representative.

After 70 years ofwork, areformed Security Council,
with new permanent and non-permanent members,
would be better positioned to adequately address the
challenges of a multipolar world and lead a new phase of
active diplomatic engagement to resolve those disputes.
The opportunity is before us. We need look no further
than the situations that have been discussed in today's
debate to realize how urgent the task is.

Brazil has been an enthusiast of multilateralism
and everything the United Nations stands for since
1945. We hope that over the next 70 years and beyond,
the international community can live up to the promise,
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, to rid
future generations of the scourge of war and all forms
of meaningless suffering.

