Ms. Power (United States of America): This
meeting comes at a time when every day we are seeing
an ever starker contrast between the conduct of the
authorities in Kyiv and the conduct of the authorities in
Moscow. Let me consider each in turn.

Ukraine's Government is placing a priority on
internal reconciliation, plans for free and fair elections,
and political inclusivity. It has proposed the creation
of a task force to consider the possibility of enhanced
autonomy for Crimea within Ukraine. Ukrainian
leaders have made clear the future they wish for their
people - a future of pluralism, prosperity and dignity;
a future free of corruption and cronyism; a future in
which the Ukrainian people do not have to choose
between East and West.

The Government of Ukraine has been unwavering
in its pledge to honour all of its international
agreements, including those covering Russian military
bases. Ukraine has also shown remarkable restraint
over the past few weeks with respect to the use of its
armed forces. As evidenced today by the statement of
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk, Ukraine's voice throughout
this crisis has been one of reason, support for the rule
of law and restraint in the face of provocation. Its
Government was voted in nearly unanimously by the
Rada and has since enjoyed broad support across the
political spectrum, including from former President
Yanukovich's former party. The Government also
includes representatives from across the country, east
and west, north and south.

Ukraine's leadership is properly focused on the
needs of its people. Yesterday in Washington, DC, the
Prime Minister met with President Obama and other
leaders of my Government, and also with top officials
of the International Monetary Fund. The Prime
Minister's goal is to stabilize his country's finances,
curb corruption, and lay the groundwork for progress
under a new Government to be elected peacefully,
freely and fairly by all the people okaraine on 25 May.
These elections, which are just over two months away,
will give any citizen who has a different vision for
Ukraine the chance to be heard. It will give those
who wish to shape Ukraine's future the chance to be
elected. Ukraine's efforts to stabilize its economy and
the coming elections merit the wholehearted support
of every member of the Council and of the broader
international community.

In Moscow, we see a different kind of leadership.
Russia has pursued a course of military action from the
outset. At the very start of the crisis, Russia massed
its forces along Ukraine's border for military exercises,
while supporting efforts inside Crimea to take control
of Ukrainian border posts, surround Ukrainian military
facilities, seize control of public facilities, and replace
Ukrainian media with Russian stations. President Putin
asked for and received authorization from the Federation
Council to use military force in Crimea, and today
there are reportedly more than 20,000 Russian troops
in the region. Although Moscow justified its actions in
the name of protecting ethnic Russians, Russian troops
have repeatedly obstructed international monitors
and mediators and denied them access, even though
their task is to ensure that the rights of minorities are
not violated. This is not the behaviour of people who
believe that they have truth and law on their side.

The self-anointed Crimean leaders set a referendum
with full backing from Russia. That date was to
be 25 May. They then reset the date for 16 March,
allowing less than two weeks to prepare for and carry
out a vote - two weeks on an issue of monumental
importance, risking grave destabilizing consequences,
in defiance of the Ukrainian Constitution and in
defiance of international law. The referendum ballot
that will be put to voters contains no option to vote
for the status quo. Ballots with nothing checked will
reportedly be ruled invalid. As the vote approaches this
weekend, the Russian military intervention continues,
and we learned this morning of new military operations
by Russian troops involving artillery batteries, assault
helicopters and at least 10,000 additional soldiers near
the Ukrainian border.

The proposed 16 March referendum on the status of
Crimea is everything that the scheduled 25 May election
is not. If the 25 May election offers an opportunity under
the law for all Ukrainians to participate in charting
their shared future, Sunday's referendum in Crimea
is hastily planned, unjustified and divisive. Ukraine's
Constitution requires that any change to its territory be
achieved only through a national referendum. Because
the Government has not authorized such a measure,
the proposed balloting on 16 March would violate
Ukraine's sovereignty. Any referendum on Crimea
must be conducted within the bounds of Ukrainian
law. Accordingly, the United States joins with others
in calling for the suspension of that ill-conceived
initiative, which cannot be recognized as legitimate,
especially when carried out against the backdrop of a
foreign military incursion. We also call on the Russian
Federation to refrain from further actions in support of
this dangerous undertaking.

The only true solution to the current crisis is
through diplomacy. My Government strongly supports
direct talks between the Russian Federation and the
Government of Ukraine, to be conducted, if necessary,
with appropriate help from the international community.
Secretary Kerry will meet with Foreign Minister
Lavrov tomorrow in the hope of finding a way off this
path of confrontation. Given the risk of conflict, none
of us can afford to leave any stone unturned.

But Russia has to want a diplomatic solution. The
diplomatic path remains both viable and desirable,
because the way forward is clear. Russian forces
must return to their bases and Russia must honour its
agreements with Ukraine. All countries must respect
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and seek
to resolve disputes through peaceful means. Every
country must fulfil its obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations and its commitments under the 1994
Budapest Memorandum and the Helsinki Final Act.
Ukraine and the Russian Federation must abide fully by
their bilateral agreements, including the 1997 Treaty of
Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership and the 1997
basing agreement.

These steps, each in accordance with prior
agreements, each consistent with international law,
each in keeping with the best interests of the people
of Ukraine, are all that is needed to end this crisis in a
way that respects the rights and interests of everyone
involved. In accordance with these principles, the
United States is proposing a draft resolution for the
Council's consideration that would endorse a peaceful
solution to the Ukraine crisis based on international
law and the Council's mandate to act, when necessary,
to ensure global security and peace.

In closing, I would like to reiterate my Government's
belief that, to resolve this crisis, what is needed now
is for a climate of restraint to replace confrontation,
openness to replace obstructionism, and peaceful
dialogue to replace coercion. This is the moment to
show that laws matter, rules matter, and territorial
integrity matters. If we do not come together, if we do
not send a clear a signal of our shared commitments,
we will live with the consequences in Crimea and well
beyond. We will look back on this moment and wish
we had come together with a unified voice before the
consequences became dire and innocent lives were lost.

