Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me first to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/l20*) and its annex on
the measurement of progress against the benchmarks
established at the London and Kabul Conferences. We
also wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his valuable
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his comments.

Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its concern at
the continued deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan owing to the increase in military
operations, the use of improvised explosive devices
and suicide attacks. Regrettably, the rising human cost
of the armed conflict in Afghanistan reached the
number of 7,120 civilian casualties in 2010, which
represents an increase of 19 per cent compared to 2009.
Child casualties increased significantly in 2010, and
the same trend continued in 2011 as children continued
to be victims of the ongoing conflict. These vast human
losses indicate that the solution to the conflict cannot
be a military one and that, in order to prevent
continued suffering and rising civilian casualties, a
political solution to the conflict must be found. We are
of the view that all parties must strengthen their efforts
to protect civilians and ensure that their actions are in
line with international legal norms.

In light of the recent developments in
Afghanistan, it is encouraging to see that the Afghan
National Assembly has been established and that the
Upper House and Lower House have elected their
Speakers. These positive political developments send
an important signal, which is the first necessary step on
the path towards national unity and the establishment
of Afghan institutions that are capable of catering to
the needs of the Afghan people.

In this context, we were pleased to learn that the
reintegration and reconciliation process has maintained
its positive momentum. We encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to continue to provide its good offices, to promote
confidence-building measures to support the High
Peace Council, to implement the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Programme, and to develop and
implement the Afghan-led reconciliation process.

We believe that regional cooperation is of critical
importance to Afghanistan's reconciliation process and
future economic development. In that context, we
commend the establishment of a joint peace committee
by Pakistan and Afghanistan, and the increasing
regional cooperation with Turkey, Turkmenistan, India
and Iran in the areas of the economic development and
trade, which may provide a basis for the sustainable
improvement of the security and economic situations in
Afghanistan.

With respect to the Kabul process and aid
coherence, we take positive note of the progress of its
implementation by the Government of Afghanistan and
of the development of its 22 national priority
programmes, in particular the public financial
management programme, which is considered to be
crucial to the implementation of all other programmes.

Furthermore, we welcome the initial achievements
in the transfer of the security sector to Afghan
authorities, which is one of the most important elements
of the Kabul process. In addition, we commend
UNAMA for its support to the Afghan Government on
this critical objective, which includes a long-term
partnership with the international community. We share
the Secretary-General's view that sustainable long-term
security in the country is to be achieved through

1 1-26621
interdependence with economic development and good
governance. We are looking forward to the
announcement of the first round of transfers of districts
and provinces to the Afghan authorities on 21 March.

With regard to the obstacles to the transition
process, we hope that the problems caused by the flaws
in the election process will be resolved in a transparent
and constructive manner that will satisfy all parties and
preserve political stability.

As for the impasse over the Kabul Bank, linked to
the finalization of the agreement on a new International
Monetary Fund country programme, we support a
solution that will best reflect the interests of the
Afghan people and economic development of their
country.

Furthermore, we welcome the strengthening of
the United Nations own coherence in supporting the
Government-led aid coordination through the
development of an integrated strategic framework in
five priority areas: peace, reconciliation and
reintegration; governance and the rule of law; human
rights; sustainable livelihood; and maternal and
newborn health.

Bosnia and Herzegovina particularly commends
the United Nations contribution to the return of
refugees in Afghanistan. The 5.5 million refugees who
have returned to Afghanistan over the past nine years
represent a very encouraging sign. Those who returned
deserve to receive all the support they need, and we
call on all international stakeholders in Afghanistan to
continue contributing to the creation of conditions for
the sustainable return of the remaining refugees and for
the return to their places of origin of internally
displaced persons, who number more than 360,000.

We are encouraged to hear that the number of
victims of landmines was reduced in 2010, and we
encourage the United Nations to continue its support to
the Mine Action Coordination Centre of Afghanistan.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its
support for the central role that the United Nations
continues to play in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan by leading the efforts of the international
community and coordinating and monitoring efforts to
implement the Kabul process through the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board.

We wish to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative for Afghanistan, and UNAMA

11-2662]
and its staff for their important work in difficult
circumstances. In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the renewal of the mandate of UNAMA for an
additional 12 months.

