Ihave the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania and the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina align themselves with this statement. The European Union remains united in its commitment to achieving a two- State solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all permanent-status issues in order to end the conflict. The EU welcomes the announcement of the normalization of the relations between the State of Israel and the United Arab Emirates and the establishment of diplomatic relations with the Kingdom of Bahrain. Israel's commitment to suspend plans to unilaterally annex areas of the occupied Palestinian territory is a positive step. Any unilateral decision that undermines a lasting, agreed solution should be avoided. The EU reiterates that any annexation would constitute a serious violation of international law. The EU remains ready to support the Israelis and the Palestinians in efforts to resume meaningful negotiations on all final-status issues in order to achieve a just and lasting peace. The EU will continue to support all efforts to help resume credible negotiations. The EU reiterates its strong opposition to Israel's settlement policy, which is illegal under international law, and actions taken in this context, such as demolitions and confiscations, including of humanitarian structures and EU-funded projects, evictions and forced transfers. The EU calls on Israel to halt continued settlement expansion and demolitions in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, especially in sensitive areas, such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and E-1, which seriously threaten the two-State solution. The violence and loss of human lives in the occupied Palestinian territory and Israel remain of deep concern for the EU. The Palestinian population continues to face repeated human rights violations and abuses. The EU recalls the importance of unhindered work of civil society organizations, both in Israel and in the occupied Palestinian territory. The worsening humanitarian and human rights situation in the Gaza Strip remains of grave concern, and the EU calls for an end to the closure and a full opening of the crossing points, while addressing Israel's security concerns, and unimpeded access for humanitarian actors. The EU firmly condemns the increased launching of rockets and incendiary balloons and other attacks from the Gaza Strip targeting civilians in Israel, as well as terrorist attacks, and any other form of violence, including a continued upward trend of settler-related incidents, and incitement on all sides. While recalling Israel's right to defend its legitimate security interests, the EU expects the Israeli authorities to fully meet their obligations under international human rights and international humanitarian law, not least in these difficult times of the coronavirus pandemic, including with regard to Palestinian detainees in Israeli prisons. The Palestinian Legislative Council was dissolved in December 2018. Strong, inclusive, accountable and functioning democratic Palestinian institutions based on respect for the rule of law and human rights are vital for the two-State solution. In that context, taking note of the recent announcement regarding elections, a date should be set very soon for elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in the Gaza Strip. The EU calls upon all Palestinian factions to unequivocally commit to democratic principles prior to the elections. The EU reiterates its deep and genuine appreciation for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and for its dedicated staff, who are working in an extremely difficult and challenging context. UNRWA is an essential provider of vital services to millions of Palestinian refugees and a stabilizing force in the region. Until a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the Palestinian refugee issue in accordance with international law is found, UNRWA remains crucial for providing the necessary protection and essential services to Palestinian refugees, and we will continue to support it in all its fields of operation, including in East Jerusalem. The EU welcomes the additional financial support from other and new donors and calls upon all partners to increase their contributions to UNRWA. The EU recalls that a lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions; the Madrid principles, including land for peace; the road map; the agreements previously reached by the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative, with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace and security and mutual recognition. The EU reiterates its fundamental commitment to the security of Israel, including with regard to the current and emerging threats in the region. The EU strongly opposes all actions that undermine the viability of the two- State solution and urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild trust and create a path back to meaningful negotiations. Allow me to turn to the situation in Syria. The Syrian conflict in now in its tenth year and is still marked by persistent violations and abuses of international law, including abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law, by all parties, particularly by the Syrian regime and its allies. The crisis continues to have profound repercussions on the overall stability of the entire region. The human devastation of the country endures. The strain of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic adds to the gravity of the situation. In the north-west of Syria, the situation remains fragile. The EU reiterates its call on all parties to uphold the present ceasefire so as to guarantee the protection of civilians on the ground and from air strikes. The EU continues to call upon the Syrian regime and its allies to fully respect international humanitarian law and in particular to permanently cease indiscriminate air strikes against and the shelling of civilians. The EU also notes with concern the ongoing insecurity in the north-east of Syria and reiterates its call for the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The EU insists further that the Syrian regime must fully cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), including its investigations of the use of chemical weapons in the conflict, and deplores the lack of cooperation of the Syrian regime, as shown by the report of the OPCW's Director General released on 14 October following the July 2020 Executive Council decision. As set out in that decision, it will now be the duty of the Conference of the States Parties to decide on a further course of action, and we call on all States parties to fulfil their responsibility and uphold the credibility of the Chemical Weapons Convention. Respect for international humanitarian law must be ensured at all times and in all circumstances. We reiterate that the use of chemical weapons is a violation of international law and unacceptable under any circumstances, and that impunity for the use of chemical weapons must not and will not be tolerated. While the EU welcomed the decision by the Security Council on 10 July to extend the authorization for cross-border humanitarian assistance to people in need in Syria for a further 12 months, the authorization of only one crossing point, in the north-west, is disappointing. The EU continues to demand that all parties in conflict, in particular the Syrian regime, allow safe, unimpeded and sustained access for the humanitarian convoys to the Syrian population in need in all parts of the country. Turkey is a key partner of the European Union and a critically important actor in the Syrian crisis and the region. Turkey's security concerns in north-east Syria should be addressed through political and diplomatic means, not with military action, and in accordance with international humanitarian law. The EU remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian State and recalls that any sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine political transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process. All those responsible for breaches of international law and human rights law, some of which may constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity, must be held accountable. The EU reiterates its call to have the situation in Syria referred to the International Criminal Court. In the absence of avenues for international justice, the prosecution of war crimes under national jurisdiction where possible and the recent initiative of the Netherlands to invoke Syria's responsibility for human rights violations represent an important contribution towards securing justice. Moreover, we will continue to support efforts to gather evidence with a view to future legal action, including by the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The EU further welcomes the report of the Commission of Inquiry and expresses its concern about the report's findings The EU fully supports the efforts of United Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and has welcomed the establishment of the Syrian-led Constitutional Committee under United Nations auspices. A third round of talks took place at the end of August this year, despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The EU urges the Syrian regime to return to the negotiating table as soon as circumstances allow a fourth round to be held and to engage in the Committee's work in good faith and with the aim of making progress. The EU reiterates that all elements of resolution 2254 (2015) must be implemented, including the issue of detainees and missing persons and the establishment of a safe and neutral environment in order for free and fair elections to be held under United Nations supervision. Regarding the situation of refugees and of internally displaced persons, the EU continues to voice strong concern about reports of social and demographic engineering in all areas throughout Syria and mass waves of displacement, inter alia, in parts of the north-west and north-east. The EU insists that their return to their places of origin can be encouraged only if it can take place in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner, in line with the parameters defined by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and in accordance with international law. That was also agreed by all participants in the fourth Brussels Conference on Syria and the region at the end of June. The underlying causes of the refugee and displacement crisis must be addressed through the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The EU will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition, in the framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process, is firmly under way.
