Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me
welcome you, Madam President, and thank you for
convening today's meeting and presiding over it. It is
an important meeting that we are having today on
Somalia.

I would like to join others in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe and Ambassador
Lamamra for their briefings. By the same token, I
would like to welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya, Mr. Moses Wetangula; the
Minister of Defence of Uganda, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga;
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan,
Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov.

Let me focus briefly on three points, namely,
first, the future posture, composition and support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM);
secondly, the political state of play and the way
forward, especially after the end of the transitional
period; and thirdly, very briefly, the relocation of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
to that country, specifically to Mogadishu.

First, I would like to reiterate our strong support
for AMISOM. The African Union (AU) peacekeeping
force in Somalia provides an excellent example of an
African response to an African crisis and deserves our
continued political, strategic and financial support. We
took note of the new AU strategic concept for
AMISOM. operations that was recently shared with us
(see S/2012/19, annex). We welcome the continued
commitment of the AU and its member States to the
Mission, and we commend Uganda and Burundi for
contributing troops to the peacekeeping force. We
express our sympathy for the losses they have suffered,
and we appreciate the arrival in Mogadishu of the first
troops from Djibouti.

We also took note of the communique of the AU
Peace and Security Council of 5 January, which
endorses the increase of the AMISOM. troop level to a
strength of up to 17,700, including troops from
Djibouti and rehatted Kenyan forces. We are ready to
work constructively with other Council members to
consider enhancing the support for AMISOM.

Let me now turn briefly to my second point *
AMISOM's recent military achievements. The
successful training of Somali security forces by the AU
training mission in Somalia and their subsequent
deployment, and especially the liberation of almost all
of Mogadishu and other parts of the country, contrast
clearly with the continued lack of political progress.
Although the Garowe meeting had positive results and
some provisions of the road map have been
implemented, we are worried about the considerable
delays in other areas and about the renewed infighting
among some of Somalia's political players.

We call on the Transitional Federal Institutions to
make the best possible use of the remaining months
until August in order to move the transition process
forward at last. In the interests of the people of
Somalia, further progress needs to be made in such
core areas as constitutional reform, basic security,
political outreach and reconciliation, good governance
and institutional reform. At this stage, we believe that
another extension of the transitional period is neither in
the interests of the Somali people nor of the
international community.
The Somali people and the international
community must now agree on what succeeds the
transitional arrangements. The discussion among
Somali stakeholders in Garowe in December and the
principles agreed there are a first step on that path. We
welcome the upcoming London conference to be
convoked by the British Government as an opportunity
to hold further discussions concerning the immediate
future of Somalia.

My third point relates to the recent announcement
of the Secretary-General to relocate United Nations
staff to Somalia and Mogadishu, in particular UNPOS.
My delegation has always favoured the swift relocation
of United Nations staff from Nairobi. We understand
that the process is difficult and involves personnel and
administrative challenges. Nevertheless, we are
convinced that the move will further help UNPOS to
support the Somali people and provide access to the
situation on the ground.

