Mr. Michel (Belgium) (spoke in French): How
many of us around this horseshoe-shaped table have
children? Who in this Chamber does not want the best
for his son or daughter? Three hundred thousand

08-2361]
children have been forcibly separated from their
families. That represents half of Belgium's children
between the ages of 11 and 15. Let us think of the stark
dilemma facing those children: kill or be killed. They
are kidnapped, drugged and abused, and forced to
commit the worst of atrocities, sometimes against their
own families. As fathers and mothers, we cannot resign
ourselves to that situation.

During my recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo I had an opportunity to see for
myself the distress of children caught up in armed
conflict. Beyond all the available reports and statistics,
looking into the eyes of a girl who had been abused,
raped and even mutilated made it possible for me to
realize the horror that sexual violence means,
especially for children. I am convinced that children
who have known only war and who owe their survival
to their Kalashnikovs are not a lost cause when it
comes to peace and development. To the contrary, they
are an essential part of it.

The problem of children and armed conflict is
well known. It has been clearly described and analysed
in the report (S/2007/757) of the Secretary-General. It
is not just a question of human rights and development
assistance. It is also a matter of peace and security. I
would even go as far as saying that it is also a question
of humanity. The recommendations made by
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
must be implemented quickly. Too much time has
already passed. The fates of too many children have
already been sealed.

Beyond the international awareness that has
resulted from the publication of the list of armed State
and non-State groups guilty of recruiting or using
children, that public list is above all an important
deterrent that can brook no compromise. With the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) and the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, the Security Council now has essential
information at its disposal to enable it to act and apply
pressure on those armed groups. The protection of
children in every phase of an armed conflict is never
negotiable. It is the responsibility of the Security
Council to adopt the necessary sanctions against
individuals and groups that continue to recruit children.
Combating impunity through national and international
justice mechanisms is a crucial prelude to
reconciliation and peace. The recent transfer of

08-2361]

Mathieu Ngudjolo from Kinshasa to The Hague is a
further step in that direction. Belgium fully supports
that approach.

Sexual violence is another scourge receiving
increasing attention from the Security Council, and
from the United Nations system overall. As the Council
is aware, with regard to monitoring the implementation
of resolution 1612 (2005), sexual violence is taken into
account only when it is associated with the presence of
child soldiers. We cannot limit ourselves to such
situations alone. Sexual violence in conflict situations
has tragic and long-term consequences for those
affected by it. This is one of the most heinous and
appalling practices of wartime. The Belgian
Government advocates strengthening the mechanism
established by virtue of resolution 1612 (2005) by
including in the annexes to the reports of the Secretary-
General a list of parties to conflict responsible for
systematic sexual violence.

Combating the phenomenon of child soldiers is
an imperative that must compel all of us, without
exception, to act. The Security Council must become
more involved in this issue. It must also encourage
other United Nations bodies to vastly intensify the
political pressure that is necessary to put an end to
these abuses - "hyper-pressure" is needed. Member
States and international agencies and organizations
must translate their commitments into concrete action.
For my part, on behalf of the Belgian Government -
as Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt did last September
(see S/PV.5749) - I can assure the Council that
Belgium will act tirelessly to that end. In the same
vein, Belgium will continue to advocate for a binding
instrument to ban cluster bombs, which, as we all well
know, affect children in particular.

I want to believe that today's debate will lead to
an increased commitment on the part of the Council.
During the 2002 special session of the General
Assembly devoted to children, Secretary-General Kofi
Annan addressed the children of the world in these
words: "Yet we, the grown-ups, have failed you
deplorably in upholding many of [your rights]" and
"We, the grown-ups, must reverse this list of failures"
(A/S-27/PV.], p. 4).

That was in 2002. Today, in 2008, however,
armed conflicts in the Kivus, Colombia and other
affected regions are still making victims of children.
Those children too have the right to live in safety. Let

us give them hope. It is our duty to guarantee their
basic rights.

