Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me too thank Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights, Mr. Andrew Gilmour, for
their briefings.

The delegation of Senegal believes that it is
incumbent upon each State to be responsible for the
protection and promotion of the rights of its citizens,
thereby contributing to strengthening international
peace and security. Senegal is convinced that the
exercise of human rights is essential to human dignity,
and that is why my country has made the protection
and promotion of fundamental rights and freedoms
for individuals a cardinal principle - with respect, of
course, for the diversity of our human societies. We are
of the view that it is necessary to create conditions for
strengthened international cooperation in the area of
human rights, emphasizing their universal, indivisible
and interdependent nature.

Therefore, as an independent and sovereign State,
we believe that it is important that we engage with
solidarity in all issues, including those related to human
rights, on the basis of mutual respect and through
constructive dialogue. It is in that spirit that we have
implemented appropriate mechanisms to promote and
protect human rights throughout the world, which is
an ongoing challenge that constitutes one of the pillars
of our Organization. Indeed, the mechanisms that
have been set up by the United Nations - especially
the Human Rights Council, the Universal Periodic
Review and the bodies created under international
instruments - while not perfect, are pertinent and
complementary tools for dealing with human rights
issues, as can be seen in the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General.

Having said that, we take special note of the
Human Rights Council's report on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. We encourage that country to cooperate more
with the relevant mechanisms for the promotion of
human rights, especially the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the commission of inquriy on
human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, established by the Human Rights Council in its
resolution 22/13.

