Mr. Prendergast: Throughout history, war
may have been hell, but for small groups of conflict
profiteers it has also been very lucrative. Today's
deadliest conflicts in Africa - such as those in
South Sudan, Somalia, northern Nigeria, the Sudan,
the Central African Republic and, perhaps most
importantly, the Democratic Republic of Congo - are
sustained by extraordinary opportunities for illicit self-
enrichment that emerge in war economies, where there
is a visible nexus between grand corruption and mass
atrocities. State armies and rebels use extreme violence
to control natural resources, labour and smuggling
networks, including those trafficking in wildlife.
Violence becomes self-financing from pillaging,
natural-resource looting and stealing State assets, with
banking and business connections that extend from
right here in New York to London, Dubai and many
other global financial centres.

In these hijacked African States, the dynamics of
which are certainly similar to those in other war-torn
countries around the world, such as Afghanistan, Iraq
and Syria, military and civilian leaders use networks
of commercial collaborators and financiers from inside
and outside their countries to enrich themselves, to
benefit the commercial and political networks, and
usually to maintain an iron grip on power. Arms
dealers, ivory traffickers, gold and diamond smugglers,
minerals dealers, oil companies, construction firms
and others collude with Government officials and
rebel warlords - as well as, at times, with terrorist
networks - to maximize profit for a narrow few.
Technically savvy and skilled at exploiting legitimate
systems of finance, trade and transport - utilizing
money-laundering, regulatory and sanctions evasion,
disguised beneficial ownership, the diversion of
State resources and assets, security sector fraud, and
offshoring assets - these networks have remained
largely untouched by law enforcement, regulation or
international sanctions imposed by this organ or others.

At their core, these conflicts are battles over the
control of hijacked States and the natural resources that
enrich the countries involved. Control of the State is the
surest way to access these resources. Diverting State
budgets into the military and internal security - the
primary means of violently suppressing dissent - is
how to secure them.

Until the Security Council and other interested
parties with potential influence can create leverage
to change these dynamics, the bottom line is that war
will remain more beneficial than peace for those at the
centre of conflict and corruption. The same people
benefiting from war economies are often the power-
brokers in peace talks and have limited incentive - in
fact, sometimes no incentive - to reach and implement
a negotiated settlement, especially if adhering to such
an agreement means losing out economically.
Therefore, peace efforts require an emphasis on
conflict transformation, where war economies must be
dismantled and hijacked State institutions, which have
often been predatory dating back to the colonial period,
must be completely reformed to fulfil their intended
purpose. This is even more difficult in countries where
natural resources have provided huge opportunities for
plunder and corruption to people all over the world.

Remarkably, and regrettably, there is currently no
coordinated strategy to disrupt the illicit siphoning of
money by leaders and their foreign business partners,
or to break the link between corruption and conflict.
Every year, billions of aid dollars pour into Africa to
clean up these horrific messes. United Nations agencies,
taxpayers and donor Governments around the world
fund peacekeeping forces, State-building programmes,
humanitarian assistance, elections and peace processes,
but none of this support has been able to keep corrupt
leaders and their network of beneficiaries from stealing
billions of dollars because the diplomats leading these
efforts simply have no leverage to change the systems
that perpetuate conflict. This is not about regime
change. It is about system change.

For years, the tool of choice for building leverage
against actors undermining peace or human rights has
been to impose targeted sanctions. But the sanctions
often imposed by this organ and many Member States
in these situations, especially in Africa, have been
inadequate. Too few individuals are sanctioned too
infrequently. The sanctions are often too weak, because
the mandate does not exist to target those responsible
for the corruption that leads to conflict. In other words,
we rarely sanction those at the centre of the networks
responsible for greed-fueled extreme violence and
their commercial collaborators. Over time, and in the
absence of meaningful enforcement, warring parties
have come to regard these kinds of erratically applied,
one-off sanctions as a vague annoyance for their public
relations rather than as a serious threat to their power.

What is missing is the use of policy tools of
financial pressures that actually alter the cost-
benefit analysis of those committing atrocities and
prolonging war. As is obvious, these leaders and their
commercial collaborators do not keep their money
under the mattress; rather, they launder it through the
international financial system and move it offshore into
real estate, shell or front companies, and bank accounts.
That makes them vulnerable. As a result, the leverage
must be laser-focused on going after this specific
illicit activity, valued in the billions of dollars. If that
activity is disrupted and the vulnerabilities of these
kleptocratic networks are exposed and attacked, only
then will United Nations envoys and other diplomats
be in a position to actually make progress towards
brokering and supporting the implementation of peace
agreements that lead to lasting peace and that benefit
long-suffering populations.

The policy tools available to the Security Council
and other interested parties are threefold: first, a
network-focused approach to sanctions that focuses
on grand corruption; secondly, anti-money-laundering
measures that focus on the illicit movement of money
through the international financial system; and
thirdly, as the Secretary-General said, prosecutions
that, in this case, focus on financial crimes associated
with atrocities.

Let us go to the first one. Sanctions must be levied
against entire networks, not just individuals. That
is the approach that the Security Council and others
took to propel Iran and North Korea to the negotiating
table. Sanctions that target networks in this way are
powerful tools for changing behaviour and pressuring
individuals to compromise. These network sanctions
work because they affect not only the primary target of
the sanctions themselves, but also the individuals and
companies that play an important role in supporting the
targets' activities. By sanctioning the individuals and
entities all at once or in close succession, and ensuring
robust enforcement, which is key, the primary target's
network does not have enough time to recover from
the financial impact of being cut off from the global
financial system.

To implement this, the Council should add
"corruption tied to conflict" as a sanctions criterion to
its existing sanctions programmes and ensure that panels
of experts are mandated to report on corruption related
to conflict. Panels of experts must be provided with
the support they need to do this work, which includes
ensuring accountability for those responsible for the
tragic deaths of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan.

Secondly, the Council should enhance its
engagement with anti-money-laundering bodies,
such as the Financial Action Task Force and similar
regional bodies, and ensure that sanctions regimes
include references to the importance of combatting the
laundering of corruption proceeds. These organizations
need the help of the Security Council to bolster
their work.

An important component of any effort to strengthen
the Security Council's ability to counter corrupt
activities that fuel conflict more effective is to move
beyond working with Governments alone. The Council
could enhance its leverage considerably by expanding
its outreach and engagement with banks and other
financial institutions to counter corruption-fueled
conflict. Certain elements of the private sector could
them become allies in support of these objectives.

Thirdly and finally, courts must have the mandate
to prosecute financial crimes, particularly those rooted
in corruption, when connected to conflict and atrocities.
The International Criminal Court and other courts of
special jurisdiction, such as the Special Criminal Court
for the Central African Republic or the Hybrid Court in
South Sudan, must have the authority to prosecute these
financial crimes.

Ultimately, these tools of financial pressure are
not an end in themselves, but should be deployed, as
the Secretary-General said today, in the context of a
comprehensive strategy that intensifies diplomacy,
supports Government institutions of accountability and
transparency, and gives space to civil society efforts to
promote human rights and reconciliation. As it stands
now - and this is the kicker - war crimes pay. In
order for peace to have any chance, those benefiting
from the human misery wrought by conflicts around
the world need to pay a price, whether financial, legal
or political, and the corrupt systems that underlie them
need to be ended.

I thank you, Madam President, for inviting me to
speak today and for bringing attention to this critical
issue. I also thank all Security Council members for
considering a more robust action plan for countering
the corruption-fueled conflict that is destroying the
lives of millions of people around the world today.

