Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to deliver this statement on
behalf of the African countries members of the
Security Council - South Africa, cote d'Ivoire and
Equatorial Guinea.

We, too, would like to congratulate Mr. Francois
Lounceny Fall and the entire team of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) for his
detailed and informative briefing on the situation
in Central Africa and the work of the Office. Allow
me also to thank Mr. Sasha Lezhnev for the relevant
information he just provided. We would again like to
thank the Secretary-General for the recommendations
provided in his report (S/2019/9l3), in which he
confirms that regional offices are the platform for
progress in conflict prevention, in particular UNOCA,
whose work has been effective in promoting peace and
stability in the Central African subregion.

Against that backdrop, we will continue to support
UNOCA in its ongoing work to create synergies for
the purposes of promoting bilateral cooperation among
neighbouring countries and strengthening cooperation
with regional organizations - in particular the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community and the Gulf of Guinea Commission - in
the areas ofpeace, security and conflict prevention. We
also strongly believe that UNOCA needs to strengthen
its cooperation, mutual coordination of priorities and
ensure a clear division of tasks with other United
Nations organizations operating in the region and with
the United Nations Regional Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, as set out in presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/10, of 12 September.

We hope that the extension of UNOCA's mandate
until 31 August 2021 will enable the Regional Office
to closely follow the electoral-cycle process in the
subregion, that the elections scheduled therein will
be held in a peaceful and tranquil environment and be
transparent, peaceful and inclusive, and that they will
address the problems of the present reality and the
threats facing the subregion, above all those related,
inter alia, to mercenary activities, terrorism, piracy
and organized crime, as those threats are currently
a major cause for concern in the area as a result of
the amplification of the uncontrolled circulation of
weapons and the conflicts taking place in the area, all
of which pose a serious threat to the peace and security
of States in the subregion.

At the same time, we must continue to strongly
condemn the terror and attacks perpetrated by Boko
Haram since 2009, the year in which the Security
Council also raised the alarm about the group. Boko
Haram's attacks continue to lead to devastating losses of
human life and pose a major threat to stability and peace
in Central and West Africa. We also recall presidential
statement S/PRST/201 1/21, of 14 November 2011, which
strongly condemned the ongoing attacks carried out by
the Lord's Resistance Army in parts of Central Africa,
which pose an ongoing threat to regional security.

In response to all those situations, in February,
during the first presidency ofthe Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2457 (2019) on the initiative to silence the
guns. This resolution will undoubtedly contribute
to safeguarding peace and security on the African
continent, and we hope that it will constitute a turning
point for the future of Africa, which recognizes that
silencing the guns will contribute greatly to saving
future generations from the scourge of war and building
an integrated, peaceful, secure and prosperous Africa.
We appreciate the efforts that the Central African
States have taken to achieve political, social and
economic stability in the subregion, as reflected in
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of UNOCA (S/2019/913) delivered by his Special
Representative. We welcome the national dialogue that
recently took place in Cameroon, which we believe
is a positive and significant step towards resolving
the disputes that have yet to be reconciled. We
appreciate the recent tripartite visit of the joint mission
to the country by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, the
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie, Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, and
the Commonwealth Secretary-General, Ms. Patricia
Scotland, which served as an opportunity to exchange
views on the implementation of the outcomes of the
national dialogue.

In that context, we align ourselves with the
declaration of the tripartite Visit of the mission and
urge the Cameroonian authorities to support and
implement the outcomes of the national dialogue. The
rapid implementation of the outcomes of the dialogue
would not only demonstrate a commitment to the will
of the people of Cameroon, but would also serve as
confidence-building measures, which we believe would
pave the way for reconciliation, peace, stability and a
return to normal life in the affected regions.

We appreciate the continued efforts to bring all
parties to the negotiating table. We encourage the
relevant parties to the conflict to heed the call to join
the negotiations, which are fundamental to resolving
differences of opinion. In the same vein, we urge
all parties to approach the negotiations in a spirit of
compromise and to strive towards achieving lasting
peace and stability in Cameroon. We would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Government
of Cameroon for having hosted on 22 November the
extraordinary summit of Central African Heads of
State on the economic and monetary situation in the
CEMAC zone.

We appreciate UNOCA's efforts to continue strongly
promoting the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in the
countries of the subregion. We also welcome the work
of the joint bilateral commissions between the Central
African Republic, Cameroon and the Republic of the
Congo. At the same time, we encourage the resumption
of the work of the joint bilateral commissions between
the Central African Republic and all its other neighbours
in order to address cross-border issues. We strongly
hope that UNOCA, together with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, will support initiatives
aimed at enhancing the capacity of the national security
forces, in accordance with resolution 2447 (2018). Cote
d'Ivoire, with its first-hand experience in dealing with
post-conflict situations, contributed to the adoption of
this resolution.

We welcome the tripartite agreement signed by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government
of Angola and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, which paves the way
for the establishment of a mechanism for the safe,
voluntary, dignified and sustainable return of refugees.
We also commend the Government of Angola for
hosting from 26 to 28 November the 49th meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.

While we also appreciate the measures that the
Governments of the region have implemented to
address the humanitarian situation, we nevertheless
remain concerned about the high number of internally
displaced persons, refugees and asylum seekers in the
Central African subregion. Displaced persons need
to earn sustainable livelihoods and have their rights
and dignity respected, yet their circumstances are
compounded by the destabilizing activities of armed
groups and continued attacks on communities that
also remain exposed to the harsh realities of climate
change, malnutrition, cholera and Ebola, for which
the international community must provide adequate
technical, health and financial assistance.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
strengthened cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Peace and Security Architecture of the
African Union, which also reinforces the Council's
subregional initiatives to advance the women and
peace and security agenda, as set out in resolution 2493
(2019), adopted on 29 October during South Africa's
presidency of the Council, will serve to advance the
implementation of that agenda and its priorities by
ensuring and promoting the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at all stages of peace processes.

Lastly, South Africa, cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea reaffirm their support for the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whose
mission of good offices and preventive diplomacy
continues to be relevant in the quest for peace, stability
and socioeconomic development in the States of
Central Africa.

