The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

At the outset, let me join others in thanking
Mr. Huang Xia, the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, for his informative briefing.

South Africa welcomes the improving relations
and levels of cooperation among the core countries of
the Great Lakes region. In that regard, we welcome
the reinforced commitments by the regional Heads
of State to a stable Great Lakes region, as reflected
in the rapprochement in the region. That includes the
normalization of bilateral relations between Rwanda
and Uganda, mediated by President Lourenco of
Angola with the support of President Tshisekedi of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome
the formation of a Government of national unity in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which will
hopefully help to unify the Congolese people in a step
on the road to national reconstruction and development.

However, my delegation remains concerned
about the security situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the humanitarian situation
in parts of the country, which deteriorated during the
reporting period. South Africa therefore underscores
the importance of ensuring that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo strengthens the
capacity of its State institutions, with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We hope that the strategic review report reflects the
desire of the Congolese people, as articulated in the
country's statement in the General Assembly (see A/74/ PV.7), to see that the training provided by MONUSCO
to the Congolese armed forces results in a force that
is focused, well-equipped and capable of adapting to
the prevailing conditions on the ground. My delegation
is also concerned about the Ebola virus outbreak,
which has resulted in the loss of lives. In that regard,
we commend the efforts undertaken by regional and
international partners in fighting the Ebola outbreak
and further urge them to continue to assist in efforts to
curb the pandemic.

Turning to the Central African Republic, we note
with concern the logistical challenges that hamper
the country's smooth implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. We are also
concerned about the activities of some non-State actors,
which continue to violate the provisions of the Political
Agreement in some prefectures, including through
illegal taxation and the obstruction of the deployment
of State institutions and security forces. It is our hope
that the Council's action in September (see S/PV.8617)
easing the arms embargo (resolution 2488 (2019))
will constitute a strong push in the multidimensional
efforts to accelerate the restoration of State authority
throughout the Central African Republic's national
territory. In spite of the challenges, we welcome the
cooperation and coordination between the African
Union (AU), the Economic Community of Central
African States, the United Nations, the European
Union (EU) and the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as with other bilateral and multilateral partners.
We also welcome the continued positive role of women
in fostering local and inclusive peace processes in
the region.

Against that backdrop, we call on development
actors to continue to play a central role in building and
sustaining peace in the country through the creation
of inclusive institutions, building capacities to deliver
services and investing in critical infrastructure, with
a view to addressing the socioeconomic gaps and
responding to the long-standing drivers of conflict.
Collaboration with the World Bank, the EU, the African
Development Bank and other development actors is
therefore vital for a genuine reconciliation process in
the Central African Republic.

Burundi remains an important part of the stability
of the Great Lakes region. We therefore continue to
support the inter-Burundian dialogue, including the
facilitation process led by the East African Community,
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, with the support of the AU
and the United Nations. It is South Africa's hope that
Burundi's preparations for the May 2020 elections will
be inclusive, transparent and peaceful.

With regard to the situation in South Sudan, my
delegation welcomes the recent face-to-face meetings
between President Salva Kiir and Vice-President
Riek Machar, which we believe are a step in the right
direction. Continued dialogue is therefore essential, as
it will help to unlock the impasse that has stalled the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.

It is our view and expectation that a region that is
politically stable serves as a foundation for regional
economic integration. We therefore reiterate our position
on the importance of curbing the persistent illicit
exploitation of and trade in natural resources, which
undermine their proper management. In addition, it will
be critical to ensure that there is increased cooperation
among the Great Lakes countries in eliminating armed
groups by focusing on inclusive cooperation and
coordinated security-sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes.

In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the Secretary-
General's recommendations that the differences among
States that are signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region are best addressed
through dialogue and cooperation. We therefore urge
the Council to reiterate its call to all signatories to the
Framework to implement their commitments under it
with a view to ensuring long-term, sustainable peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

