Mrs. Viotti: I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of November. I also thank
you for the opportunity to participate in this meeting in
my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. In
addition, I thank the Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-

09-5946]
Bissau, for his comprehensive and insightful remarks
on the situation in the field.

Since I last briefed the Council, on 23 June (see S/PV.6]49), a number of developments have affected
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. Following the tragic
assassinations in March and June, the country seems to
have restored constitutional normality. The two rounds
of presidential elections occurred in a peaceful manner,
and the candidate of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, Malam Bacai
Sanha, was elected President.

From 7 to 12 September, I visited Bissau in order
to attend the inauguration ceremony of President Sanha
and meet with the Prime Minister, members of the
Government, civil society and bilateral and multilateral
partners. From the many conversations I had, I could
sense an atmosphere of cautious optimism. I would
mention four developments among the reasons for
positive expectations, which have already been
highlighted by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.

First, the fact that the President and the Prime
Minister are both from the same party contributes, in
principle, to strengthening political stability. The
decision by the National Assembly to hold a national
reconciliation dialogue focusing on the root causes of
conflict and the future of the country augurs well for
the peacebuilding process.

Secondly, the need to pursue security sector
reform remains a top priority. The launching of a
pension fund for members of the military who will be
demobilized is seen as a major step in this regard.

Thirdly, Government authorities expressed their
willingness to put an end to the culture of impunity.
They remain interested in receiving international
technical support for the work of a commission of
inquiry into this year's political assassinations.

Fourthly, there has been a notable improvement
in the management of public finances. The Government
had been able to normalize payrolls, mostly through
the mobilization of domestic resources. The growth in
public revenue and the record performance of cashew
nut exports illustrate the economic potential the
country needs to tap into.

However, many challenges remain. In the context
of security sector reform, the Government is expected
to take decisions that will enable the process to move
forward, in particular with regard to the establishment

of the pension fund. The Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has offered to organize
a meeting on security sector reform in Abuja as a
follow-up to the meeting held in Praia this past April,
to be followed by a donors' round table next year. All
stakeholders should join in supporting Guinea-Bissau,
as successful security sector reform is key to the
peacebuilding process in the country.

Guinea-Bissau continues to need assistance to
build capacity that may enable State institutions to
function properly and the rule of law to take hold.
Efforts to help Guinea-Bissau build a functioning State
capable of addressing basic social needs, ensuring
security and promoting human rights continue to be
essential.

There are still important bottlenecks hampering
economic recovery. Despite a recent increase in total
power generation, the production and distribution of
energy is still a matter of great concern. Without
adequate infrastructure, the prospects for sustained
economic growth and employment generation will
remain unfulfilled.

The attention given to the fight against drug
trafficking in Guinea-Bissau has yielded some positive
results, as reported by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), as we just heard from
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa. This should be seen as an
encouragement for further action and enhanced support
to the country, with a view to achieving even more
effective results.

During my trip to Bissau, I encouraged the
national Steering Committee to review the strategic
framework approved last year. Such a review would be
aimed at assessing the progress achieved so far and
defining, within each priority area, those aspects that
will need the particular attention of the international
community in the short term. I was pleased to learn
that this process has already started and is progressing
well. Apart from its intrinsic value, this prioritization
exercise will be instrumental to informing the
allocation of a second round of Peacebuilding Fund
resources to Guinea-Bissau.

In the light of the importance attached to a
regional approach to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, I
will be travelling with the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission to Addis Ababa next week, to establish
contact with African Union officials on matters of
relevance to the countries on the agenda of the

Commission and, in my case, Guinea-Bissau in
particular. I will also travel to Abuja in order to meet
with ECOWAS officials on issues pertaining to
Guinea-Bissau. I believe these trips will provide a good
opportunity to strengthen cooperation with both
organizations and coordinate actions in support of
Guinea-Bissau.

Last but not least, I would like to reiterate the
importance of a renewed and strengthened presence of
the United Nations on the ground. The transformation
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau into an integrated mission, endowed
with the necessary resources and staff to fulfil its
mandate, is vitally important to the success of
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. We hope that the
budget proposal for the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau will be
favourably considered in the Fifth Committee and that
the new Office can start operating at full capacity as
soon as possible.

