Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for his informative and very helpful briefing on
the Secretary-General's latest report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2003/421).

The situation in Kosovo - and, more generally,
in the Balkans - continues to be a matter of great
importance, as evidenced by Secretary of State
Powell's recent visit to Belgrade. Before turning to the
Secretary-General's report, let me make a few
comments on recent acts of violence in Kosovo.

The United States has provided resources to
confront organized crime in the Balkans, and has
spoken loudly and often against organized crime and
extremist violence. The United States condemns
outright violence against witnesses in criminal trials
and violence targeted against specific ethnic groups.
The United States supports the decision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to list the so-
called Albanian National Army as a terrorist
organization. Its attack on the railway bridge was
clearly intended to kill innocent civilians, an utterly
despicable act. As President Bush has said, it is never
acceptable to target violence against innocent civilians.

The United States finds it incredible that such
violence comes only weeks after assassins took the life
of the Prime Minister of Serbia. We share in the loss of
a democratically elected leader. As my delegation
noted at the time, we express our sympathy to the
people of Serbia for that loss.

The Secretary-General's report and Mr. Annabi's
briefing suggest the challenges we face in our efforts to
implement Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
There are some encouraging developments. My
delegation is pleased by the continued progress in
training and strengthening the Kosovo Police Service.
My delegation is encouraged by the report of some
progress in dismantling the parallel judicial system in
northern Kosovo. My delegation is encouraged to learn
that the first six enterprises have been approved for
privatization. But Assistant Secretary-General Annabi's
report of growing extremism, grenade attacks on
UNMIK police stations and the painfully slow pace of
refugee returns powerfully reminds the Security
Council that much work remains to be done. And of
course, that was the conclusion of the Security
Council's mission to Kosovo last December.

There is uneven progress in consolidating
Kosovo's elected Government. The functioning of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government must
improve. Some of the uneven progress stems from
insecurity about the future; some of it comes from a
difficult and emotional history; yet other problems
spring from a lack of capabilities and experience.
There are equally sobering realities involving ongoing
efforts to integrate the Serb minority into the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. The
progress on returns is slow, as I have noted. Respect for
minority rights is inconsistent. We here in New York
always seem to be in the middle of a chicken-or-egg
debate that has no end. Those in the Government
pledge to do more to reassure minorities; things will
change, they say, when they are secure about the future
and when Kosovo's Serbs participate in the Provisional
Institutions. Kosovo's Serbs argue that they will do so
when there are more returns, more respect for
minorities and less talk about independence.

The United States Government continues to
support the Council's consistent response to all of that.
Quite simply, we must do all that is practically
necessary to implement Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). That means achieving the benchmarks
that have been delineated and that must be met before
status issues can be resolved. It means getting the
Kosovo Assembly to focus on practical problems
instead of on declaratory motions that have no basis in
law. It means reinforcing absolute respect for
minorities and the rule of law. It means creating an
environment inviting for the return of refugees. It
means transferring non-reserved authority to local
leaders, even if we are sure there will be missteps.

When those mistakes happen, the painful but
necessary response is to say, "Try again". Last week,
members of the Security Council criticized the Kosovo
Assembly's action on the higher education law. That
does not mean that there is a simple solution. The
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, and especially the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Michael Steiner, must work
with the Provisional Institutions to ensure that the
legislation comes out right. I emphasize "work with".
However difficult or pragmatic, a functioning
partnership is required. Ultimately, it is the Kosovo
Assembly's job to make the laws, and it is the
Government's job to build support for their passage. If
democratically elected representatives continue to
ignore constitutional safeguards, we hope donors will
take note of that defiance.

We must use all the levers at our disposal to
encourage respect for the goals set out in resolution
1244 (1999). We must do all we can to encourage
responsible government. That is the rationale for
United States support for the benchmarks process, and
it is the reason the United States believes that UNMIK
should complete the transfer of all non-reserved powers
to the Provisional Institutions on schedule, by the end
of the year.

The details of implementation are for UNMIK
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to decide, but the atmosphere in Kosovo
makes it even more critical that the Special
Representative consult in a timely and thorough way
with all parties. That can be a painstaking process. It
can be difficult; it can be time-consuming. But a more
collaborative process will help dampen the
inflammatory rhetoric that gives a sense of crisis to
every important decision.

Back in February, the Security Council called on
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
produce a plan for implementing the benchmarks. In a
presidential statement, the Council welcomed the
imminent arrival of the plan. The United States
continues to believe that a detailed operational plan for
achieving the benchmarks is critical. My Government
would be willing to provide experts who could help to
put a plan together. My delegation hopes that such a
plan for implementing the benchmarks will be
forthcoming, as requested in February.

Ultimately, progress on the benchmarks will have
to be carefully evaluated. We believe that such a
determination should include input from the Security
Council. We do not believe it would be appropriate to
leave the determination solely to the Transfer Council.

In closing, let me say a few words about the
dialogue between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the Government
of Serbia and Montenegro. The United States supports
efforts to intensify the consultative process in the
context of a common document. Mutual respect will be
the key to healthier dialogue. We are sure there are
areas where UNMIK and the Government of Serbia and
Montenegro can share more information on issues of
concern to both sides. In certain cases, however, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is right
to consider carefully how he will exercise the authority
granted to him in resolution 1244 (1999).

As is the case everywhere, perceptions in Kosovo
are an important factor that should be taken into
account. The Government of Serbia and Montenegro
has made certain commitments to help establish
UNMIK's presence in the north and to dismantle
parallel institutions. The United States welcomed those
commitments and looks forward to their full
implementation. At the same time, we look forward to
early progress by the Special Representative on
decentralization. We welcome the involvement of the
Council of Europe and look forward to its June report.
Progress on those fronts will help to ease tensions and
reinforce ongoing efforts to promote meaningful Serb
participation in the Provisional Institutions.

