Mr. AlOtaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We are very confident in its abilities to guide
the work of the Council. We are also grateful for the
preparation of the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) and
for this debate. Our thanks also goes to the President of
the Security Council in January, the representative of
Jordan, for his outstanding leadership of the Council,
which coincided with the beginning of Jordan's two-
year term as a member of the Council.

Today we are considering a question very important
for international relations - the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The last time the Council addressed
the question was in August 2013 (see S/PV.7019). We
have an important opportunity to assess challenges
facing civilians in conflict situations. The majority
of statements made today have stressed the sensitive
concerns regarding the issue. Many tragic examples
have been referred to - examples from a large number
of countries that have suffered from civil wars, conflicts
that have left many civilian victims. Various United
Nations reports reiterate the importance and scope of
this issue.

There is no doubt that responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests above all with the States
concerned. When there are mass violations of
international humanitarian law, which we have been
noting in many regions, the State should be responsible
for ending those violations. Ifit is powerless or does not
wish to do so, the international community must play a
role in putting an end to such violations.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
is closely linked to the question of supplying
humanitarian aid. At a time when we are witnessing
a resurgence of activity by the United Nations
and its specialized agencies in response to many
humanitarian crises around the world, we must note
that the international community has been unable
to ensure the effective protection of civilians where
those conflicts have emerged. As a result, civilians
bear the brunt of any armed conflict, since the parties
to conflict take no account of their needs and prevent
the provision of humanitarian assistance in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Moreover, the parties in conflict
hinder relief operations.

Therefore, we need to reach out to parties in conflict
in order to prevent human rights violations, to strengthen
international mechanisms of accountability, and to
bring to perpetrators to justice. We must criminalize
those violations. We should add that strengthening
the protection-of-civilians aspect is part of mandates
assigned to certain peacekeeping operations.

Every meeting in which we discuss the protection
of civilians in armed conflict - every time - we think
about the situation of the Palestinian people, who have
suffered from violence and from the perpetual Israeli
occupation, the siege of Gaza and the imprisonment
of thousands of Palestinians in prisons in flagrant
contradiction to international humanitarian law.

We are also witnessing humanitarian disasters
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Yet the worst crisis is that of the Syrian people, who
have suffered since the start of that conflict from the
indiscriminate use of all types of weapons, particularly
those that the use of against civilians is prohibited. At
a time when the international community has managed
to neutralize the use of chemical weapons, which left
thousands of victims, the fact remains that the Syrian
Government continues to use barrel bombs, dozens of
which have fallen on urban centres.

The agreement between the parties to the conflict
in Syria to extend the ceasefire for three additional days
in the City of Homs augers well. It allows unimpeded
access to United Nations humanitarian assistance to
a greater number of besieged citizens, in line with
international humanitarian law.
In that context, Kuwait stresses the need to bolster
efforts to put an end to the violence and work towards
a political solution to the crisis, in step with the
aspirations of the Syrian people. We call on the Council
to assume its responsibilities and not turn a blind eye
to the major, grave human rights and international
humanitarian law violations that continue to reflect
everyday reality throughout the entire Syrian territory.
which are coupled with impeded access to humanitarian
assistance.

In that regard, we would welcome the adoption of a
draft resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, given the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. All signs indicate the lack of any genuine
progress since the adoption by the Council of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/15, on 2 October 2013, or even
since the two rounds of negotiations at the "Geneva II"
Conference. In reality, the data indicate that the number
of victims has increased from 100,000 to over 130,000.
The number of refugees has increased from 2.2 million
to 2.5 million, while the number of internally displaced
persons has risen from 4 million to 6.5 million and to
close to 250,000 persons find themselves under siege.

Aware ofthe scale ofthe Syrian crisis and its impact
on international peace and security, Kuwait hosted the
second donor conference for Syria, in January, with
the participation of 69 States that pledged $2.4 billion.
Kuwait also pledged $500 million to mitigate the
suffering of the Syrian people.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the need
for serious efforts aimed at guaranteeing respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights in
order to prevent human rights violations, particularly in
armed conflict - as shown by my country's committed
efforts and those of the international community - with
a View to bolstering the principle of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

