Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): Over a
year ago the Council took several important steps to
improve arrangements for consultations with troop
contributors. The ensuing months have been a useful trial
period. After several dozen troop-contributor meetings
under the new format, there is general agreement that the
change has been positive. But at the same time there are
clearly areas where further improvements would be
desirable. Today's Security Council meeting is a good
opportunity to take stock of where we are, and we

 

commend the Ambassadors of Argentina and New Zealand
for having taken the initiative to propose it.

Among the positive effects of the November 1994
changes, two stand out. One is predictability. Meetings
between the Council, troop contributors and the Secretariat
are now routinely convened before mandates are extended,
terminated or significantly altered, and before other
significant anticipated developments. The second positive
result is that due to this regularity there is more meaningful
opportunity for a timely exchange of views, particularly
with the Secretariat, on the issues at hand.

On the other hand, it is fair to say - and I will try to
make this point diplomatically - that the November 1994
statement provided for a somewhat more dynamic and
substantive discussion than sometimes takes place in these
meetings, as well as for somewhat greater participation by
the Security Council President. These concerns are less
important for relatively straightforward missions or those
that are routinely extended. But for the more complex or
risky missions some strengthening of consultative
arrangements is worth exploring.

We have a few suggestions to strengthen the
arrangements agreed to last year.

First, Council Presidents should be encouraged to take
a greater part in the discussion. Of course, the President
cannot speak on behalf of the Council regarding matters on
which it has not made a decision, but when the Council is
seized with an issue affecting troop contributors and
considering alternative courses of action, the President
should be encouraged to summarize those options and the
views pertaining to them.

Secondly, the 1994 statement anticipated that
Presidents would summarize the views of troop contributors
during the course of relevant informal consultations of
Council members. This rarely takes place. Although most
Council members take it upon themselves to learn troop
contributor Views, a brief oral report directly from the
presidency would better ensure that this information gets to
all Council members in a timely manner.

Thirdly, this issue of timeliness is one of the most
difficult. The press of events often forces the Council to act
upon a Secretariat report very quickly, leaving little time
for troop contributor consultation or communication with
capitals. Notwithstanding this, and whenever possible, the
distribution of relevant papers, the timing of meetings with
troop contributors and of Council "informals" should be
scheduled so as to give the fullest opportunity for an
informed discussion.

Finally, the same considerations suggest that the
troop contributors would benefit from somewhat greater
consultation among themselves ahead of meetings on the
major missions. This might allow for earlier identification
of key common issues; it could expedite the task of
consulting with capitals; it could permit concerns to be
conveyed to the Secretariat even in advance of a
Secretary-General's report; and it could result in the
selection of one of their number to serve as a focal point
during the regular three-way consultations with the
Secretariat and the Security Council.

As my remarks have shown, the United States
believes that the Council should consider further
refinement and improvement in consultative arrangements
with troop contributors. However, we think the basic
format that now exists is a good one, and our efforts
should be directed towards strengthening it rather than
setting it aside in favour of new arrangements.

