Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for presenting
their reports on their activities since last May. As we did
at their previous briefings to the Council, we pay well-
deserved tribute to the representatives of Germany,
India, and South Africa for the degree of commitment
that they have displayed in heading up their respective
Committees.

In the context of counter-terrorism efforts, the
positive thing to note is that the threat represented
by Al-Qaida has been decreasing globally under the
significant blows dealt to the leadership of that terrorist
organization. However, at the same time, the group has
expanded its reach in several regions of the world by,
in particular, focusing on regional or local entities that
spread devastation wherever they go, as is currently the
case in northern Mali. Given this situation, it is more
crucial than ever to continue to adapt the sanctions
regime to new threats and to improve procedural rules.
My country is grateful to the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
and the Office of the Ombudsperson for the excellent
work they have been carrying out.

Next month, the mandates of the 1267 Committee
and the Office of the Ombudsperson will be renewed.
Our Council should take that opportunity to provide
clear answers to the various concerns and pertinent
questions that have been raised, in particular on
procedural issues, on the basis of broad consensus.
In this regard, we are pleased to note that a group of
States has submitted a document for consideration
that addresses the need to develop fair and clear
procedures for a more effective sanctions system. This
document, by proposing, inter alia, the codification
of the institution of the Ombudsperson with extended
powers and the expansion of that institution to other
sanctions committees, as well as encouraging broader
cooperation among States, could be a basis for continued
consideration. Nevertheless, Togo believes that efforts
to improve the rules of procedure should be undertaken
without casting in a favourable light those terrorists
who are considered to have repented but who might still
take up arms one way or another.

Regarding resolution 1540 (2004), we are pleased
that the efforts deployed by the Committee established
pursuant to that resolution have strengthened the
resolve of States to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. This is evidenced in the
activities carried out and the number of countries that
have presented reports on the implementation of the
resolution. The awareness-raising campaigns, sharing
of best practices, capacity-building and technical
assistance that the Committee has provided to States
are efforts that we rightly welcome and that are
appropriate means to promote the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

However, the comprehensive implementation
of that resolution should not be up to the States
themselves. Regional and subregional organizations
should constantly be called upon in activities for raising
awareness and sharing good practices. Furthermore,
given the importance and clout of the Committee's
activities, which require enhanced efforts, Togo believes
that the Secretariat should do all it can to enable the
three remaining experts to join the Committee.

Resolution 1373 (2001) is an important element in
the arsenal of international legal instruments to combat
terrorism. We note that, given the activity report,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate (CTED) have remained very active in
pursuing and implementing the resolution. Awareness-
raising activities, workshops, seminars and evaluation
missions are activities that help draw the attention
of the international community to the central issues
concerning the fight against terrorism. Here, Togo
welcomes the upcoming special meeting on preventing
and curbing the financing of terrorism, to be held on
20 November, and the meeting on the financing of
terrorism and the challenges posed by porous borders,
to be held in spring 2013.

We cannot reiterate often enough that applying
measures to combat terrorism can entail violations of
human rights. The rights of the victims of terrorist
acts must be respected throughout the entire process of
investigation and appearance before judges, as Member
States and human rights organizations have always
insisted. This is why the delegation of Togo welcomes
the fact that the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
CTED are paying particular attention to this question.

In conclusion, I would like to say that I welcome
the crucial cooperation that has been established
between the expert groups of the three Committees.
No one can deny that combating terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction require
a significant investment, both from States and from
international organizations. Henceforth, cooperation
and coordination of the work of the groups of experts
of the Committees should be strongly encouraged, as
they will not only prevent duplication and enable the
best use of the limited resources available, but also
and most importantly channel assistance where it is
needed. We are pleased to note that, in the context of
this inter-institutional cooperation, capacity-building
for States facing the threat of terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction remains
a key concern, given the rapid ability of terrorists and
non-State actors to adapt.

