Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their briefings. I want to focus on two
main issues: political and security developments, and
humanitarian developments.

With regard to the political and security
developments, Mr. Griffiths' briefing earlier gave
indications of a positive atmosphere that could move
the Yemeni peace process forward, and of limited
progress in implementing the Stockholm Agreement,
even though 10 months have passed since its entry
into force. During most of that period there was a total
impasse. The Yemeni issue clearly drew the attention of
the international community throughout the month of
September, especially during the high-level week of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, where
there was a need to uphold the political solution as the
only framework for resolving the Yemeni crisis.

The most important international interactions
took place during the ministerial meeting that Kuwait
chaired along with the United Kingdom and Sweden.
Its outcome was a declaration that contained many
aspects, including the affirmation that the Stockholm
Agreement is the cornerstone of the Yemeni peace
process and that the Al-Hudaydah Agreement is to be
implemented through the constructive participation
of the Yemeni parties, in accordance with United
Nations proposals concerning security arrangements
authorizing the redeployment of forces, and the
establishment of the tripartite monitoring mechanism;
the importance of implementing the agreement on the
exchange of hostages and prisoners; condemnation of
the attacks perpetrated by the Houthis against civilian
installations and civilians in the sisterly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia; and the need to cease such attacks
without preconditions. It also urged the Yemeni parties
to participate in the dialogue facilitated by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia for maintaining the territorial integrity
of Yemen, and supported the plan of the Special Envoy
to hold informal consultations with Yemeni parties in
preparation for resuming the negotiations.

Kuwait has expressed its readiness once again
to host those negotiations, in cooperation with the
United Nations, in order to reach a comprehensive
and definitive agreement on resolving the crisis based
on the three terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015).

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome Mr. Lowcock's reference to the resumption
of the activities of humanitarian agencies in several
Yemeni regions, due to an increase in the funding of
the 2019 humanitarian response plan. The pledges of
the State of Kuwait in support of the United Nations
activities since the beginning of the crisis in Yemen
amount to approximately $600 million, of which we
have disbursed $350 million to international agencies
and organizations and relief agencies. We will disburse
the balance before the end of this year. In this context,
we stress the need to not impede humanitarian aid and
to cooperate with the humanitarian agencies, foremost
of which is the World Food Programme.

We commend the positive role of the Yemeni
Government in continuing to pay the salaries of civil
servants and retirees, in addition to the ongoing efforts
of its Economic Committee to ensure the delivery
of fuel into the country. We hope that its 11 October
initiative to expedite the delivery of oil products to
Al-Hudaydah port will be dealt with positively.

We would like also to express our deep regret for
the inability of United Nations experts to inspect and
evaluate FSO SAFER floating oil tanker in Ras Isa.
That could foreshadow a serious environmental disaster
in the Red Sea.

In conclusion, we emphasize our firm position
that there is no military solution to this crisis. We once
again call on the Yemeni parties to implement in full
the Stockholm Agreement and its three pillars, thereby
supporting the efforts of the Special Envoy to achieve
a political solution based on the three agreed terms of
reference in order to end the crisis and preserve the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Yemen, as well as non-interference in its internal affairs.

