Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): I
am especially pleased, Mr. President, to have been
invited to this debate on peacekeeping. We are grateful
to all those who have participated today, especially
Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi. We fully
endorse the initiative and position put forth by France
and the United Kingdom in preparation for our debate.
We assure you, Mr. President, of our preparedness, at
every stage of the consultations, to share the
experiences and lessons learned by the African Union
in this area.

It is clear that today's debate has raised various
questions. With regard to the growth in the number of
peacekeeping operations, the question before us is
whether to reduce the number of operations or run the
risk of being unable to address the various conflict
situations. Should we no longer address root causes?
The African Union has consistently emphasized
underlying problems, including poverty, lack of
development, challenges to democracy, lack of good
governance, complex crises and so on.

The growth in peacekeeping operations also
means the proliferation of all sorts of weapons.
Concerted efforts, especially to eliminate small arms
and light weapons, have therefore been undermined; it
is precisely those weapons that will fuel additional
conflicts, thereby creating a perpetual cycle.

15 there, at this stage, a need to reconsider the
mandates of peacekeeping forces? Should we still
expect that there is peace to keep? In any case, the
African Union did not hold back in Somalia - with
the Council's authorization. Such considerations have
been put forth in support of an appropriate
45
interpretation of Chapters VII and VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

There is also the question of mobilizing donors,
troop-contributing countries and all other potential
actors, including the private sector. Experience has
shown that the willingness of countries to provide
troops is too often curtailed by the difficulties
encountered in mobilizing logistical means and
resources, which must of course meet the strict
requirements of the United Nations. The bilateral
negotiations that contributing countries must
themselves carry out with donor countries serve to
delay the deployment of troops.

How can we motivate troops on the ground, who
are the real forgers of peace? How can we ensure that
those who comprise the various missions are treated
equally, including those under regional organizations
authorized by the Security Council, such as the African
Union? By way of a concrete example: troop-
contributors prefer to send their troops to Darfur rather
than to Somalia, where they are much less well paid
and where their situation is often precarious.

How are we then to rationalize the costs of
peacekeeping operations? The African Union has
frequently noted that peacekeeping operations, which
are becoming increasingly burdensome, are being often
being carried out at the expense of development efforts
and in order to advance conflict prevention.
Simplifying bureaucratic procedures and involving
local economic actors in the supply stream of
peacekeeping operations could certainly contribute to
reducing their costs.

(spoke in English)

We have witnessed a great evolution in the
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations with the establishment of the first hybrid
operation in Darfur. The constructive engagement
between the two organizations revealed what can be
achieved through such collective efforts. The tripartite
approach to decision-making and preparation has also
shown great merit. A concrete example in this
connection is the provision of security by the Sudan for
the movement of convoys of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. It would thus be
instructive to further explore the full potential of this
tripartite approach with respect to security of
peacekeepers and mission resources.
46

This growing cooperation is also illustrated by
the African Union-United Nations panel established by
the Secretary-General to consider in-depth the
modalities of how to support a number of issues
concerning peacekeeping operations. The panel has
concluded its work, and we believe the Security
Council will soon be considering its report, which may
offer constructive ideas for enhancing peacekeeping
operations.

One of the constant practices has been the
advance role played by the African Union at the early
phases of crisis. This has been the case in Chad and the
Central African Republic, where African Union
political missions have supported efforts to prevent the
escalation of tensions and to conduct negotiations,
pending the full engagement of the international
community. In other cases, such as Burundi, Darfur
and Somalia, the African Union has, with the
authorization of this Council, deployed advanced
peacekeeping operations, which, in Burundi and
Darfur, were followed by United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In the case of Somalia, we are eager to see
such an operation take over from the African Union
Mission in Somalia in the light of resolution 1863
(2009).

It might be instructive to consider the lessons
learned, in particular with respect to the quality of
actions performed by the advance African Union
missions, since these operations ultimately constitute
the foundations of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have witnessed the consequences of the
weakness of African Union advance missions, such as
in Somalia, where the lack of necessary strength may
result in many lost windows of opportunity to secure
lasting peace.

The strengthening of linkages between the
counterpart bodies of the African Union and the United
Nations would also be crucial for the development of
both the doctrine and field conduct of peacekeeping
operations. This includes systematic exchanges
between the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and this Security Council; greater cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support with the African
Union Peace and Security Directorate; and general
interaction and joint programming between the African
Union Commission and the United Nations Secretariat.
09-21747
Finally, I take this opportunity to call on the
Security Council to lend its full support to the
development of the African Union peace and security
architecture, particularly within the context of the
present reflection. I also thank all those who
underscored the African Union role in particular during
this debate.

