Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I wish at the
outset to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency and thank the Ambassador of Lithuania for
their very effective conduct of our business last month.

New Zealand reaffirms its strong support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) as well as for the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and we
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings.
New Zealand was on the Council more than
20 years ago, when the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda were established. When the ICTY
resolution was adopted, we stressed the importance of
the Tribunal operating independently and impartially.
We also emphasized the need for it to be enabled to
carry out its work until it had discharged its mandate or
the Council had decided its work should end.

We took the same stance with the ICTR and worked
hard to ensure that the provisions of its Statute were
both consistent with that of the ICTY and suitable to
the circumstances of Rwanda and acceptable to the
Government of Rwanda, despite the differences of view
between Rwanda and the rest of the Council over the
applicability of the death penalty.

It is fair to say that I did not expect the Tribunals
to still be on the Council's agenda when I returned
here 20 years later. But that should not be seen as a
failure. During that period, both Tribunals have
managed complex criminal proceedings. Both have
added breadth and depth to international criminal
jurisprudence in relation to some of the most horrific
crimes in recent history. These proceedings have
taken time, partly because of the challenges associated
with locating those charged. While the ICTY has now
achieved this, several ICTR fugitives remain at large
who, once apprehended, will need to be prosecuted
through the Residual Mechanism or by the Rwandan
Government.

The ICTY's recent experience has demonstrated
the central role that States can play in apprehending
fugitives, and we encourage similar cooperation in
relation to the ICTR's work. New Zealand acknowledges
both Tribunals' efforts to implement their completion
strategies. The Residual Mechanism has now assumed
responsibility for many functions. While the transition
appears to be going well, some critical work remains
to be done. But we are pleased to see that the formal
closure of the ICTR is still on track for the end of
2015, with only liquidation activities remaining. We
encourage the ICTY to step up its efforts to ensure that
its proceedings are completed by 2017.

The ICTY and ICTR also engage in wider activities
that contribute to the advancement of international
criminal justice. Both have a mandate to share
information as part of broader reconciliation processes.
They, of course, deal only with the most serious
offenders. National courts have a role in continuing
their legacy through prosecutions, as do other bodies
that allow relevant crimes to be acknowledged in some
way. This is necessary if the communities affected are
to move on.

New Zealand has consistently drawn attention to the
need to ensure that the Tribunals enjoy the same levels
of support at their closure as they did at inception. This
is also true for other similar current and future judicial
institutions. It is not credible for the Council to wash its
hands of these bodies after their establishment. Rather,
we as the Council have an ongoing responsibility to
continue providing the support necessary - in terms
of resources as well as political support - for the
Tribunals to complete their mandates.

There are valuable lessons to be learned from
the Tribunals' experiences in managing judicial,
administrative and prosecutorial functions that should
be shared. These include challenges associated with
winding up a Tribunal, such as problems with senior
staff retention and the impact on managing caseloads.
We thank Mr. Joensen for his assurances that the ICTR
is already addressing these lessons-learned issues.

While the Council has a responsibility to the
Tribunals, the Tribunals, in turn, have a responsibility
to work as effectively and efficiently as possible. This
responsibility is not only to meet Council deadlines
but, moreover, to meet the legitimate expectations of
victims, for whom these Tribunals were ultimately
established.

