Mr. Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My
Ambassador has asked me to convey her greetings to
Council President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner.
Her presence today in the Council and the fact that
Argentina has called for this open debate on regional
organizations and their role in the international sphere
provide a clear example of Latin America's ability
to bring together such a large number of ministers
and representatives of regional organizations. In my
experience at the United Nations I have never seen such
a large group of dignitaries in an open debate of the
Council.
We appreciate the statements made by the President
Pro Tempore of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC), Mr. Bruno Rodriguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba. We
support the ideas that he expressed in his statement. We
also welcome the presence ofthe Secretary- General this
morning and the message he delivered to the Council.

We know now that no State can act alone or in
isolation. The globalized world and the progress
in industrial technology, cyber communication
and information technology make us increasingly
interdependent. That is a reality. Thus we face
dangerous threats and problems collectively, and that
is why this debate is very important to the State of
Honduras, which firmly believes in multilateralism and
the role of international organizations. That is also the
reason why we were one of the founding members of the
United Nations, the Organization of American States
(OAS), and the Central American Integration System
(SICA), among others. And we are firmly committed
to continuously strengthening regional and subregional
mechanisms, which should play a role in international
peace and security. Such regional and subregional
organizations must also, in our opinion, actively
fight against the scourge of international terrorism,
transnational organized crime, drug trafficking and
trafficking in persons. Above all, such efforts should be
carried out with the decisive cooperation of the United
Nations.

The collective efforts of regional organizations
and the United Nations are all the more crucial for
the development of programmes and projects of a
regional and subregional nature that are designed to
counter the adverse effects of climate change and
natural disasters and promote the coordination of
international humanitarian assistance. The whole
spectrum of regional and subregional cooperation in
its humanitarian dimension is an invaluable element
for coordination and cooperation. Here, in this
debate, it takes on a human face. We believe that the
commitment of States to strengthening cooperation
with international, regional and subregional bodies is
the highest expression of multilateralism.

In its previous meeting on this topic the Council
agreed that regional organizations are in a unique
position to understand the causes of conflicts and
other security problems, pointing out that we should
take advantage of the current and potential capacity
of regional and subregional organizations and
encourage the countries in every region to resolve their
differences peacefully through dialogue, reconciliation,
consultation and negotiations, as well as good offices,
mediation and the settlement of disputes through legal
means (see S/PV.6257).

The Foreign Minister of the Republic of Guatemala
mentioned the democratic and peaceful vocation of
Central and Latin America, and he described how
from the Contadora Group we arrived at CELAC.
Central America is a clear example of how the United
Nations and its peace operations can be a success today.
We have a Central American Parliament, we have an
integration system, a Central American Bank, a Central
American Court of Justice, and we are currently further
strengthening our expectations through international
cooperation.

Since the United Nations is not equipped to
tackle all of the crises of the world alone, we have
to strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in order to maintain
international peace and security. While it is true that
the Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining peace and security, cooperation between
regional organizations and the United Nations would
not only lighten the burden for the Council but would
also provide greater legitimacy with the participation
of regional partners in times of crisis.

In that regard, cooperation between the United
Nations and the different regional and subregional
organizations must achieve a higher level of cooperation
and avoid a duplication of efforts and financial
resources and avoid the squandering of efforts,
financial resources and time. Communication channels
must exist between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations that would enable both
parties to be sure that they are on right track to achieve
their common goals. In the same spirit, we welcome
today's presidential statement, which achieved a
consensus under the leadership of Argentina. It is not
always easy to achieve a consensus in the Council, and
we are sure that it will make a special contribution to
the urgent need to develop effective partnerships that
could smooth the way for the tasks envisaged.

Lastly, Honduras is fully convinced that, despite the
difficulties and obstacles that exist, the international
community can benefit, in the process of maintaining
peace and security, from a balance between the sound
knowledge of a conflict that a regional organization
might have and the legitimacy and authority of the
Security Council.

