The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Egypt, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Mali, Mexico, Monaco, Myanmar,
Norway, Sierra Leone, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Uganda and Ukraine, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, representatives
of the aforementioned countries took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF).
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Executive Director of UNICEF to take
a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/1053, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I shall not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table or invite them to resume their
seats on the side. When a speaker is taking the floor,
the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table. I thank members in advance for their
understanding and cooperation.

Before giving the floor to Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, I should like to
announce that, in relation to this debate, a brief video
about the suffering and pain of children in armed
conflict will be shown. The video was produced by
War Child Canada, and I thank them for their
contribution.

A video was projected on screen.


The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretariat for its cooperation.

Now that we have seen the video, I shall give the
floor to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children in Armed Conflict. Mr. Olara
Otunnu has the floor.


