The President (spoke in Arabic): Before making
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, I would like to inform
members of the Security Council that the delegation of
Costa Rica has requested to make its statement
following the statement by the representative of Iraq.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

At the outset, I would like to express my thanks
to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for his briefing. I
commend his efforts and those of his predecessor and
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). I would also like to express my thanks to
Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for his briefing to the
Security Council on the activities of the Multinational
Force in Iraq.

We fully realize that conditions in Iraq today are
the direct result of the siege and the subsequent
invasion and occupation through which the occupation
forces destroyed the country's political, administrative
and cultural institutions. That, in turn, led to the
current situation of which we are all fully aware.

We are also aware that the Iraqi people
themselves bear primary responsibility for stemming
the bloodshed in Iraq and ensuring its territorial
integrity, sovereignty, independence and control over
its natural resources - and, indeed, for ensuring the
participation of all its citizens in national affairs, with
no sector of the population being marginalized. They
are fully able to shoulder that responsibility. We
believe that the role of the international community

and of Iraq's immediate neighbours must be to promote
dialogue and reconciliation, defusing all tensions
among Iraqis.

Furthermore, reconciliation and dialogue among
Iraqis require the clear prospect of an end to the
occupation. We believe that the occupation is a major
bone of contention among Iraqi factions. Here, we
believe that UNAMI has a central role to play in
promoting dialogue and reconciliation and defusing
tensions. That role inevitably proceeds from the need
for national reconciliation and for stability in all
sectors, including, in particular, security.

We welcome the improvement in the security
situation mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/ 19). Perhaps the initial returns of
refugees and internally displaced persons, albeit
modest at this point, reflect that improvement. We hope
that this trend will continue through an improvement in
the political process in the country. In paragraphs 3 and
4, the report states that progress in that regard has been
slow.

We ought perhaps to commend the adoption of
the Justice and Accountability Law and the consensus
on the need to implement article 140 of the
constitution. Mr. De Mistura has played a
commendable role in that regard. Those are positive
indicators. However, they are certainly not sufficient to
allow us to talk about genuine progress in the political
process.

With regard to the security situation, I must point
to paragraph 54 of the report, concerning security
companies. We believe that such security companies
are akin to mercenary companies. Their conduct in Iraq
justifies not only discontinuing their use but also
prosecuting them. There is much talk of human rights;
perhaps those engaging in it should stop and consider
the activities of these companies.

Libya encourages all parties in Iraq to work
towards reconciliation. We encourage the Government
of Iraq to persevere in its efforts to reach out to
neighbouring countries, which will certainly have a
positive effect on improving security and humanitarian
conditions for the people of Iraq. In that regard, we
welcome the October meeting of neighbouring States
held in Kuwait, as well as November's Istanbul
meeting of foreign ministers of neighbouring States of
Iraq, with the participation of international
organizations and others.
We believe that the current conditions in Iraq
require that all of Iraq's resources, human and material
alike, be utilized for reconstruction. We therefore
strongly support Iraq's call for the cancellation of all
debts accumulated under the oil-for-food programme.
We also call for the cancellation of compensation, or at
least a moratorium on its payment. These funds should
be used for the development of Iraq.

Moreover, we call for a reversal of the brain drain
suffered by Iraq due to unemployment or insecurity.
We know that this is not an easy task, but it is a worthy
one that merits much effort. We believe that this could
begin with the Government of Iraq devoting greater
attention to those who have left for neighbouring
countries. We thank those countries, in particular Syria
and Jordan, for their sacrifices and their hospitality.

We very much appreciate the efforts of United
Nations agencies in Iraq. We hope that future reports of
the Secretary-General will include details about
UNESCO's support for the Government of Iraq in its
efforts to repatriate the cultural heritage that has been
pillaged from the country.

In conclusion, we support the efforts of UNAMI
to assist Iraq. We hope that all possible resources will
be made available to the mission and to the Office of
the Special Representative. We share the concerns of
the Secretary-General regarding the need to ensure the
security of the mission.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

