El Salvador thanks the presidency of France for having convened this open debate, and the Secretary-General for presenting his latest report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525). We commend the Council's efforts to facilitate and encourage dialogue on the protection of children and adolescents through various actions, consultations and campaigns that have contributed to the inclusion of child protection in specific cases involving peace negotiations. El Salvador wishes to reiterate its deep commitment to the maintenance of international peace and security in tackling the heartbreaking consequences of armed conflict and working to alleviate the resulting widespread suffering of the civilian population, particularly children, girls and adolescents in conflict areas. El Salvador believes that full compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child is a high priority in order for the best interests of the child to prevail, regardless of the context. We welcome the progress set out in the most recent report of the Secretary- General on this issue. However, we express our deep concern at the continued forced recruitment of minors, whose use in conflicts constitutes a serious violation of their rights, resulting in separation from their families, sexual abuse, appalling mutilation and, in the worst case, their tragic death. Such traumas deprive them of their childhood and dignity and leave permanent scars on their adult lives. At the same time, we deplore the significant increase in the number of attacks on schools and hospitals, which is why we urge a greater commitment on the part of the international community and condemn the use and recruitment of children and adolescents in conflicts. We must continue working for the promotion, protection and full and effective enjoyment of the rights of children and adolescents, while giving priority to that goal in our work. Because El Salvador is committed to those who suffered as children during the internal armed conflict, it has progressed in terms of the creation of legislation and institutions for the protection of children, having signed and ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. El Salvador therefore recognizes that respect for, and the protection and guarantee of, human rights are essential pillars of the establishment of genuine rule of law. Consequently, it has made a resolute commitment to the issue of prevention and to that of locating and identifying missing persons, especially boys and girls, as well as support for the families of disappeared persons, the investigation of cases, the punishment of those responsible and comprehensive reparations for victims and their families. EI Salvador has recognized the right of families to know the whereabouts of those girls and boys who disappeared during the armed conflict. For that reason, in 2010 El Salvador created the National Commission for the Search for Girls and Boys Disappeared during the Internal Armed Conflict, which conducts research and locates, contacts and reunites disappeared children - who today are adults - with their biological families, as well as provides psychosocial support to families that are victims of enforced disappearance. In addition, October 2013 saw the creation of the Reparations Programme for Victims of Severe Human Rights Violations That Occurred in the Context of the Internal Armed Conflict, which includes the forced disappearance of persons. The Board of Directors of the Registry of Victims of Serious Violations of Human Rights That Occurred in the Context of the Internal Armed Conflict was also created. Likewise, the country is promoting the creation of a State bank of genetic profiles in order to locate missing children in the context of the internal armed conflict. All of the aforementioned is in line with Salvadoran initiatives within the United Nations such as the proclamation, through General Assembly resolution 65/196, of 24 March as the International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims. El Salvador suffered from the scourge of an armed conflict for more than 10 years, which left us with countless lessons learned and allowed us to strengthen our regulatory framework, with the primary goal of not repeating the mistakes of the past. For that reason, we passed the Law for the Comprehensive Protection of Children and Adolescents, which establishes a series of rights, guarantees and duties of children and adolescents that is consistent with the international framework of human rights. That law establishes that, in the event of disasters or in situations of armed conflict, the State must provide all children with special protection based on their rights. It also provides protection measures against sexual abuse and exploitation as well as other forms of exploitation, including the forced or compulsory recruitment of children and adolescents for use in conflict. In addition to those measures, El Salvador joined the Safe to Learn initiative, which is aimed at ending violence in and through schools so that children can be free to learn, prosper and pursue their dreams. It has also signed on to the Safe Schools Declaration and to the commitment to protect schools from attack in times of armed conflict. Although there is no armed conflict of any kind in El Salvador, a decision was made to establish safe places and implement inclusive designs that are resistant to the threats to which educational centres may be exposed, in the process involving educational communities and implementing monitoring projects, financing and continuous supervision of the relevant facilities. In addition, 2019 saw the implementation of the Education Violence Alert System, which is aimed at preventing acts of violence that could affect the educational community, including harassment, bullying, sexual abuse, threats and extortion, both inside the schools and in their vicinity. The project is led by the Ministry of Education and has a network of public and private educational centres throughout the country. The Ministry of Education works at the inter-institutional level in coordination with the National Civil Police, and together they provide an efficient and effective response to cases reported through the system. In addition, the set of alerts produced through the Education Violence Alert System will generate information that will serve as input for the design of public policies and the development of strategies and plans to reduce violence in order to urgently prevent critical acts of violence affecting educational communities, thereby strengthening the protection of schools and providing adequate care in order to serve the people involved in the reported cases. We take this opportunity to thank the agencies of the United Nations system that have supported that initiative, as well as other friendly countries that have offered their cooperation and support in its implementation. In the framework of the General Assembly, El Salvador, as a State member of the Latin America and Caribbean Group and in conjunction with the European Union, submitted a draft resolution entitled "The rights of the child" (General Assembly resolution 74/133), which, among other things, encourages all States to strengthen efforts to protect children affected by armed conflict, including from the recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups and by supporting long-term and sustainable reintegration and rehabilitation for these children. Likewise, El Salvador co-sponsored resolution 74/275, entitled "International Day to Protect Education from Attack", which highlights the need to take measures to achieve the full realization of the right to education for all children and, in particular, to take all feasible measures to protect schools from attacks and to refrain from actions that impede children's access to education, and to facilitate access to education in armed conflict. In addition, El Salvador is a pioneer country in the Global Partnership to End Violence against Children, which aims to make progress in the fight to eradicate violence as well as in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We are pleased to report that El Salvador, following up on the commitments made and in the context of openness to special procedures, received, from 23 April to 3 May 2019, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence, Mr. Fabian Salvioli, in order to assess the progress made in the implementation of transitional justice measures in order to address the violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed during the armed conflict. Among his preliminary findings, the Special Rapporteur acknowledged the progress made since the signing of the Chapultepec Peace Accords in terms of truth and guarantees of non-recurrence, as well a recent initiatives to search for disappeared adults and children, the request for a public apology and the first steps forward in the criminal investigation of the violations committed. We would like to thank UNICEF for all its support at the national and international levels in promoting better results in the protection of children in various contexts, particularly its work in different regions for the protection of children in conflict situations. We believe it is necessary to strengthen programmes to reintegrate children who have been released and removed from military activity, so they can be properly integrated into society through viable alternatives. In this way, we will reduce the chances that they will again become vulnerable to abuse, social stigmatization and recurrent recruitment. We believe that it is best to apply preventive approaches that ensure that all children and adolescents are protected and given the opportunity to grow up and strengthen their abilities to build their life projects. To that end, in December 2017, El Salvador joined the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and considers them to be a comprehensive set of measures to end the recruitment of child soldiers. The Vancouver Principles, which are based on the existing framework for the protection of children and the promotion of their rights, constitute an innovative measure to encourage the reporting of all types of abuses and grave violations against children and adolescents in armed conflict. It is important to apply such measures in areas where peacekeeping operations are carried out, taking into account the impact that conflicts can cause on children and how vulnerable to failure the objectives of the United Nations would be if we did not take measures to prevent the violation of children's rights. We call on the international community to consider joining this initiative and thereby strengthen the protection of children and the promotion of their rights. The outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has caused an unprecedented set of challenges for all Governments and other key actors in achieving the goals on the children and armed conflict agenda. In the Secretary-General's most recent report, we can see how progress has been constrained by the outbreak of the virus. The social, economic and political consequences of the pandemic are expected to grow, including consequences to peace, international security and the protection of human rights and international humanitarian law. El Salvador wishes to emphasize the importance of multilateralism and the collective support that each country and international organization, civil society, the private sector and other relevant actors, each working in its own area of specialization, can provide to minimize the negative consequences, as we face the effects of the outbreak of COVID-19. We must maintain a spirit of solidarity as we work together to support efforts aimed at protecting children and adolescents, without reversing course on the important achievements we have made. The time has come to take immediate action to respond to the effects of COVID-19. This response must address the immediate effects of the pandemic, bearing in mind that incitement to hatred, inequality and restrictions on access to health care, among other restrictions that undermine human rights and limit progress in the area of peace and security, have also been exacerbated in the effort to contain the impact of the pandemic. In these difficult circumstances, we call on all countries to continue to the best of their abilities to support efforts aimed at continuing life-saving work. We commend the work of the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, in particular for ensuring equal humanitarian access for all, without discrimination. We would urge all parties to conflicts to respect international law, primarily human rights law and international humanitarian law, and to continue to take measures to end violations of the rights of children and adolescents in armed conflicts, and to take preventive, protective and rehabilitative action, as required, on a case-by-case basis. For our part, while El Salvador has made significant achievements in terms of children's rights in various contexts, we will continue to seek solutions to the challenges before us - solutions that not only respond to the mandate to adapt our national legislation to the principles and precepts of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, but also involve concrete steps forward in the transformation of our society in favour of a paradigm of comprehensive protection for children and adolescents. Finally, El Salvador remains convinced that the protection of all children and adolescents in armed conflict must be an important aspect of any strategy for conflict resolution and of any peacebuilding process. Addressing armed conflicts from a comprehensive perspective is the key to ensuring the maintenance and sustainability of peace in different regions of the world.
