Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. We would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing this morning. We would also like to welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine at this meeting.

Jordan associates itself with the statements made
by the representatives of the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Egypt on behalf the Arab Group, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and the
Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.

The world is unanimous today on the objective of
achieving a two-State solution and establishing
comprehensive peace in the Middle East in accordance
with the agreed terms of reference, international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative. The Arab
countries are also committed to this goal, as
demonstrated in the adoption of the Arab Peace
Initiative in 2002, its consequent reaffirmation at other
Arab summits - the most recent of which was the
Doha summit - and its adoption and sponsorship by
the OIC. We have also seen the Palestinian National
Authority, particularly President Mahmoud Abbas,
work tirelessly and continuously in the pursuit of the
two-State solution, which would guarantee peace and
security for the peoples and States of the region.

In spite of all this, Israel unfortunately remains
intransigent and rejects the tireless and sincere efforts
being made to create an environment conducive to
serious peace negotiations on all tracks, proceeding
from the most recent point they had reached. Israel
continues its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Arab territories, including East Jerusalem.

We further reiterate that settlements and peace are
contradictory and cannot go together. This is
particularly true give that settlement activities run
counter to international law and international
humanitarian law. They undermine any possibility of
establishing a viable and independent Palestinian State
on Palestinian national soil in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the borders of4 June 1967.
We therefore reaffirm that these settlement
activities and their recent frenzied resumption seriously
threaten the prospects for peace in the region. Israel
also pursues its unilateral, illegal and illegitimate
measures in occupied East Jerusalem. We have seen a
serious acceleration in the scope and number of these
activities, including excavations under and around
Muslim and Christian holy sites, particularly around
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and its environs, the demolition of
homes and the forced displacement of their Arab
inhabitants, the consolidation of existing settlements
and the establishment of new ones, and frenzied
attempts to change the demographic makeup of
occupied East Jerusalem and to prevent the
administration from doing its work there. The
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan condemns all of Israel's
unilateral measures as illegal, illegitimate and in gross
violation of its commitments as the occupying Power.
They represent a grave obstacle to efforts to relaunch
serious negotiations aimed at achieving the two-State
solution and a peaceful settlement in the Middle East.

For the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, led by His
Majesty King Abdullah Bin Al Hussein, the serious
Israeli escalation over the past two weeks in terms of
many provocative measures carried out at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa mosque, and other
violations aimed at altering the legal status of East
Jerusalem, represent a red line that cannot be crossed.
We wish to highlight the fact that we are intensifying
our contacts with all influential actors concerned,
particularly the five permanent members of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, with a
view to exerting pressure to put an immediate and
definitive end to all Israeli aggressions and provocative
actions.

Jerusalem has a special status in the hearts and
minds of tens of millions of Muslims and Christians
throughout the world. Because of that status, Israel's
provocative and illegal actions are an explosive
element that threatens the very foundations of
international peace and security. Therefore, we call on
the international community to shoulder its
responsibility and take resolute action to put an end to
all Israeli aggressions and provocations in the occupied
Arab territories, particularly East Jerusalem. We wish
to reaffirm that preserving and protecting the holy city
of Jerusalem will always be a top priority for Jordan,
which will spare no effort in opposing any such
aggression, provocation or threat to either Muslim or
Christian holy sites.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has forcefully
condemned the Israeli aggressions committed against
unarmed civilians during its latest war in the Gaza
Strip. On more than one occasion, including in the
statement made by His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jordan to the General Assembly on
26 September 2009, we have welcomed the report of
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict (A/HRC/l2/48), led by Judge Richard
Goldstone. We have done so because of our firm
conviction that it is important to support the principle
of international criminal justice and its application in
an objective and non-selective manner, free from
politicization. We also supported the request that an
emergency session of the Human Rights Council be
held tomorrow in Geneva to discuss the Goldstone
report.

Furthermore, we wish to call for the lifting of the
blockade against the Gaza Strip, whose population is
suffering greatly every day and lacks the most basic
needs of everyday life. That inhumane blockade must
be lifted, and the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip must
begin immediately.

We reaffirm our support for the important
statement made by His Excellency Mr. Barack Obama,
President of the United States of America, to the
General Assembly on 23 September 2009. It was
unambiguous in setting out the President's vision of a
final solution to the problem in accordance with the
agreed frameworks, ending the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967 and establishing a viable, independent
Palestinian State with contiguous territory, living side
by side in peace and security with Israel. President
Obama's clear reaffirmation that the political
framework of negotiations between the Palestinians
and the Israelis is the best way to address the final
status issues - security for Israelis and Palestinians,
borders, refugees and Jerusalem - and his forceful
statement that all settler activity is illegitimate show
his strong commitment to the two-State solution and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, as well as his
resolve to continue his tireless efforts - which began
the day he took office - to create an atmosphere
conducive to the relaunching of serious and
constructive peace negotiations on all tracks aimed at
the attainment of that noble objective.
Finding a just and comprehensive solution to the
question of Palestine, which is at the heart of the
Middle East conflict, would be a key to resolving other
conflicts and a guarantee for peace and security in our
region, which yearns for peace and stability. These can
be achieved only through the two-State solution: an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
with Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel.

