Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
As this is the first open meeting of the Security
Council for this month, I should like, on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, to thank Ambassador de La
Sabliere for having successfully guided our work
during the month of June. I should like also sincerely
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I wish you every success in guiding the work
of the Council to a fruitful conclusion and assure you
of the full support of the Chinese delegation.

The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Turk, for his briefing
on the latest developments in Bougainville. We are
pleased to note that the general elections to choose the
President of the autonomous Government and to
appoint members of the regional House of
Representatives were held successfully last month. The
process of swearing in elected leaders and
representatives went smoothly, marking a great
achievement and a new historic phase in the
Bougainville peace process.

In that connection, China wishes to extend its
heartfelt congratulations to the Autonomous
government and to the people of Bougainville and to
express its appreciation to the Government of Papua
New Guinea for its unremitting efforts
comprehensively to implement the Peace Agreement.

This is the last meeting of the Security Council to
deliberate on the question of Bougainville. We
congratulate the Council on the successful conclusion
of its work in the context of the Bougainville peace
process. We also congratulate the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville on the
accomplishment of its mission.

Over the years, under the leadership of successive
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
UNOB and its predecessor, the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), have done
outstanding work there by establishing credibility and
trust among the parties to the Bougainville peace
process and can serve as a model for small United
Nations missions entrusted with handling regional
conflicts. Their work is to the credit of the United
Nations and has shed light and provided useful
information on how to improve United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in a year of reform.

Prior to this new, historic phase, the process of
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Bougainville
did not proceed as smoothly as it could have, given the
challenges and tasks facing the province. It is our
sincere hope that the Autonomous government will live
up to the expectations of its people and remain
committed to political reconciliation and economic
development. We urge the various political forces in
Bougainville to respect the choices of the people and to
support the Government in its work.

We also call on the international community to
remain committed to Bougainville and to help the
Autonomous government to more speedily enhance its
governance and effectively improve the lives of its
people.

We are fully confident that, with the strong
support of the Government of Papua New Guinea, with
the assistance of the international community and
through the painstaking efforts of the local people, the
dream of a peaceful and dynamic Bougainville will be
translated into reality.

