Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would very much
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, for
your remarkable presidency of the Council during the
month of May. I also wish to congratulate your team
on the very excellent performance of the Council and
for the results achieved in our common endeavour to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

A tangible result of the Egyptian presidency
was the progress achieved in the Security Council
mission to Somalia and East Africa, which was able
to ensure - with the assurance of and delivery by
the Somali leadership - that elections will take place
according to the agreed model under the set deadline. It
is now expected that the international community will
assist the Somali authorities in ensuring that elections
take place in the best possible conditions, which will
represent a substantial contribution to the complex
political and security process the country has been
going through.

The Security Council's mission to East Africa also
included important meetings in Kenya and Egypt. In
a meeting held in Nairobi with the President of Kenya
and Kenyan high officials, concerns were raised
on the future of African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and on the Somali refugees in Kenya.
The Kenyan authorities stressed the correlations
between the participation of Kenya in AMISOM. and
Kenyan national security, and the crucial need for
greater United Nations support to AMISOM, a matter
concerning which the serious attention of the Council
is required. We thank you very much, Mr. President, for
putting emphasis on that during the mission to Somalia.

The presence of a considerable number of Somali
refugees in Kenya poses a huge security, economic
and environmental burden on Kenyan authorities. In
that connection, an appeal for the assumption of the
principle of shared responsibility was addressed to the
international community through the Council's call
for support for countries enduring the massive influx
of Somali refugees, of course including in Kenya.
Those two issues, AMISOM. and refugees, justify
the Council's renewed attention in order to preserve
the gains so far achieved in Somalia and to avoid
undesirable developments in case a suitable solution is
not found to the refugee issue.

The tenth joint consultative meeting between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council (see S/PV.7694) was another
important achievement of the Egyptian presidency.
The meeting was an opportunity for both Councils to
reaffirm and to find ways to strengthen cooperation,
complementarities and commitments in addressing
threats to international peace and security in Africa.
At the formal meeting held at the Permanent Mission
of Egypt to the United Nations, the two Councils
assessed the existing partnership at the strategic and
operational levels and the need to improve the exchange
of information and analysis in all phases of conflict,
and discussed the financial, logistical and operational
challenges ofpeacekeeping missions in Africa.

The two Councils also discussed the impact
of the three reviews under way of United Nations
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture,
and resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In the formal meeting, the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
discussed the situation in Somalia and Burundi. A
candid exchange of views took place, with the two
Councils reiterating their support and contribution to
those countries on the path to lasting peace.

Since it was established in 2004, African Union
Peace and Security Council has deployed or authorized
almost 70,000 uniformed peacekeepers to missions
in Africa, including the Regional Task Force for the
Elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army and the
Multinational Joint Task Force set up to fight Boko
Haram. Moreover, the African Union established
AMISOM, the hybrid Mission with which we had
contact in Somalia.

Despite financial and logistical constraints,
the deployment of peacekeeping missions by the
African Union Peace and Security Council has been
instrumental in supporting the Security Council.
Cooperation between the two Councils is based on
practical analysis of the African Union's comparative
advantages in terms ofproximity to the political, social,
economic, religious, ethnic and other dimensions of
African conflicts. That framework could guide the
Security Council in establishing the basis for effective
cooperation with the League of the Arab States - a
wish strongly expressed by both parties in the meeting
held in Cairo on 21 May, when the Security Council
mission and the League of Arab States held their first
consultative meeting. It is our view that the League of
Arab States can make a meaningful and significant
contribution to the peacebuilding process in Somalia,
which is a member ofthe Arab League. Both secretariats
at the United Nations and the League of Arab States
could start discussions on how to operationalize such a
partnership, which, in our view, could yield important
results in the security, political, social and economic
processes under way in Somalia.

In conclusion, I once again reiterate our sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the very skilful
way you have conducted the Council during the month
of May. We look forward to the French presidency, of
which the Ambassador of France has just presented the
first outlines to the Council, and we look forward to
continue working together with him.

