Mr. Ramos-Horta (Timor-Leste): I am here
again before the Council to argue for a modest yet
robust United Nations presence in Timor-Leste from
May 2006 to May 2007. I am doing so against the
background of the most recent developments in my
country.

I will be candid in offering a sober analysis of the
problems we are facing, the risks ahead, and the
possibilities of continuing progress in consolidating
our still fragile democracy.

In September 1999, those serving in this Council,
acting swiftly on the advice of our esteemed Secretary-
General, ended the violence in Timor-Leste that
followed the United Nations-sponsored referendum of
30 August 1999. That was one of the United Nations
finest moments.

The Council and others in the United Nations
family responded to the calls of our people and of
millions around the world and took swift action. Within
days of the Council's historic decision to authorize the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET),
Australian Hercules planes began to roar over the
mountains of the rugged island, and hundreds of brave
men and women in uniform disembarked.

While the Council was not able to prevent a
thorough destruction of the country, it did prevent a
greater human tragedy. Its decisive action saved many
thousands of lives. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies, coordinated by the late Sergio Vieira de
Mello, also acted swiftly and a much-feared
humanitarian disaster did not materialize.
Timor-Leste remains one of the United Nations
finest success stories. With Timor-Leste in 1999, the
Organization entered a new and unexplored experiment
in nation-building. The Report of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations - the Brahimi report -
(S/2000/809) and the Secretary-General's High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change eloquently
elaborated on the complexities of post-conflict periods
and nation-building and made convincing arguments
that for peace to be durable the international
community must stay resolutely engaged.

While we must all be cognizant of the political
and financial constraints that militate against ideal
solutions, I nevertheless believe that a long-term plan
and commitment are most effective in securing peace,
and are much less costly. Our experience shows that
short-term missions are inefficient and costly.

We are grateful that, following the deployment of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the restoration of Timor-Leste's
independence, in 2002, the members of the Council
authorized successive missions, namely, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL). Those consolidation missions were crucial
in ensuring the functioning of vital State institutions
and the enhancement of peace.

On separate occasions earlier this year, my
President, the Prime Minister and I have requested the
Secretary-General to establish a special political office
comprising four main components: an electoral
assistance component, United Nations police advisers,
military liaison officers and civilian advisers. The
Secretary-General responded positively to our request
and recommended the establishment of a small
integrated United Nations office for a period of 12
months, starting on 21 May this year. I very much hope
that the members of this body will give due
consideration to the request we have placed before
them.

I will be candid with the members of the Council.
The incidents in Dili last week were a wake-up call to
us, the East Timorese leadership, as well as to the
international community, that we must not take for
granted the apparent tranquillity in the country and that
urgent preventive measures must be taken in a resolute
manner to prevent a relapse into the past of violence
and instability.

I would now like to share my perception of the
recent political and security developments in Timor-
Leste and of the remaining requirements for the
continued presence and support of the United Nations
for one year, leading to the first presidential and
parliamentary elections since the restoration of
independence, five years ago.

As UNOTIL's mandate draws to a close, Timor-
Leste is preparing for the holding of the first post-
independence national elections. The Government of
Timor-Leste and its people are determined, at this
crucial juncture in our country's history, to ensure that
the presidential and parliamentary elections are held in
a free, fair and credible manner. However, recent
developments indicate that threats remain to our fragile
peace and stability. Let me provide the Council with
more detailed background of recent political and
security developments.

On 8 February, around 300 members of the armed
forces demonstrated in front of the President's office,
demanding a response to their petition of 15 January
concerning alleged discrimination in promotions and
ill-treatment. On 9 February, those soldiers agreed to
return to their military base. However, although a
commission of inquiry had been established, no
progress was made towards resolving the issue.

In mid-March, the situation culminated in the
mass dismissal of 591 soldiers, representing 40 per
cent of the armed forces. On 12 April, President
Xanana Gusmao held separate meetings with Prime
Minister Alkatiri and Brigadier Taur Matan Ruak. It
was agreed to end the impasse by reinstating the
salaries of the, now, 594 soldiers until their final status
was decided, conducting a formal legal process on a
case-by-case basis, not discriminating against those
who were formally discharged in the competition for
jobs - for instance, if they were to apply to join the
national police force - and by providing Government
assistance in the search for gainful employment.

On 24 April, members of the group of soldiers,
along with members of their families and sympathizers,
began their planned five-day march and demonstration
from Tasi Tolu, west of Dili, to the cultural centre of
Uma Fukun. About 1,000 to 2,000 persons participated
in the demonstration on the first day.

On 25 April, the group continued to hold
demonstrations, from around 8 am. onwards, at which
an estimated 1,000 demonstrators participated. Unlike
the first day, the tone of the protesters became more
critical towards the Government and they requested a
political solution to the demand of the 594 dismissed
soldiers.
On 26 April, speeches continued, with a more
anti-Government content, including by a member of
the Timor-Leste armed forces (F-FDTL) in full
uniform, who provocatively warned that if the problem
were not resolved there would be bloodshed and that
elected leaders should be removed if they could not
resolve such issues. On the same day, the group's
leader, Lieutenant Salsinha, accepted the Government
proposal that I personally had conveyed to him.
However, he also reiterated that the position of the
group was that there should be resolution of their
demands, otherwise they would call for a general
strike.

On 27 April, Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, with
President Xanana Gusmao at his side, announced the
establishment of an investigation commission to look
into the allegations contained in the petition of the
former F-FDTL members. The investigation
commission was due to commence its work on
Tuesday, 2 May. We assured the protesters that it
would complete its mandate within 90 days. Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri subsequently pledged to
Mr. Salsinha and his group that the Commission would
complete the investigation and present its conclusions
and recommendations much earlier, within one month.

The Government has appointed Senior Minister
and Minister of State Administration Ms. Ana Pessoa
and Vice-Minister for the Interior Alcino Barris as its
representatives to serve in the investigation
commission. The presidency of the Republic, the
National Parliament and the judiciary have all
nominated their respective representatives. The
Bishops of Dili and Baucau and the NGO Forum have
nominated advisers to the commission. I was informed
late last night, New York time, by Prime Minister
Alkatiri that the commission of investigation would
began its work at once.

In the course of several days prior to 28 April, I
personally held conversations with the leader of the ex-
F-FDTL members, Mr. Gastao Salsinha. He stated to
me that his group would accept the conclusions and
recommendations of the commission. Subsequently, the
senior leadership of the defence forces also stated that
they would abide by the commission's conclusions and
recommendations.

Following the announcement of the establishment
of the commission, the group's demonstration
continued, yet with no more than 800 protestors
present and no more than 200 of the ex-F-FDTL
soldiers present. The main speaker, Osorio Leki -
who is not a member of the group but a sympathetic
relative, as well as the Secretary General of the PDRT
party - told the demonstrators that the objective of the
demonstration was not to establish a commission but to
find an immediate solution to the issues. He rejected
the proposal, arguing that 90 days were too long to
wait for a resolution.

Here, I would like to clarify for members of the
Council that I personally spent many hours - in fact,
several days - in dialogue with the leaders of the
military group. While they seemed to show willingness
and flexibility to find a peaceful solution to the
problem with the Government, I also conveyed to the
military group my perception and feeling that they had
seemed to have lost control of the demonstrations.
Being politically inexperienced and having never
organized a political demonstration, the military
allowed a particular group - Coliman 2000 - to
hijack their demonstration and their agenda. That was
when the ex-military lost control and that group, which
is essentially a mob of hooligans that were known way
back in the time of UNTAET in 1999 and 2000, took
control of the demonstration.

From then on it was next to impossible, short of
swift police intervention, to engage in further dialogue
with the military, because the military itself was no
longer able to regain leadership of the demonstration.
That was the reality in the days leading to the outbreak
of violence.

No major damage was done in the ensuing
violence that took place in the afternoon of 28 April.
Subsequently, the mob broke into smaller groups and
went in different directions, triggering rioting, fighting
and arson in the outskirts of the city, but it was the
poor neighbourhood of Tasitolu and the Taibessi
market that bore the brunt of the acts of vandalism.

Most elements of the ex-military did not join in
the violence and actually dispersed to various
destinations. By Friday evening, five persons were
reported killed and more than 30 injured, including
four policemen, one of whom critically. Forty-five
shacks were destroyed and 116 partially destroyed, all
belonging to the poorest people living in the suburbs.
No foreign national, embassy, United Nations property
or major business was attacked, even though all such
businesses and some embassies, including the
Australian embassy, are on the main road used by the
demonstrators as they left the city towards the west.

On the first day of the intervention by the defence
force - which was called in to intervene by the Prime
Minister in view of the failure of the police to
intervene - 100 people were detained. Having
detained them, the F-FDTL handed them over to the
police. At no time did the F-FDTL keep any individual
in detention. In the absence of any evidence of their
involvement in the riots, all 100 detainees were ordered
to be released by the Dili district court, which reviewed
their cases on Sunday, 30 April. All 100 were released,
including several former F-FDTL elements who were
also in detention.

There have been unsubstantiated allegations and
rumours that many more people were killed by the F-
FDTL. Figures mentioned in those rumours and
allegations vary from 20 to 60. However, I have
personally made every effort to find out if there is any
basis to such allegations. Upon hearing the first
rumours about the number of people killed beyond
what had been established by the police, I personally
spoke at length with the F-FDTL commander,
Brigadier-General Taur Matan Ruak, Interior Minister
Rogerio Lobato and Police Commissioner Paulo
Martins. All three emphatically denied the allegations.
I also urged General Taur Matan Ruak to immediately
visit the President, which he did at his private
residence at about 1.00 a.m. on 30 April. The General
promptly went to see the President as I had asked him
to do and the two met for two hours, during which the
General was able to explain to the President the
absurdity and the malicious nature of those rumours.

In response to the allegations that many more
than five individuals had been killed during the 28
April incidents, the Government established a
commission for the verification of data on the dead and
wounded. In addition, as Special Representative
Hasegawa has just briefed the members of the Council,
the UNOTIL Human Rights Unit, the Ombudsman and
the National Red Cross were all able to carry out
immediate investigations into the allegations and have
found no evidence.

However, I can state here that, if all the
assurances given by my Government and the initiatives
it has taken, such as the establishment of a commission
to look into the allegations, as well as other separate
investigations referred to above, are not sufficient, as
Minister for Foreign Affairs I am issuing an invitation
to appropriate United Nations rapporteurs - possibly
the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions - to visit the country and carry
out a thorough investigation into those and other
allegations.

The situation has since calmed down. However,
rumours and panic have caused an exodus from Dili to
the districts. An estimated 10,000 to 15,000 Dili
residents have left Dili for the rural areas. Dili has at
least 180,000 people; at least 5,000 more are sheltered
in churches, the UNOTIL compound, schools and so
on. The central Government in Dili and the district
authorities have been doing their best to deliver basic
services to the people.

A positive development yesterday, 4 May, was
that President Xanana Gusmao spoke on the phone
with Lieutenant Salsinha, who reiterated that his group
would abide by the commission's findings and
recommendations. Lieutenant Salsinha has also told the
President that he is seeking assurances about his safety
and is ready do return to Dili. According to Prime
Minister Alkatiri, Lieutenant Salsinha's safety is
assured. Prime Minister Alkatiri told me last night that

many former F-FDTL soldiers have made contact with
the authorities in their respective districts.

The Government has established another
commission to look into the losses incurred by
individuals and to propose ways to assist them.

As I speak today, Dili is on edge. Fear is palpable
among a people traumatized by past violence. There
are concerns about the ability of the PNTL to maintain
law and order. There is concern about cohesion within
the remaining F-FDTL forces. However, I wish to
assure the Council that the same leadership that guided
our people through the past 30 years is united and
determined to overcome this new challenge.

President Xanana Gusmao and Prime Minister
Alkatiri have held regular consultations and there have
been frequent consultations between the two leaders
with the leadership of the defence and police forces.
The Government is in full control of the situation and
public administration continues to function, though at a
much slower pace, as many civil servants have left
town. The F-FDTL has now completely returned to the
barracks. The PNTL is charge of law and order.

I have personally been in regular touch with the
church hierarchy and I can inform the Council that next
week, upon my return, a meeting will be held involving
the two bishops, President Xanana Gusmao, the Prime
Minister and the other Government ministers. The
meeting will serve to take stock of the situation in the
country and look at ways for the State and the church
to enhance relations and cooperate to ensure peace and
stability.

Notwithstanding the recent security
developments, the Government is moving swiftly to
prepare for the upcoming elections. The draft electoral
laws on the presidential and parliamentary elections
were submitted to the Council of Ministers, which
approved them on 26 April. The draft laws will now be
sent to the national Parliament for a broad public
debate, and we expect the law to be approved by the
national Parliament after its recess in September.
Having consulted internally and having taken due
consideration of concerns raised by civil society, the
church and other stakeholders, we have called upon the
international community to assist us in that endeavour.

I wish now to outline the four most pertinent
reasons for establishing an integrated office following
the completion of the current UNOTIL mandate.

First, on the political environment, I wish to
reiterate that the country is still in a consolidation
phase and that democracy and peace remain fragile. As
mentioned earlier, representatives from civil society
organizations, the church and opposition political
parties with whom I have consulted have indicated
their concerns that the law enforcement agency, the
PNTL, has not reached the level of maturity or attained
the professionalism to fully resist political party
influences. The transparency of the electoral process
will directly affect the legitimacy of the outcome of the
elections and the prospects for the development of a
healthy, multiparty democratic system in Timor-Leste.

As concerns the timing of the elections and with
the aim of precluding any unnecessary delays, the
President and the Government have agreed to hold both
the parliamentary and the presidential elections before
or by May 2007 in order to swear in the new
parliament and president by 20 May 2007.

While the Technical Secretariat for the
Administration of Elections will take the lead in
organizing and administering the elections, including
logistics and operational activities, the National
Electoral Commission will supervise electoral
preparatory activities, voter education and electoral
campaigns.

The United Nations electoral needs assessment
mission that visited Timor-Leste in November last year
has provided valuable guidance to the Government in
its discussions on the electoral laws and procedures.
We greatly acknowledge the important role that the
National Electoral Commission will play in monitoring
the electoral process and in providing voter education
throughout the 13 districts. To that end, the
Commission will have to be provided with sufficient
financial and human resources, which naturally calls
for an independent source such as the United Nations
in order to ensure impartiality, transparency and
fairness.

Secondly, I wish briefly to elaborate on the
challenge of upholding internal stability, the rule of
law and respect for human rights before, during and
after the elections. While the national police force has
been trained by United Nations police and bilateral
partners and has the basic know-how to do routine
policing, recent events demonstrated the inability of
the PNTL to act decisively and swiftly in crisis
situations. Its impartiality in a tense political
environment may not always be guaranteed,
particularly in dealing with the first nationwide
elections.

The presence of United Nations police will be
vital to advise and support the national police in
planning and carrying out their electorally related
security responsibilities, including through training and
assistance in the development and implementation of a
comprehensive election security plan aimed at
forestalling the development of volatile and possibly
violent situations.

The main focus of the integrated office will be
electoral assistance. However, other support elements
will be of equal importance in ensuring a free and fair
electoral process, hence our request for continued
civilian advisory and human rights support. While
United Nations agencies and bilateral partners have
agreed to take over most of the civilian advisory posts,
we feel that there is a need to strengthen the
institutional foundations of the Ministry of Defence
and the F-FDTL through the drafting and
implementation of the organic law and other
instruments for effective management. As the President
stated in his letter of 2 April, Timor-Leste requires
advisers who can lay the legal and institutional
foundations of the security agencies.

Thirdly, the creation of a secure environment
prior to, during and after the elections is of equal
importance in the border region. That would require
the engagement of impartial United Nations military
liaison officers to monitor and advise on the security
situation, and to liaise with our own Border Patrol Unit
and the Indonesian military as required. Possible
security risks at the border with Indonesia prior to and
during the elections would certainly be mitigated
through an impartial United Nations presence and
professional advice on effective border management.

A small number of military liaison officers would
be able to provide advice and assistance to the
Timorese Government, particularly the PNTL, in
liaising with our own Border Patrol Unit and the
Indonesian military in the planning and conduct of
proper border security operations and in monitoring the
border security situation. Their presence will certainly
promote a secure and peaceful environment for the
conduct of elections. In the past, a United Nations
presence on an international border has also proved to
be an effective way of easing the tensions that arise
from time to time because of misunderstandings. Such
a presence can provide impartial feedback and advice
so as to reduce the possibility of conflict.

Fourthly, there remains an acute need for
continued international assistance to the justice sector.
While the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) has successfully developed a justice support
programme, the funds made available are not sufficient
to provide the support needed for the Office of the
Prosecutor-General. Also, a significant number of
human rights officers are needed to support the Office
of the Ombudsman and the national Parliament to
ensure that human rights considerations are fully
respected in preparation for the national elections.

As I stated in my letter of 2 March to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, the type of assistance needed to
ensure an environment that is conducive to the
successful conduct of elections in Timor-Leste includes

"support and facilitation, as appropriate, in key
areas relevant to our political consolidation,
including in the areas of reconciliation and
human rights."

On the issue of establishing a reliable justice
system and fostering respect for human rights, it is
crucial that the international community remain
committed to fostering the genuine commitment to
justice and human rights that exists in the Government,
in civil society and among the Timorese people.

In the light of the political and security situation
and the latest developments, and in response to our
modest request, the Secretary-General proposed the
establishment of an integrated office, as outlined in his
recent report.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the fact that the
proposal contained in the Secretary-General's report
represents the bare minimum that Timor-Leste
requires. In the light of the latest developments, the
Prime Minister, the President and I consider it
desirable to have once again a robust international
police force during the period leading to the national
elections. Such a force, of at least a company strength,
with appropriate logistical means, is required given the
volatility and fragility of the situation. As it was in
1999, the decision is in the hands of the Security
Council - a decision that will decisively influence the
course of events in my country, for good or for ill.

