Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is pleased
to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council this
month. We would like to thank you, at this early stage
of your presidency, for having convened this meeting
of the Council to consider the grave situation in
Palestine. We also wish to pay tribute to Ambassador
Kishore Mahbubani of the Republic of Singapore for
the effective manner in which Singapore conducted the
work of the Council during the busy month of May.

My delegation appreciated the statement made
earlier by Ambassador Al-Kidwa, the Permanent
Observer of Palestine. We are in full agreement with
his analysis of the current situation and of the role
played by Mr. Sharon in creating the situation in order
to serve certain strategic objectives, which are now
clear to all.

Malaysia condemns the reoccupation of Nablus,
Bethlehem and the refugee camps of Balata and Askar,
as well as the incursions into Tulkarm, by the Israeli
armed forces. We condemn the attack on and siege of
President Arafat's headquarters in Ramallah on 5 June,
which were completely uncalled for and unjustifiable
and which placed President Arafat in serious danger.
Equally deplorable are the imposition of a curfew on
the entire city of Ramallah and the continued
harassment of its inhabitants. All of these draconian
Israeli actions - curfews, raids, mass arbitrary
detentions and the destruction of Palestinian structures,
including homes, in the occupied Palestinian
territory - have caused extreme hardship for the
Palestinian people. Such actions have not enhanced the
security of the people of Israel. On the contrary, they
have provoked violent retaliation from Palestinian
militant groups which are beyond the control of the
Palestinian Authority, thereby exacerbating the tense
situation and locking both sides into a continuing cycle
of violence which prevents efforts towards a peaceful
solution.

It should be clear by now that Palestinian
militancy cannot be laid at the door of President Arafat,
who has repeatedly condemned attacks against Israeli
civilians. President Arafat continues to be blamed and
demonized, when the root cause of Palestinian
militancy and anger towards Israel is Israel's
continuing occupation of Palestinian territories, its
expansion of illegal settlements in the territories and its
continued rejection of an independent and sovereign
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Palestinian Authority has clearly condemned
recent bombings and refuted Israel's accusation that it
was promoting suicide attacks. The Palestinian
Authority has declared, before international public
opinion, that it considers those attacks to be harmful to
the Palestinian cause and struggle and to the image of
the Palestinian people. Rather than treating President
Arafat as the implacable enemy who must be harassed
and intimidated at every turn - or even removed from
the scene, as is being openly contemplated - Israel
should engage him in constructive dialogue and
negotiation. It should do so because, as the elected and
undisputed leader of his people, his important -
indeed, indispensable - role in the final resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict cannot be denied.

Israel's lack of restraint in its military actions -
actions that it is taking amid international efforts to
convene a peace conference on the Middle East, as well
as efforts by the United States to assist in the
rebuilding of the Palestinian administrative and
security structures - reflects its commitment to a
military, rather than a political, solution. It is patently
clear to all, including Israelis, that the eventual
establishment of an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine is the key to the final resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, and that the realization of such a
State is only a matter of time.

To continue to deny this inevitability through
policies and actions that will result only in more death
and destruction and in increased hatred and militancy
between the two sides is incomprehensible, to say the
least. It is ludicrous for Israel to continue its policy of
rendering President Arafat powerless when it wants
him to reassert his authority and when his role as the
leader of his people is pivotal in any peace process.
President Arafat cannot be wished away or replaced by
another leader of Mr. Sharon's choice. He must be
engaged in any serious and constructive dialogue if a
lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is to
be found. An international conference, convened for
the purpose of resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
will not achieve the desired results without the full
participation and active involvement of the elected and
undisputed leader of the Palestinian people.

My delegation continues to believe that the
dispatch to the occupied Palestinian territories of a
United Nations or international peacekeeping or
monitoring force is immediately necessary in order to
prevent a worsening of the situation on the ground. The
presence of a neutral party to prevent further violence
is a necessary measure, considering the deep hostility
between the sides. Given the utter sense of frustration
and despair among the Palestinians, Israel's continued
use of brutal force against them would only serve to
increase their militancy. To defuse the anger that has
understandably been building up over the past two
years, the Palestinian people must be given renewed
hope and vision for peace, with a definite timetable for
an independent Palestinian State through the
formulation of a clear road map for a solution, on the
basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) and the 1991 Madrid
Conference terms of reference, based on the principle
of land for peace.

Pending a final solution, the concern of the
international community must continue to be directed
towards the dire humanitarian situation on the ground,
which continues to deteriorate and could worsen as a
result of the construction by Israel of a 68-mile buffer
zone near Jenin, Tulkarm and other cities. Mr. Peter
Hansen, the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), has warned that
these buffer zones would very seriously hamper the
operations of humanitarian agencies or even cause such
operations to come to a halt. UNRWA and other
humanitarian agencies continue to report on the
problem of accessibility on the ground.

My delegation condemns the new restrictive
measures which are resulting in the Balkanization of
the territories, with nine closed areas in the West Bank
and four in Gaza; this aggravates the difficulties and
hardships faced by an already overwrought population
living in the occupied Palestinian territories.
My delegation continues to encourage and
support all international efforts aimed at achieving a
just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict,
and looks forward to the successful outcome of the
initiatives of the United States, the "quartet" and other
members of the international community, particularly
those in the Middle East region. We continue to urge
the Council to fulfil its responsibility by acting
decisively to ease the tension and end the cycle of
violence. The Council must send a clear and
unambiguous message to Israel that it is not all right to
continue its military operations against the Palestinian
people. It is time for the Council to convey its
impatience with Israel for pursuing policies which
promote, not the dialogue and negotiation that the
entire international community is clamouring for, but
more violence and bloodshed, which can only lead to
an intensification of the conflict.

Beyond addressing the issue of the suicide
bombings, the Council must consider the larger picture.
In this regard, the Council must initiate or support
efforts towards resolving the conflict once and for all.

