Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): For my
part, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to welcome
you, Madam President, and express our gratitude
for your participation in this meeting. My delegation
congratulates Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and
Mr. Pierre Krahenbiihl, Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), on their detailed
briefings on the latest developments in the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Cote d'Ivoire expresses its concern over the
deadlock in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process,
the consequences of which are reflected in sporadic
outbreaks of violence and a disastrous humanitarian
situation in Gaza and the West Bank. My country notes
with regret the recent violence in the Gaza Strip and
border towns, which killed 27 people and injured a
number of others, including many civilians. We would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our call to
stakeholders to exercise restraint and resume dialogue.
We call on the parties to refrain from any unilateral
action that could compromise the mediation activities
of the international community.

Cote d'Ivoire wishes to reiterate its commitment
both to the security of the State of Israel and to the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. We also reaffirm our strong support for
the two-State solution, coexisting peacefully within the
pre-l967 borders.

The current security and humanitarian situations
remain closely linked to a political settlement of the
crisis. Cote d'Ivoire therefore encourages the warring
parties to continue the peace talks and calls on the
Council to support all mediation initiatives towards
reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas in order
to enable the Palestinian Authority to regain all its
prerogatives on the Palestinian territory.

The Council is concerned about the structural
weaknesses affecting the Palestinian territories, in
particular an estimated unemployment rate of 53 per
cent and a drastic reduction in the supply of decent
housing and school and hospital facilities, as well as
the continuing shortages of basic social services, such
as drinking water and electricity.

With regard to the current humanitarian situation
in the Palestinian territories, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates
its call for the convergence of the Council's views
and encourages it to work to mobilize the necessary
assistance in order to meet the essential needs of
the affected populations. My delegation also urges
humanitarian donors to continue their support to
UNRWA, whose role is crucial in assisting those
in need.

My country would like to recall that the peace
process remains the appropriate framework for
seeking mutually acceptable solutions to the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute. In that regard, it urges the parties
concerned to fulfil their commitments with a view to
facilitating the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and creating the conditions for the
implementation of the peace agreements, in particular
the Oslo Accords.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for the tireless efforts of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
and wishes him every success in the execution of
his mandate.

We remain convinced that there can be no military
solution to the various crises in the Middle East, in
particular in Palestine. My country therefore reaffirms
that only inclusive talks will make it possible to achieve
peace and stability in a region whose peoples have a
legitimate aspiration to prosperity and happiness.

