Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
is gratified by your decision to convene this debate on
the issue of small arms, an issue which has been a
source of major human suffering during the past
decade. We also appreciate the report of the Secretary-
General on the subject, which contains many important
recommendations.

The post-cold war era has witnessed conflict and
strife at levels unprecedented in recent history. The
consequences of these armed conflicts were made
worse by the easy availability of small arms and light
weapons, increasing the intensity of the conflict,
causing higher casualties, and making peacekeeping
more complicated and risky.

Having participated proudly in several important
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Pakistan is
fully aware of the complexities arising from the
widespread presence of small arms and light weapons
in regions where such missions have been conducted.
We are also cognizant of the need for sound planning
and implementation of strategies regarding
de-weaponization and re-integration as part of
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

During the long war against foreign occupation,
Afghanistan became a repository of millions of small
arms and light weapons. After the Soviet withdrawal,
Pakistan became a victim of this proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. Realizing the magnitude of
this problem, the Government of Pakistan resolved to
take strong action to cleanse our society of this
menace.

Last year, we therefore updated the Anti-
terrorism Act and this year we have banned several
organizations, some of whose members were involved
in extremist or sectarian violence and terrorism.

We have adopted a comprehensive strategy under
which over 150,000 small arms and light weapons have
been confiscated or voluntarily surrendered by the
possessors of these arms. At the same time, the
Government has stopped issuing licences for new
weapons, while a ban on the display of weapons has
also been imposed and is being implemented
vigorously.

We are confident that our efforts will produce
good results, cleansing our society of the repercussions
of the two decades of conflict in Afghanistan. The kind
of national measures that we have undertaken could,
we believe, be helpful to several other countries that
may find themselves in similar circumstances. We
would be happy to share our experiences with other
developing countries.

Pakistan applauds and welcomes the several
regional initiatives that clearly recognize and seek to
address the problem of small arms in all its dimensions,
including human security, development, law
enforcement, de-weaponization and arms control. It is
obvious that only such a comprehensive approach that
takes into account socio-economic factors can
effectively address the problems associated with small
arms and light weapons.

We are happy to note the successful United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was held
in July last year. The Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference may not be perfect, but it is a
significant step forward. In our view, efforts must now
focus on the implementation of this Programme of
Action.

The Secretary-General's report in document
S/2002/ 1053 reviews the comprehensive measures
being pursued to control small arms and their adverse
impact on society and on peace and security. The report
speaks of the "mixed results" achieved by the Security
Council's embargoes so far in curbing the flow of small
arms and light weapons in conflict areas. We endorse
many of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report, including the need for
effective enforcement of sanctions.

At the same time, measures to control small arms
must, in our view, give priority to a more effective role
for the United Nations, and especially for the Security
Council, in the resolution of the underlying causes of
conflict. The causes of war are, in our view, more
important than the instruments of war.

We must also, seek to uphold and implement two
principles that were endorsed by the General Assembly
in its resolution 50/70B on small arms and have been
endorsed subsequently each year. These two principles
are the right of States to exercise self-defence in
accordance with the Charter, and the right of peoples
struggling against foreign occupation to exercise the
right to self-determination.

We cannot forget the hundreds of thousands of
patriots who made the ultimate sacrifice for the cause
of freedom and liberty, which has enabled our nations
to be here at the United Nations.

Pakistan honours the 80,000 Kashmiri heroes
who have been killed by an occupation army of
700,000 in their decade-long struggle for self-

determination. These three elements - peaceful
resolution of disputes, the right of self-defence and the
right of self-determination - must be appropriately

reflected in the recommendations of the Secretary-
General and in the debates and considerations of the
Security Council in the context of small arms.

The General Assembly has asked the Conference
on Disarmament in Geneva to negotiate principles for
conventional arms control at the regional and
subregional levels, such as the principle of
undiminished security of States and elaboration of the
concept of sufficiency in armaments. The adoption of
such principles can make a useful contribution to
specific negotiations for conventional arms control in
various regions of the world, including the control of
small arms.

Finally, let me add a word on behalf of the
delegation of Colombia, which has asked me to inform
the members of the Security Council that the non-paper
that has been referred to by many delegations was sent
to the presidency for circulation as an official Security
Council document last night. We understand that it will
also be posted on their Web site.

