Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your country,
Kazakhstan, on your successful presidency of the
Council and commend Astana's initiative to organize
this timely debate on building regional partnership in
Afghanistan and Central Asia. I also highly commend
your leadership in convening the recent Security
Council visiting mission to Afghanistan, which
contributed greatly to this debate.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and his continuous commitment to conflict
prevention and sustaining peace.

First, I would like to stress the importance of
regional cooperation as an effective means not only
of promoting the economic and social development of
Afghanistan, but also to promote peace and stability.
From my country's perspective, the diversification of
economic ties in Central Asian countries serves both
their sovereignty and interests well. Central Asia and
Afghanistan's location presents a unique opportunity
to enhance direct and multinational cooperation aimed
at constructing transport and logistics infrastructure
that will interconnect Europe and Asia. Those valuable
links will facilitate the exchange of not only goods but
also ideas and people-to-people contacts as well as
mutual understanding.

We are glad to note the recent developments in the
region in the field of connectivity. Projects such as the
Turkmenistan - Afghanistan - Pakistan - India
pipeline, CASA-lOOO, the railway to Herat and the
air-cargo corridor between Afghanistan and India are
excellent examples of the diverse benefits that regional
cooperation can bring. We believe that these investments
will not only contribute to the region's prosperity, but
will also build trust between neighbours.

In this context, we would like to commend
the Governments of Afghanistan, Turkmenistan,
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey for having signed the
Lapis Lazuli Corridor Agreement. We believe that this
vital document will facilitate one of the most effective
ways of linking Afghanistan to European markets as
well as help diminish its dependence on neighbouring
countries in terms of transit and transportation.

We must remember that even the most ambitious
agenda with regard to regional economic connectivity
may fail owing to an unstable security situation,
as a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan is a
prerequisite for peace and stability in the region as a
whole. We are alarmed by the continuing high level of
violence in numerous Afghan cities and the resulting
number of civilian casualties.

Regarding the improvement in security, we
welcome the Afghan Government's four-year security-
sector reform plan, in the hope that it will strengthen
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
However, military success is only a means to an end,
which is to achieve peace.

We are deeply convinced that an inclusive, Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process
is the only viable long-term solution to ending the
conflict. We hope that the Kabul Process brings much-
needed progress, but we would like to underline the
importance of the negotiations being inclusive.

On 1 January 2015, NATO launched the Resolute
Support Mission, a non-combat mission whose purpose
is to help Afghan security forces and institutions
develop the capabilities they need to defend Afghanistan
and protect its citizens in a sustainable manner. In
other words, its aim is to create conditions for the
country's future successful development. Poland has
been engaged in the Resolute Support Mission since its
inception and has continued to increase its contribution.
We are also proud to have participated in the operations
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
starting in 2002. The Polish military contingent in ISAF
was one of its biggest and most successful. I would
like to emphasize that our military efforts have always
been complemented by our development assistance
to Afghanistan, mostly through contributions to the
multilateral assistance mechanisms of the United
Nations system and the World Bank.
Another serious threat to the security of the wider
region as well as Afghanistan is narcotics production.
Despite the Afghan Government's efforts, drugs
remain one of the largest sources of terrorists' income.
It is therefore crucial to identify and coordinate both
international and regional efforts to tackle that problem.
We would like to thank the United Nations Assistance
Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central
Asia (UNRCCA) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for their hard work in addressing the
issue of the production of narcotics, and we invite other
regional organizations to coordinate their endeavours
with them. At this point, I would like to emphasize
support for UNRCCA's multidimensional approach
to regional security in Afghanistan and Central Asia,
including in the areas of transport, environment, food
and energy security, and its focus on new threats to
peace and security. Poland also greatly appreciates the
work of UNAMA and the comprehensive support it
provides to Afghanistan and its people.

Together with our partners in the European
Union (EU), we have identified four priority areas
that are critical to achieving progress in Afghanistan.
They include promoting peace, stability and regional
security, reinforcing democracy, the rule of law
and human rights, promoting good governance and
women's empowerment, and supporting economic and
human development and addressing challenges related
to migration. Those priorities are the pillars of the new
EU strategy on Afghanistan and show our engagement
and commitment to the country. We hope that the
Afghan Government will work with us to implement
that vital strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that Poland
has been a long-term partner of Afghanistan and the
region. We remain committed to further strengthening
peace, stability and the development of Afghanistan
and Central Asia, and we are taking action to that end.

