Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Italy for organizing this meeting on
the role of the police in peacekeeping operations, which
has enabled us to adopt resolution 2382 (2017), the
second Security Council resolution pertaining to the
police, three years after resolution 2185 (2014). I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and the heads of the police components here for their
briefings today.

I would like to pay tribute to the approximately
11,500 men and women who are currently deployed as
police officers in peacekeeping operations. Whether
they are from civilian or military national security
forces, they carry out their mandates in what are
sometimes extremely difficult security conditions as
they labour to ensure that peace is maintained and
civilians are protected.
Today peacekeeping operations are deployed
in increasingly complex, varied and evolving
circumstances, and police components are a major
asset in our response to them, as the resolution we have
just adopted emphasizes. In that regard, I would like to
discuss three priorities.

First, police forces should continue to play a central
role in the protection of civilian populations, and the
success of that depends on close contact between the
police deployed to operations and the people at risk.
Civilians, especially the most vulnerable among them
such as women and children, must be able to rely on
our police and gendarmes to protect them from human
rights abuses and violence and ensure that those
accused of such crimes are brought to justice and held
accountable for their actions. In the event of imminent
violence, it is the job of the United Nations police to
provide affected populations with the protection they
need. Besides that, it is through their commitment to
communities and the quality of their contact with the
people and local authorities that these United Nations
gendarmes and police officers build the trust that is
essential for effective protection, as has been the case
in Mali with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
For police components to carry out these duties
effectively, it is vital to ensure that they are working
in full coordination with their peace operation's other
components, especially the military and human rights
divisions. Their ability to respond together depends on
their ability to plan, analyse and act together.

That brings me to my second point, which is that
the police component plays a fundamental role in
establishing lasting peace. Establishing and training
domestic security forces that respect human rights,
ensure equal treatment for all and serve the people
are preconditions for long-term stability. The police
components of United Nations missions contribute
to that through support and training, in accordance
with the rule of law and United Nations due-diligence
human rights policies. That effort can be seen in the
Central African Republic with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, whose formed police
units are helping to protect civilian populations in
Bangui and beyond and to build the national internal
security forces" capacity and strengthen Government
authority. The success of that commitment depends
on identifying the needs of the host State in detail and
on appropriate planning, enabling an effective police
response. In the transitional situation in Haiti, the
Council has recognized the significant added value of
using police for restoring peace with its establishment
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti.

Thirdly, for police components to be able to help
to resolve conflicts, they must be fully adapted to the
needs of peacekeeping operations, a task that presents
several challenges. The first requirement is their
capacity for force generation. To be effective, a police
force must be large enough, as well as well equipped
and well trained. The ability to deploy an adequate
police component quickly remains a major challenge,
and we must all work together to respond to it.

The second challenge is police-force composition.
We support efforts to deploy more women to the police
components of peacekeeping operations. Women are
a guarantee of the link between the United Nations
police in missions and highly fragile populations. They
are at the forefront in combating and preventing sexual
violence. They are an example for the future and a model
for the people we protect. We also support efforts in the
area of language. The capacity to maintain ties to the
host population depends on an ability to establish and
deepen a relationship of trust and mutual respect over
time and with the support of local authorities. France
does that by training deployed police and gendarmes
in French.

The third issue, which seems central today, is that
of technical competence. In order to deal with the
many types of crime they encounter on the ground,
investigations aimed at fighting impunity require
complex police techniques. Because of that, mission
police components must have the specialized technical
knowledge needed to combat sexual violence or
transnational organized crime, for example. France is
firmly committed to that approach. For instance, the
European Gendarmerie Force will shortly deploy a
team within MINUSMA to combat organized crime
and terrorism composed of Italian carabinieri, staff of
Spain's Guardia Civil, Portugal's Republican National
Guard and soldiers of the French National Gendarmerie.

The next meeting of police and gendarmerie
heads, to be held in the spring of 2018, will be an
opportunity for reflection on the role of the police
within the United Nations. It should help us examine
our doctrinal and technical choices, while offering an
analysis of the future of police components. In that
regard, I would like to hear the views of our briefers on
the role of police personnel in building lasting peace.
In other contexts they have all promoted the concept of
sustainable peace through the prevention of violence,
the restoration of host-country policing capabilities and
national reconciliation. Can they tell us what they have
learned from their experience? It would be particularly
helpful to get a better understanding of the constraints
they have encountered and the imperatives they have
had to take into account in carrying out their actions. I
thank them in advance for that.

