The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as representative of Ethiopia.

I would like to express my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu for her presence here today and for her
comprehensive briefing on aviation security. I also
wish to thank Ambassador Aboulatta for his excellent
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and for his presentation highlighting what the CTC has
been doing in relation to aviation security. We thank
the United Kingdom for the initiative of convening this
meeting, which marks the one-year anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 2309 (2016), on
aviation security.

The aviation industry has often been the primary
target of terrorists and a series of measures have
already been put in place to enhance aviation security.
However, it remains vulnerable to attacks as terrorists
continue to perceive civil aviation as an attractive target
and to seek to exploit real or perceived vulnerabilities
in the system. That is why aviation security should
remain a high priority agenda for Member States and
for the international community. It is also why there is
a need for greater international cooperation in closing
any loopholes that could be exploited by terrorists. That
is what resolution 2309 (2016) calls for.

In that regard, we appreciate the briefing we
received today on the implementation of this important
resolution, which deals specifically with terrorist
threats to civil aviation. The resolution affirms States'
responsibility to ensure the safety of air services
operating within their territory and calls on all
States to work within the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) to ensure that international
security standards are reviewed, updated, adapted and
put in place based on current risks, pursuant to the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation.

However, as all colleagues mentioned earlier, it is
very clear that not all Member States have the same
level of capacity to implement those provisions of the
resolution that have resource implications and require
more sophisticated technical know-how. Therefore,
assistance in the delivery of effective and targeted
capacity-development, training and other necessary
resources, technical assistance, technology transfers
and programmes are needed to enable all States to
achieve the objectives set out in the resolution.

There is no doubt that no single Member State, big
or small, can carry out the responsibilities outlined in
the resolution, given the globally interconnected nature
of aviation and the magnitude of the threat posed. That
is why strengthening cooperation and collaboration and
sharing experience in regards to developing security-
check technologies and regional and international
cooperation on border control, law enforcement and
criminal justice continue to be extremely critical.

In this context, the close cooperation between
ICAO and CTC and between ICAO and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) is
very important. It is encouraging to note that aviation
security issues have been continuously addressed in
CTC/CTED country assessments and reports. We
also commend the special meeting of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee on terrorist threats to civil
aviation, held in July, which afforded the opportunity
to look into existing good practices, identify gaps
and vulnerabilities relevant to aviation security,
and consider the responsibilities of ICAO, Member
States and international and regional organizations in
promoting the effective implementation of resolution
2309 (2016).

We believe that today's meeting will enable us
to reflect on the progress made in implementing the
resolution and applicable ICAO standards, and on
challenges and opportunities in relation to aviation
security, and to explore possibilities for more tangible
collaboration and cooperation, at both the regional and
the international levels. We sincerely hope that States
will continue to develop partnerships aimed at building
capacities and facilitating technical assistance delivery,
and that ICAO, CTC, CTED and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force will also continue to
strengthen their cooperation in that regard.

As Ethiopia is living in a volatile neighbourhood
that is facing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism, attacks against civil aviation by terrorists
are not remote possibilities for us. They are real threats
and they have already happened in our region. Having
one of the biggest airline groups in the region, Ethiopia
attaches great importance to aviation security. I wish
to express our firm commitment to cooperating with
other States and to working with all the relevant
stakeholders in the contexr of regional and international
cooperation frameworks.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Ms. Fang Liu to respond
to comments.

