Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
voted in favour of resolution 2350 (2017) as a further
sign of its continued solidarity with the Government
and people of Haiti, with whom we share special
historical relations. This commitment led to Senegal's
deployment of 173 police officers to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). In 2010,
following the horrific earthquake that struck Haiti,
Senegal responded by hosting more than 200 students
who were trained in human rights and in gender rights
in particular, which ultimately made it possible for this
country to manage these issues.

Senegal is therefore pleased to have voted with
the other Security Council members to extend
MINUSTAH's mandate for a further six months and
for the last time with a view to its drawn down on
15 October. We also welcome the establishment of the
new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti on 16 October to support the Haitian Government
as it seeks to strengthen its institutions, particularly in
the areas of rule of law, the police force and human
rights. Senegal will continue to be a partner of Haiti in
those efforts.

On 11 April (see S/PV.7920) I noted here that

Haiti was at a crossroads. As we work to restructure

MINUSTAH, we appeal to the international community

to step up its cooperation in all areas with this country,

which, in the eyes of Senegal and Africa, I repeat, is

the first black republic and the first South American
democracy. Our appeal was all the more urgent as, in the
transition from the newly elected President, the outgoing
provisional President said that the vulnerability of Haiti
at the environmental, economic and social levels was
inexorably deteriorating every day, as 96 per cent of the
population was living constantly from the threat of two
well-known hazards: drought and floods.

As if response, in his own inauguration address
President Jovenel Moise, the fifty-eighth President of
Haiti, said that he would fulfil his campaign promises
before the end of his first mandate so that, inter alia, his
Government could restore the trust of the Haitian people
in the political system and class and in the national
elites; reinforce social inclusion and national solidarity;
boost the productive sectors of the economy, including
tourism, by the domestication of new technologies; and,
of course, build a resilient nation able to withstand the
natural disasters that frequently strike the country.

That is why Senegal appeals to and commends the
Group of Friends of Haiti, chaired by our colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Uruguay, to continue
to advocate for that country, which still needs the
United Nations.

