The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in

document S/ 1998/ 102.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

 

In favour:

Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1152 (1998).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.

The Council, in adopting this resolution that extends
the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB), has
just taken an important decision. The President of the
Gabonese Republic, El Hadj Omar Bongo, in his capacity
as Chairman of the International Mediation Committee for
the crisis in the Central African Republic, has conveyed to
the Security Council, in the letter he addressed to its
President, the urgent need to take all possible steps to
prevent the situation in the Central African Republic from
deteriorating once again, for lack of appropriate assistance.
I am most gratified that the resolution we have just adopted
reflects that concern.

In this regard, I would like to underscore the
prominent role played by MISAB in the Central African
Republic's political stabilization - though we must realize
that it is not yet absolutely assured. I am also pleased to
pay tribute here to the sacrifices made by the African
countries - Burkina Faso, Senegal, Chad, Togo, Mali and
Gabon - that are participating in MISAB. I also pay
tribute to the assistance provided by the United Nations
Development Programme. And I am also pleased to praise
the commitment shown by all of the partners, especially
France, whose logistical and financial contribution to
MISAB has allowed it to carry out its mandate.
At a time when the composition and the resources of
MISAB will be undergoing significant changes due to the
announced withdrawal of France, I believe it is reasonable
for the international community to demonstrate its
solidarity with the Central African people, in particular by
the timely deployment of a peacekeeping operation, as
rightly recommended by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, in his report of 23 January 1998. By taking such
a step the Council would be contributing effectively to
preventing the resurgence in the Central African Republic
of new conflicts, the effects of which would seriously
threaten the already fragile peace of the whole Central
African subregion.

I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
the deep concern of the Government of Gabon at the
possibility of any further procrastination by the Security
Council regarding the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation in Africa.

In the present case, we feel that there is no real
justification for such an attitude. It seems to me that all
the conditions are in place for a smooth transition from
MISAB to any operation to be established in the future.
What we must bear in mind is the need to avoid another
tragedy brought about by the international community's
absence from a crisis situation in Africa.

That is why I must take this opportunity to reiterate
the appeal addressed to the Security Council by President
Bongo that it complete its task of maintaining and
consolidating peace in the Central African Republic.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of

its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.

