The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

I wish to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his report. It is a timely and impressive piece of work.
As he made clear, this is a time of opportunity in the
Middle East. There are some positive developments
that give reason for hope, and it is for the international
community to encourage the parties to take advantage
of this and to support the peace process.

This is all the more important following the
recent escalation in violence, which has led to a
number of casualties on both sides. The relative
stability over recent months has enabled progress on
the political front. A return to violence would be an
unacceptable step backwards. In that context, I
condemn the violation of the ceasefire in Gaza by
Hamas's military wing, and I look to the National
Unity Government to take the necessary measures to
prevent such attacks. All sides should put an immediate
end to violence so that we can continue to concentrate
on the political process. It should be apparent to all that
meaningful progress can be made only through
dialogue.

The creation of the National Unity Government
in March was a significant step. The United Kingdom
will judge the Government by its platform and actions,
and respond accordingly. As we have made clear, we
have always been willing to work with a Government
based on the Quartet principles. I call on colleagues to
be consistent in their message to the National Unity
Government on the importance of adhering to those
principles.

1 would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the formation of the Arab Ministerial Committee for
the Arab Peace Initiative, following the reaffirmation
of the Arab Peace Initiative at the Arab League Summit
in Riyadh. I also welcome the role that Secretary Rice
has played in bringing Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas together and their recent meeting on
15 April. I sincerely hope that that dialogue will
continue.

We should focus now on what is already available
to us. We need to re-energize existing mechanisms and
frameworks such as the Quartet and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We must ensure that we maintain
momentum, regardless of efforts to detract from the
process. Of course, there will be events which could
knock us off course. But we cannot allow this process
to fall victim to these events or, indeed, to unduly high
expectations. Instead, we must find a way to offer hope
to both the Israeli and Palestinian people and help them
to develop confidence in each other. That is why we
need to work together and offer a political horizon.

The international community needs to
demonstrate its commitment to a future Palestinian
State and to Israel's security. We can send a strong
message of support for a viable Palestinian State by
improving the capacity of Palestinian institutions.
Facilitating the coordination of assistance to the
Palestinians will also help in the short term to improve
the daily lives of Palestinians. The temporary
international mechanism continues to channel
humanitarian assistance, but I also call on Israel to
release the Palestinian tax revenues.

I welcome Prime Minister Olmert's intention to
normalize the opening of the Karni and Rafah border
crossings and to ease other restrictions on movement.
That would all help to improve the lives of Palestinians
and increase the confidence between the parties. But
both parties can do more to build confidence. I call for
the immediate release of Corporal Shalit and for a halt
to the firing of Qassam rockets from Gaza into Israel. I
understand that President Abbas presented Prime
Minister Olmert with a security plan, and I very much
hope that, through continuing dialogue, the parties can
put it into effect and improve security. I also join in the
calls on Israel to abide by the Road Map and freeze all
settlement construction, including the growth of
existing settlements, and to remove all outposts.

The Quartet has an important leadership role on
the peace process, and I am pleased that it has met
frequently this year. We would welcome an expanded
Quartet meeting, including countries from the region. It
goes without saying that there is a role for the region in
offering prospects for peace and improved relations for
the parties within the region. The United Nations has
an important role to play. It is essential that the
involvement of all United Nations agencies and bodies
be constructive and that the Organization's response to
the situation be carefully coordinated. I was pleased to
hear about the Secretary-General's successful visit to
the region last month.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
all those who have supported our calls for the release
of the British journalist Alan Johnston. We continue to
appeal for his immediate and unconditional release.
His continued detention is completely unacceptable.
Alan Johnston has been a great friend of the Palestinian
people, and he chose to live in Gaza to report the news,
and the truth as he saw it, from Gaza. This is a
reprehensible crime, and he must be released
immediately, because the existence of a free and
Vigorous press is the cornerstone of all of our
democratic societies.

I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom's
commitment to finding a solution in the Middle East
that will result in a comprehensive and lasting peace,
with two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by
side in peace and security.

I now turn briefly to Lebanon. We support the
continued efforts of Prime Minister Siniora to find a
solution to the current political situation. At the heart
of those discussions is the issue of a tribunal to try
those eventually indicted for the murder of Rafik
Hariri. We strongly believe that early establishment of
the tribunal is in the interests of all Lebanese, not least
to bring to an end, once and for all, the cycle of
politically motivated assassinations. We will continue
to support efforts to achieve that.

The United Kingdom also remains fully
committed to the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006), which, like the
tribunal, is central to Lebanon's future stability. The
Council has just authorized the first significant
operational follow-up to that resolution: the dispatch of
a United Nations mission to assess the security of the
border with Syria. That is an important step that, we
hope, will both enhance Lebanese sovereignty and
improve compliance with the arms embargo established
by resolution 1701 (2006). We look forward also to
progress on the Sheba'a farms issue and underline once
again the need for the release of the Israeli soldiers
abducted last summer.
We have been at moments of opportunity too
often before to be, if I may say so, naively optimistic.
Great challenges remain on all sides. But the prize of
peace and security for the region is there to be grasped
if those in the region have the courage and if we in the
international community have the commitment. Britain
will spare no effort in playing our part.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the Permanent Observer of Palestine.

