Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): When Canadians think
about reconciliation, at the forefront of our minds is, of
course, our own colonial history, our relationship with
indigenous peoples and our own painful and ongoing
process. In 2017, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau
addressed the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.12) and
called the failure of successive Canadian Governments
to respect the rights of indigenous peoples our great
shame. We see our path towards reconciliation as a series
of continuing actions, one of which was endorsing the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples. At the heart of our journey is the opportunity
for victims and survivors themselves to tell their stories
and be meaningfully listened to and heard across our
country. That was a key component of Canada's Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and Canada's national
inquiry into missing and murdered indigenous women
and girls.

From that experience, we know first-hand that
unjust institutions and systemic inequality are not
established overnight and are not dismantled in a day.
We know that it will take time, investment, energy,
humility and sustained political will to overcome those
legacies and to jointly build new ones. We also know
that there is no one-size-fits-all approach. But from our
own experience and the experiences of others, there are
a few common elements that we can all learn from.

First, we know that reconciliation is not an event
or even a single process. Effective efforts towards
reconciliation involve balancing concurrent demands,
including peace and justice, reckoning with the past,
moving forward, accountability for perpetrators and
healing for victims. Secondly, successful reconciliation
processes rely first and foremost on national ownership
and domestic leadership. Thirdly, such processes are
survivor- and victim-centric. They counter legacies
of exclusion with inclusion, while engaging local
communities in both the design of processes and the
implementation of the recommendations that flow
from them.

I would like to recognize Security Council member
South Africa, which showed us that truly reckoning
with the past can help to build an inclusive future.
Theirs is an example of both the links between systemic
inequality and instability and those between genuine
efforts towards equality and stability. In that vein, we
are very encouraged that we are seeing similar action
today in The Gambia and the first inklings of what we
hope to see in the Central African Republic.

(spoke in French)

The establishment of the Truth, Reconciliation
and Reparations Commission in the Gambia marked a
major break from the violations of the former regime.
We commend the Commission's outreach efforts to
ensure that more victims and witnesses can participate.

Canada is proud to have provided technical
assistance for forensic investigations and financial
support to local organizations to strengthen the
participation of survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence. Canada encourages the Gambia to follow
through on the Commission's recommendations to
ensure accountability of those responsible for violations.

In the Central African Republic, we welcomed
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation. We appreciate that inclusivity,
local-level dialogue and community engagement
continue to be important parts of this process,
particularly in increasing women's participation.

Combating impunity is vital to sustaining peace
in the Central African Republic. We commend the
work of the Special Criminal Court and encourage
the establishment of the truth, justice, reparation and
reconciliation commission as soon as possible, taking
into account gender-balance policies.

Canada, South Africa, the Gambia and the Central
African Republic are all distinct cases with their own
legacies of oppression and exclusion, but there are
common lessons to be learned.

Sustained political commitment is a prerequisite
for effectiveness.

(Spoke in English)

This is where Canada believes that the Security
Council, regional organizations and other external
actors have a crucial role to play. We commend the
work of the African Union in particular for providing
technical support to the Gambia and in brokering the
peace process in the Central African Republic.

The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) offers a valuable platform for strengthening these
partnerships and for offering sustained attention and
accompaniment. I would like to commend the Gambia,
along with other countries, for regularly coming to the
PBC to offer their frank assessment of challenges and
opportunities for reconciliation.

As a longstanding member and a candidate to serve
as the next Chair of the PBC and an aspiring member
of the Council, Canada will continue to promote
efforts to strengthen United Nations support for
national reconciliation processes. Our willingness to
listen, to learn and to adapt to meeting new challenges
are among the assets that have prepared us for such
potential future roles on both the PBC and, we hope, on
the Security Council.

In closing, I would like to leave the Council with
these words from the final report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission of Canada:
"Without truth, justice, and healing, there can be no
genuine reconciliation. Reconciliation is not about
closing a sad chapter of Canada's past but about
opening new healing pathways of reconciliation
that are forged in truth and justice".

