Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
promptly convened this urgent meeting of the Security
Council to examine the situation prevailing in the
occupied Palestinian territories and the dangerous
escalation of violence there.

We must recall that this escalation was provoked
by the visit of the Israeli Prime Minister to the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. It is regrettable that today we cannot but
recognize that the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories has reached such an unprecedented level that
it represents a serious threat to international peace and
security.

It is perfectly clear that the current Israeli
Government is persisting in the use of excessive force,
as reported by Israel's closest friends. This behaviour
has become a style of government that is part of an
organized, methodical repressive policy targeting the
defenceless Palestinian people and aimed at
undermining what is left of the peace process.

Israel is continuing its policy of physical
liquidation of innocent Palestinian civilians and their
leaders. It has pursued targeted extrajudicial
assassinations, in flagrant contravention of
international law, humanitarian norms and moral
values.

The cycle of Israeli violence is such that the army
is shamelessly taking over zones under Palestinian

S/PV.4478

 

control and economically throttling the civilian
population. It has also continued to launch attacks with
heavy weaponry, causing severe damage to the
infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority and the
institutions that care for the daily needs of the
Palestinians, which were financed by international
partners, such as the European Union. Even United
Nations buildings and its staff members have not been
spared, as if Israel had become the enemy of all.

We are convinced that under these circumstances,
which are cause for deep concern, the time has come to
urgently put an end to the escalating violence. The
international community cannot remain stymied in the
face of further deterioration and stagnation of the
situation. The United Nations, and especially the
Security Council, must assume their full responsibility
to bring Israel to end immediately its practices and
aggression. Israel must submit to the dictates of
international and humanitarian laws and urgently
provide the required protection for Palestinian civilians
in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949.
The Council has on several occasions
endeavoured to arrive at a resolution based on an
approach that concentrates on prevention to deal with
the crisis situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. These attempts have unfortunately failed. It
is now clear that the Council must adopt a resolution
under circumstances that are no longer a matter of
prevention, and that it must address a painful situation
where a whole people are threatened with elimination.
The Council must move rapidly to avoid what could be
an even worse situation.

We agree with the Secretary-General and his
Special Coordinator, Mr. Larsen, that focusing on the
security aspect alone has become a barrier rather than a
bridge to reaching political dialogue. It is clear that
Israeli policy creates obstructions. The Israeli
Government continues to impose conditions and
unilateral demands on the legitimate Palestinian
Authority. This has resulted in squandering the
opportunity to resume negotiations and achieve peace
on the basis of the Mitchell and Tenet
recommendations in the wake of dissipating violence
after President Arafat's statement on the 16 December
2001.

The lack of seriousness in the Israeli political
discourse and its illogical approach manifest
themselves in Israel's focusing only on the security
level and on assigning the sole responsibility for that to
the Palestinian Authority. At the same time, Israeli
armed forces deliberately undermine the basis of the
Authority through daily provocations and deprive it of
its means of intervention, as well as attacking the
buildings of Palestinian security services and killing its
members.

Does it really make sense that we demand that
Mr. Arafat, while he is under siege at his place of
residence by heavy Israeli machinery, stop the
defensive reaction of the Palestinian people? How can
the Palestinian Authority keep order and security in the
face of daily Israeli attempts to destroy the Palestinian
security apparatus? How can the situation in the
occupied territories be calmed when they are under
daily bombardment by air, sea and land by the
occupation force?

Despite the seriousness of the current situation,
we believe that the solutions are clear. Tunisia has
always maintained a firm position in favour of peace
and has advocated political settlement as a strategic
option. It therefore appeals to the international
community and to the co-sponsors of the peace process
to bring pressure to bear on Israel to join the peace
process seriously, responsibly and without
procrastination, to return to the negotiating table, to
respect international legality and its instruments -
particularly Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for peace -
to withdraw from all territories under the control of the
Palestinian Authority and to recognize the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to
the establishment of an independent State on its land
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

The world has entered a critical stage of its
history, demonstrated by globalization and new global
threats to international peace and security. Perhaps we
can learn from the recent painful events that have
claimed the lives of thousands of innocent people. In
that spirit, we believe it is necessary to adopt a
preventive approach in dealing with these threats on
the basis of the premise that security is a
comprehensive, integral concept and that our
commitment to that concept has to be collective and
international.

It is therefore of the utmost importance and
priority that the international community today act in

S/PV.4478

 

concert and pool its efforts in a unified front to
confront the challenges facing humanity. At the same
time, it is not possible for that commitment to be as
credible and as effective as we would wish if we accept
that some are exempt from respecting it.

In that regard, it is today unacceptable that Israel
alone be granted an exceptional status in the
international community. It cannot be allowed to seek
cover under a narrow security perspective that allows it
to infringe upon international law and to practise a
policy of force and fait accompli.

Breaking the Vicious cycle of violence has today
become a collective responsibility requiring a political
solution to the crisis. It has become imperative that
new political horizons be opened before the parties in
order to move the peace process forward. It is also
necessary to deal firmly with the political adventurism
and the policy of dictates followed by the current
Israeli Government. This urgent demand is no longer a
Palestinian or Arab demand only; it has also become
the demand of moderate, peace-loving circles in Israel
itself, as the policy of the current Government has
proven that security and peace cannot be born out of
oppression, intransigence and domination.

I would not wish to end my statement without
particularly stressing the following points. First, it is
imperative that the blockade currently imposed on
President Arafat be lifted and that he be ensured
complete freedom of movement.

Secondly, the Israeli Government must furnish
proof of its willingness to achieve peace and declare its
desire to resume negotiations, especially since
Palestinian leaders proclaim this every day.

Thirdly, we urge that negotiations be resumed
urgently on the basis of international legitimacy and
new instruments, especially the Mitchell and Tenet
plans.

Fourthly, there is no doubt that the United States
has an essential role to play in settling this conflict.
Both President Bush and Secretary of State Colin
Powell in Louisville enunciated this vision. Recently,
other new ideas have been proposed, particularly by
France and the Arab side, which has never stopped
demonstrating its full willingness to find a political
settlement to the Palestinian question and to the
situation in the Middle East. We welcome all these
ideas and believe that it is high time that they be turned
into practical and concrete initiatives.

For more than a generation now, Tunisia has
consistently advocated a political solution to the
Palestinian question and to the situation in the Middle
East. Today, at this delicate international and political
juncture, it appeals to the international community to
act with the urgency required by the gravity of the
situation in the Middle East.

