Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this timely debate and congratulate
you on having convened it. Allow me to briefly touch
upon the topic from our national perspective besides
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, with which Romania fully aligns
itself.

Against the backdrop of the ever-growing United
Nations peacekeeping operations with increasingly
complex multidimensional mandates, while also
bearing in mind the decrease in human resources and
financial sustainability, the United Nations has the
difficult task of ensuring that its operations remain
viable and efficient. It therefore constantly seeks new
partnerships in maintaining peace and security. In that
regard, the strengthened United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations is unquestionably, in our
View, a positive trend and an increasing necessity. That
is why I wanted to emphasize from the start that your
idea, Mr. President, of holding this discussion is very
welcome.

In numerous situations, characterized by difficult
and violent environments where peace is almost
inexistent and where non- State actors and transnational
armed groups, foreign fighters, mercenaries or
organized criminal networks are increasingly active,
regional and subregional organizations are often in a
better position to operate than United Nations troops
either in a stabilizing intervention or in taking over
from the United Nations at a certain point.

As a security provider, Romania attaches great
importance to the effectiveness of the United Nations in
its pursuit of global peace and security. As a contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, my country
is an active promoter of redefining how the United
Nations and regional organizations cooperate. In that
context, allow me to recall that, during its most recent
mandate on the Security Council as a non-permanent
member in 2004-2005, one of my country's key
achievements was the successful promotion of resolution
1631 (2005) pertaining to United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations in the maintainance of
international peace and security. Besides being the first
Romanian resolution adopted by the Security Council,
that document represents the first resolution in the
history of the United Nations to deal with cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.

Further to resolution 1631 (2005), regional
organizations have become significant contributors to
international efforts to support States in transition from
conflict and from political instability to sustainable
peace, as highlighted, for instance, in the report of
the Secretary-General on the relationship between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security (S/2008/186). As a
member of the European Union since 2007, Romania
has been an ongoing and consistent supporter of the
European Security Strategy, including its priority of
strengthening cooperation with the United Nations. At
the same time, Romania is one ofthe States members of
NATO that have firmly supported the need to create a
United Nations-NATO cooperation framework.

On those grounds, as an important contributor
to EU and NATO missions with a multidimensional
involvement, from military and police components
to civilian elements, most notably in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Iraq, Afghanistan and Georgia, Romania
has continuously been involved in the efforts of the
international community on crisis management.
Having always called for regional and global actors to
have complementary roles, Romania has also started
to work on new concepts and to identify new actions
in the area of stabilization and post-conflict recovery.
That is why we established the Training Centre for
Post-Conflict Reconstruction in Bucharest. Such
topics are relevant to complex situations, such as that
in Afghanistan or the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the cooperation and coordination of all
field actors - international organizations, States and
non-governmental organizations - is highly necessary.

Our presence in other regional cooperation
formats, such as the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Regional Cooperation Council and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization, seeks
to consolidate and diversify Romania's contribution
to and role in security matters at the regional and
subregional levels.

Allow me to conclude with Romania's conviction
that strengthening United Nations partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations is key to
improving the capacity for facing and overcoming an
ever-growing set of challenges, as the world seems
to be in turmoil these days. We see room for better
communication between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, including
through consultations at all appropriate levels. We
also need better integration between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as it is a fact that peacekeeping
operations alone cannot solve conflicts and must be
complemented by carefully crafted peacebuilding
mechanisms. I congratulate all those who think and act
in that way. My country will always share that vision
and gladly help with its implementation.

