Many thanks, Mr. President - dear Heiko - for having invited the European Union (EU) to a debate an issue of such relevance to us. The protracted conflict in Libya has caused immense suffering for all Libyans and has become a major challenge for the region, and ultimately for the international community. As the European Union, we believe it is high time to put an end to this military conflict right on our doorstep and manage a proper transition in Libya. We must preserve the country as one single Libya - a united, stable, prosperous and reliable partner for all. The present meeting brings together all countries that have the capacity, if genuinely committed, to contribute to a political transition in Libya. We all undertook strong commitments at the Berlin Conference in January. It is now time to translate our words into concrete actions. We need to work collectively, under strong United Nations leadership, to truly implement the conclusions of Berlin, which everybody accepted. The polarization, which has turned Libya into a theatre of proxy wars, needs to stop. Actions in support of one or the other Libyan party fuel the conflict, and some constitute clear provocations. Unilateral initiatives go against the spirit of the consensual international dialogue Libya urgently needs, and which we need to encourage. We must go back to our Berlin commitments, starting with the enforcement of the United Nations arms embargo, which unfortunately continues to be violated on all sides every day, with full impunity, as we heard from the United Nations and as Heiko recalled. And we need a collective effort to favour the return of the Libyan parties to the negotiating table, starting with the United Nations-led 5+5 military talks to reach an agreement on a sustainable ceasefire. And we support the initiative to demilitarize the conflict around Sirte and Jufra. We, the European Union, are doing our part. I have promoted strong EU commitment to the Berlin process, to respect and implement what we all agreed. That is why we launched the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, with core tasks to implement the United Nations arms embargo and to stop the flow of weapons into Libya, as well as to monitor oil smuggling. We are reporting regularly to the United Nations Panel of Experts on the basis of the mandate given by the Security Council. It is also clear that control of the arms flow into Libya requires action beyond the maritime domain. But for that, the Council should enlarge the mandate. As co-Chair of the Economic Group, we also hope to find a sustainable solution for the exploitation of oil resources in Libya, a key issue in the conflict, which is directly linked to the increasing build-up of presence in Sirte. That is of the utmost importance; all of the European help to Libya is the equivalent of the oil revenues that Libya could generate in one week. Later this month, we will co-host the next international follow-up committee on Libya, where these discussions can continue. We need to work towards these goals together, stop all interference fuelling the conflict and join forces to support an inclusive, Libyan-owned and Libyan-led process leading to a political solution.
