Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I have the honour to
speak on behalfofthe States members ofthe Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.

We commend the initiative by the Nigerian
presidency to hold this important open debate. In the
year in which we celebrate the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, a year that will set new directions
for the Organization in many areas of its work, it is
indeed important to reflect on the challenges ahead and
the critical role that regional organizations can play in
addressing these challenges.

Our collective efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security are now faced with
increasingly complex threats, in both the traditional
and non-traditional sense. Conflicts are taking new
forms with the rise of extremist groups in control of
a large swath of territories. Intra-State conflicts are
not winding down, while inter-Sate tensions remain a
major source of concern. New non-traditional security
issues also pose serious challenges to global security, as
highlighted in recent debates of the Security Council.
Comprehensive approaches, which should include a
prominent role for regional organizations, are required
so as to achieve tailored and sustainable solutions to
such challenges.

In this connection, ASEAN member States are
pleased with the efforts by the United Nations, including
the Security Council, to engage with and promote
the contribution of regional organizations. With the
adoption of relevant resolutions, the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and among regional organizations themselves is
being strengthened, especially in conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We
commend the efforts made by the Secretary-General
and the Security Council in this regard.

ASEAN has strived to strengthen its own ability to
address regional security challenges in accordance with
its Charter. ASEAN has made significant progress in
making an ASEAN community a reality, including the
advancements made under the political-security pillar.
ASEAN works closely with our dialogue partners in
various ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ASEAN
Regional Forum, ASEAN Plus Three, the East Asia
Summit and the ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting
Plus, and leads efforts to build a regional architecture
conducive to regional stability and prosperity. We are
intensifying ongoing efforts by the State parties to the
Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free
Zone and the nuclear-weapon States to resolve all
outstanding issues in accordance with the objectives
and principles of the Treaty pertaining to the signing
and ratifying of the Protocol to that Treaty. We are also
working with partners to develop tools for conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including a code of conduct in the South China Sea.

ASEAN continues to attach great importance to our
partnership with the United Nations. ASEAN and the
United Nations have been partners in addressing issues
of common interest and concern within the region and
beyond. The ASEAN-United Nations Comprehensive
Partnership continues to be advanced with the
implementation of the work plan of 2015. ASEAN
member States have deepened their engagement with
various United Nations efforts, including United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Cooperation between
the two secretariats has been regularized through a
number of consultations, workshops and dialogues.
ASEAN welcomes the appointment of a United Nations
liaison officer to the ASEAN secretariat.

Moving forward, ASEAN believes that regional
organizations can do more to address new security
challenges.

First, ASEAN's own experience has shown that
the ASEAN way of consensus-building, sustained
engagement, respectfortheviews ofallparties concerned
and the fundamental principles of international law,
including respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, non-interference in their internal
affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes, is the
best way to address common challenges. As the Chair
of ASEAN put it at the forty-eighth ASEAN Foreign
Ministers' Meeting, ASEAN history is built upon the
twin pillars of dialogue and diplomacy.

Secondly, it might be necessary to adequately reflect
on the role of regional organizations in the ongoing
reviews of United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding
architecture and other important exercises. The
forthcoming reports of the Secretary-General on this
important work could provide assessments and, most
importantly, recommendations on how to further
promote the engagement of regional organizations.

Thirdly, ASEAN is supportive of enhancing
consultations and dialogue among regional
organizations with the United Nations to share best
practices, expertise and resources, so that we can fully
utilize our collective capacity to meet new, complex
challenges. In particular, regional organizations have the
comparative advantages of geographical proximity and
a better understanding of the context of the problems.
ASEAN looks forward to closer engagement with the
United Nations and with other regional organizations,
including during the upcoming high-level week of the
General Assembly.

Fourthly, no two regional organizations are the
same. Each has its unique characteristics, objectives
and functions. In working to address any international
security challenge, the partnership between the United
Nations and a regional organization must build upon
an accurate understanding of each other's nature and
strengths as well as limitations.

I would like to conclude by underscoring that the
partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
has been beneficial to regional peace and stability. We
look forward to continued United Nations support for
ASEAN centrality in our regional security architecture.
ASEAN reiterates its commitment to contributing to
the work of the United Nations and stands ready to
work closely with the United Nations and other partners
in our joint efforts to address the new challenges of the
day.

