Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The
Egyptian delegation would like at the outset to extend its
thanks to you, Sir, for convening this meeting, which
establishes a very good precedent, one that will definitely
contribute to further transparency in the work of the
Security Council.

The delegation of Egypt also welcomes both the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia and
his statement.

We should like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of the Secretary-General as well as for his fifteenth
progress report on the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL). We have carefully studied the report
and would like to express our grave concern regarding the
delay in implementing the provisions of the Abuja
Agreement signed last August. This jeopardizes the
possibility of holding presidential and legislative elections
on 20 August 1996, as was agreed.

We also regret the latest attacks on ECOMOG in the
Tubmanburg region. We extend our condolences to the
families of the victims - those who were killed carrying
out their duties in maintaining peace on the territory of
Liberia.

The peace process in Liberia is at a critical juncture.
It requires the full support of all the parties in Liberia to
overcome the latest setback to implementation of the
provisions of the peace Agreement within the agreed
schedule.

Probably the most important step would be to enable
the approximately 60,000 soldiers who will be demobilized,
from the various factions, to be reintegrated into civilian
life and to find them appropriate job opportunities. In our
opinion, this requires the international community to attach
special importance to rehabilitation projects and the
reconstruction of State facilities in order to provide
further job opportunities. This, in turn, requires creating
a stable and safe environment through full disarmament
of the factions and pressure to bear on all parties to abide
by the schedule to be agreed upon in order to engage
troops in disarmament.

Since its eruption in 1989, the civil war in Liberia
has led to great human suffering, with 150,000 victims
and the displacement of more than half the country's
population. That places a great moral and humanitarian
responsibility on the international community to help end
the Liberian people's plight, by giving all possible
assistance to the governing Council and the new
Government as soon as the elections are over.

It is worth mentioning that providing protection and
security for UNOMIL, as well as for all the international
relief organizations, is an important responsibility that all
the Liberian factions should discharge.

The experience of ECOWAS in Liberia is a very
good model for the role that regional and non-regional
organizations may play in containing and settling
conflicts. This experience has demonstrated now
important it is that the United Nations, being the "mother"
organization, should provide support for these
organizations, most of which lack technical and financial
resources, as well as equipment, to make regional
endeavours a success. Thus the United Nations is directly
responsible for making the experience of ECOMOG in
Liberia a success, and should learn from this for the
future.
The delegation of Egypt would like to confirm that
it is important that all countries, particularly Liberia's
neighbours, respect the arms embargo imposed by
Security Council resolution 788 (1992) and faithfully
cooperate with the Committee established to monitor the
resolution's implementation. The spread of weapons in
Liberia today is the major threat to Liberia's stability and
to the stability of countries throughout the region. What
Liberia needs today is not more weapons, but
humanitarian, technical and financial assistance, so that
normality may be restored to the country.

We welcome and support the efforts of the
Secretariat, in coordination with the United Nations
Development Programme, to extend assistance to Liberia
so that the country may prepare for elections to take place
next August, in accordance with the Abuja Agreement.

 

The Egyptian delegation supports the proposal of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) until 31
May 1996. We hope that the progress report due to be
submitted by the Secretary-General by the end of March
1996 will include positive developments, confirming that
the Liberian factions will take positive, serious steps to
implement the Abuja Agreement.

