Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his dedication and work. I particularly extend my gratitude to the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which is doing a magnificent job, sometimes under difficult circumstances. Germany welcomes the unanimous extension of the Mission's mandate. We look forward to the discussions with all Colombian stakeholders about the future role of the United Nations Mission in verifying compliance with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace sanctions. I would like also to welcome Claudia Blum de Barberi. Her presence here signals that she supports the Security Council's role and engagement in the process and the importance of the Mission. We have seen unanimity on Colombia, so I think that is very encouraging. Let me also make the point, as most members have done, that we are alarmed about the illegal armed groups and the criminal organizations that have taken advantage of the coronavirus disease to strengthen their presence. They have attacked public security forces. The targeted killing of human rights defenders, social leaders and former members continues. Extending the presence of State institutions in remote areas and ending impunity is necessary. We support the various institutions of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. I remember that when we visited Colombia last year, we were all very impressed by the dedication of the people involved in those institutions. Regarding the reintegration of former members of the the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo, I want to concentrate on the role of women. There is an urgent need to accelerate the implementation of the gender provisions of the agreement. A lot has been done, but we need to continue to work on this. We need to strengthen the participation and the leadership of women former combatants in economic reintegration activities and decision-making. We have to fight the ongoing sexual and gender-based violence. We have to recognize the women social leaders and the women ethnic leaders, who do a tremendous job. I recall when we were back in Colombia visiting a territorial area for training and reintegration, we met with some women who were really incredible. This is the last time that Germany will be participating in a discussion on Colombia during our Security Council membership. Germany remains confident that the Colombians can succeed in consolidating the peace that they have begun to build, especially if they are able to overcome the distrust and increasingly work together with a comprehensive vision of the peace agreement. The international community and Germany will continue to assist Colombians to realize their aspirations to a more peaceful future.
