Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their important updates. Despite the enormous efforts of the Special Envoy and humanitarian workers, the situation remains of great concern. That is of even greater worry today as the world struggles with the coronavirus pandemic, which is limiting the ability to travel and perform normal duties. I hope everyone 1s well and stays healthy. In response to the briefings, Indonesia would like to highlight three points. First, regarding the political track, we are particularly troubled about the lack of progress towards the resumption of dialogue, as well as the escalation of violence in Ma'rib and Al-Jawf. It is significant that, until now, Ma'rib was untouched by the open conflict and was a safe haven. We applaud the Special Envoy for his quick response in visiting the area, thereby demonstrating the support of the United Nations to the people. Sadly, the violence has resulted in thousands of people being displaced. My delegation echoes the call of the Special Envoy for a halt of all military activity and the start of a comprehensive, inclusive and accountable de-escalation as well as dialogue. We reiterate our position that the military approach or pursuit of territorial gain cannot settle the conflict in Yemen. Secondly, on the humanitarian track, it is evident that the current fighting will impair the humanitarian efforts to secure the displaced thousands of people. Furthermore, we are deeply concerned that the hostilities may drive Yemen back to the high civilian casualty levels of 2018. We therefore urge the parties to abide by international humanitarian law in that regard. With regard to humanitarian assistance, we also urge the removal of impediments to assistance. It is imperative that the Houthis also grant access for the United Nations team to the FSO SAFER oil tanker before it is too late. That call was made in resolution 2511 (2020), which we adopted in February, and we will keep monitoring the situation. My third point is on the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, including the MHodeidah Agreement. It was a grave disappointment to read the statement issued by General Abhijit Guha on 8 March on the air strike in Al-Salif. The air strike illustrates the fragility of the situation in Al-Hudaydah. As we have previously stated, Al-Hudaydah is the centre of gravity and the humanitarian lifeline in the country. Parties must do their utmost to implement the Agreement, particularly the ceasefire. We would also like to reiterate the call by General Guha for the parties to continue working through the Redeployment Coordination Committee to ensure that the ceasefire holds and that de-escalation continues. With regard to the Stockholm Agreement, we similarly call for its implementation, including the prisoner-exchange agreement and the memorandum of understanding on Taiz.My delegation would like once again to emphasize that all concerned must commit to dialogue before it is too late and Yemen slips back into large-scale conflict and even greater humanitarian tragedy. Measures must be taken to implement agreements and avoid making a bad situation worse. As we prepare to celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, it is inconceivable to have a humanitarian catastrophe reminiscent of the world war era. Before concluding my statement, allow me to take this opportunity to join others in paying tribute to Her Excellency Ambassador Dame Karen Pierce for her dedication, constructive engagement and contribution to the work of the Security Council. For Indonesia, it has been such a privilege to serve in the Council together with Ambassador Pierce, not only during our current membership but also during our previous membership, in 2007 and 2008. We will certainly miss her, and we wish her all the very best and success in her next assignment.
