Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Government of Poland for convening
this important open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Azerbaijan fully supports
the Secretary-General's determination to genuinely
contribute to preventing wars and sustaining peace, as
well as his efforts to conduct the reform process with
a view to responding early and effectively to conflicts
and crises.

The increasing brutality and changing nature
of conflicts, as well as the vulnerability of civilians
in wartime, require redoubled protection efforts
worldwide. Those efforts must be free of selectivity and
must address all situations of armed conflict without
distinction, including those of a protracted nature and
with prolonged impact on civilians in particular.

Azerbaijan supports the increased focus on the
problem of internal displacement as a result of armed
conflict. A lack of agreement on political issues does not
and cannot provide any justification for interfering with
the rights of displaced persons and for discriminatory
policies and practices aimed at preventing their
return and changing demographics along ethnic and
religious lines.

A pressing issue that requires urgent action is that
of civilians, including women and children, who have
been taken hostage or reported missing as a result of
armed conflict. Azerbaijan is continuing its efforts
to raise awareness of the problem at the international
level, including through the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status of
Women, of which my country is a main sponsor.

The importance of ensuring accountability for
violations is fundamental to enhancing respect for
international law. Where national action is inadequate,
the international community and the Security Council
should play a more proactive role in taking concerted
action. It is critical to ensure that peace and mediation
efforts do not encourage, accept or tolerate under
any pretext situations that have been achieved by the
unlawful use of force or other egregious violations of
general international law, such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity, ethnic cleansing and genocide.

The issue we are discussing today is crucial for the
Security Council, the entire international community
and my country in particular. It concerns the serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the course ofArmenia's aggression against Azerbaijan
and its resulting military occupation of my country's
territories, including, among other things, deliberate
attacks on civilian objects, killings of civilians, the
taking and holding of hostages, mistreatment and
summary executions of prisoners of war and hostages,
sexual violence, extensive destruction of inhabited
areas and public and private property, and pillaging
and forced displacement. The scorched-earth policy
implemented by the Armenian armed forces involved
the ethnic cleansing of all Azerbaijanis in the seized
territories, as a result of which my country has one of
the largest displaced populations in the world. As of
1 April, 3,875 citizens of Azerbaijan were registered
as missing in connection with the war. They include
710 civilians, including 67 children, 265 women and
326 elderly people. Armenia refuses to cooperate
in establishing these missing persons' fate, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law.

The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators of
these crimes, who include some holding political and
military posts at the highest level in Armenia, not only
prevents progress from being made in achieving peace
and reconciliation, it also aggravates the situation on
the ground. Direct and deliberate attacks by Armenian
armed forces on civilian targets in Azerbaijan situated
along or behind the front lines have continued with
varying frequency and intensity. Moreover, Armenia is
taking purposeful measures to consolidate the results of
the use of force and prevent displaced Azerbaijanis from
returning to their homes and properties. Azerbaijan
will spare no effort to end the unlawful occupation of
the Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and other
occupied territories, achieve a political settlement of
the conflict based on international law, and ensure
peace and justice in the region.

In conclusion, we believe it is essential to ensure that
the Security Council consistently maintains its focus on
the protection of civilians and systematically reiterates
its demand that all parties to armed conflicts comply
fully with their obligations under international law.

