Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador
Roman Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing. We would
like to express our appreciation for his diligence and
commitment in fulfilling the tasks of the Committee
under his responsibility.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela once again
expresses its satisfaction over the adoption of the
landmark agreement reached between the P5 + l and the
Islamic Republic of Iran on 14 July. This achievement
is a triumph of diplomacy and dialogue over bellicose
pronouncements that promote confrontation and
mistrust. This agreement shows that, when there is
political will and commitment among parties, solutions
can be reached that promote international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

In view of recent developments concerning the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, Venezuela welcomes the
progress shown in implementing the Plan as adopted on
20 July in resolution 2231 (2015). We reiterate our full
support for the implementation of this historic effort,
which, in the short-term will result in the definitive
lifting of the sanctions regime applied to that brotherly
country, as well as other illegal, unilateral and coercive
measures that were imposed on other States owing to
their cooperation with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In that regard, we call on all Member States to uphold
and comply with the provisions set out in this broad
agreement.

We are pleased that dialogue and cooperation have
been maintained between Iran and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as underscored in
its report of 27 August. We encourage the parties to
intensify their efforts in order to resolve all outstanding
issues between the IAEA and Iran by the end of 2015.
We acknowledge the important role played by the
Agency in resolving all issues related to the Iranian
nuclear programme. We hope that cooperation will
continue to be strengthened in order to move ahead
with the measures relating to the implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Action Plan. The implementation
of the Plan of Action should ensure the Islamic
Republic of Iran its sovereign right to the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes with a view to promote its
technological and energy independence.

We note with satisfaction how over the past
several months the adoption of the Plan of Action
has contributed positively to the start of a new phase
of diplomatic relations based on mutual respect and
dialogue between Iran and several countries in the
international community. The Islamic Republic of
Iran shares borders with major countries in Asia and
the Middle East, which is why cooperation between
Iran and other countries in the region is of extreme
importance in facing common threats to peace and
stability in the region. Iran's contributions should
not be underestimated. Any decision of importance
regarding this area should be based on cooperation,
so that our fellow country can play proactive role in
finding solutions that would contribute to the stability
and security of this unstable region, while dealing
jointly with threats that stem from terrorism and violent
extremism, among other challenges.

Furthermore, the strengthening of peace and
stability in the Middle East requires the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region, as agreed
upon in 1995 at the Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which also indefinitely extended the Treaty.
The nuclear agreement between the P5+l and Iran
is a positive sign that encourages us to redouble our
efforts in order to achieve this important goal as soon
as possible, in order to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and other categories of weapons of
mass destruction in the region.

Similarly, this new phase in the relationship between
Iran and some States members of the international
community paves the way for establishing alliances of
cooperation in different areas. The lifting of sanctions
against Iran will make it possible to re-establish
economic, commercial and financial links with
countries that want to do business with this important
trade partner, which will lead to the achievement of
greater well-being and progress for the Iranian people
and the region.

With regard to the work of the Committee, we
emphasize that, in this crucial phase, it is important that
the Committee be able to contribute in a constructive
way to addressing the new challenges and goals that
are emerging in the face of this new dynamic, taking
into account the current political situation. We would
appreciate it if, in this new phase, the Committee
would reorient its tasks mainly towards providing
assistance to States and international institutions for
the implementation of the relevant measures adopted
in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Similarly, it
would also be a good idea for the Committee to provide
support and advice to Member States that are looking
for technical guidance regarding new cooperation
initiatives on Iran on issues that fall under the mandate
of the Committee.

