Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): At the outset, allow me
to thank Peru for providing us a platform to discuss the
important issue of the linkage between international
terrorism and organized crime.

The nexus between international terrorism and
organized crime is, by its nature, complex. What
complicates the matter further is a certain trend towards
the convergence between terrorist groups and organized
criminal networks, to the extent where a single entity
might simultaneously exhibit both criminal and
terrorist characteristics. Organized criminal networks
might use terrorism to produce fear and achieve certain
aims, while terrorist groups might use cybercrime and
trafficking in drugs, weapons, cultural heritage and
even human beings to finance their terrorist activities.

On that point, I would like to praise the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) and, more specifically,
the role played by the Netherlands in launching a policy
toolkit at the fifteenth GCTF Coordinating Committee
Meeting, held in Malaga in March. The toolkit serves
its purpose well by making the complex nexus between
organized crime and terrorism more comprehensible,
on the one hand, and by bringing to light useful best
practices, on the other.

Today's discussion gives us a necessary platform to
continue stressing the importance of taking seriously

the tackling of terrorist financing. Despite the success
of the global coalition's military campaign Inherent
Resolve in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham survives as an underground network and
continues to pose a major threat to the security of both
Iraq and Syria through its terrorist cells. It is clear that
they need money to finance their illegal activities - be
they the recruitment of new followers through online
and offline propaganda channels or the need for
equipment and weapons, as well as specific expertise
in explosives such as improvised explosive devices. In
that sense, blocking the financial channels of terrorist
organizations effectively serves to cut off the head of
the snake.

As my final point, I would like to stress the need
to continue working towards finding the right balance
between human rights protection and technology.
It is important to ensure greater transparency of
cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology, as the use
of cryptocurrencies, in general, is on the rise, including
by criminal networks.

