Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and the Director of the
Operational Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging, for their
briefings. We express our full support for their work.

Despite the numerous pronouncements made by the
Security Council on the situation in Yemen, including
the presidential statements of 15 June (S/PRST/2017/7)
and 9 August (S/PRST/2017/14), and in spite of the
repeated calls that the Council has made to the parties
with a view to their commitment to a cessation of
hostilities and initiation of dialogue to achieve a
political solution to the conflict, the situation in the
country has not improved, and the humanitarian crisis
unfortunately continues to worsen without signs of
progress.

Aside from the conflict, which has generated
nearly 3 million internally displaced persons, and has
left 9.8 million people in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance, according to data published on 1 October by
the World Health Organization, the cholera outbreak has
spread to 96 per cent of governorates in Yemen, causing
over 2,000 deaths and possibly infecting 750,000
people, a one third increase over the number reported
at our previous briefing, in August (see S/PV.8027),
where the figure was around 500,000 people.

Regrettably, the presence of armed groups,
checkpoints and indiscriminate airstrikes, especially in
the governorates of Al-Yauf, Marib, Sa'ada, Hudaydah
and Sana'a, among others, continue to hamper the
distribution and deployment of humanitarian assistance,
not only because of the transit and transit restrictions
that those entail, but because of the high risk that
humanitarian workers are subjected to when entering
those places, where they have been subject to attacks
with firearms on a number of occasions, the origin
of which should be a matter deserving of the careful
attention by the Council. In that regard, we reiterate to
the parties involved in the conflict that they must allow
and guarantee the security and integrity of the agencies
that provide humanitarian assistance. We also remind
them that it is prohibited to identify such agencies as
military targets by any reasoning. Moreover, they must
ensure the unconditional and unrestricted access of aid
to all places where it is needed.

With regard to the food shortage in Yemen, as
reported by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations last September, 60 per cent of the
population lives with food insecurity, and 7 million
people are at risk of famine. This situation is aggravated
by the fact that 90 per cent of the food staples required
by the population to survive are imported. Furthermore,
the ports that are currently providing services do not do
so in full capacity and are not capable of meeting the
demand. In that regard, we call on the parties to ensure
the full operation of all ports and routes of access to
the same, including the port of Hudaydah and Sana'a
airport.

For all of those reasons, we reiterate our call on the
Council and the membership in general to maintain a
unanimous and firm position in condemning belligerent
acts and campaigns that aggravate the crisis in Yemen
and that generate the damaging instability that threatens
the lives of millions of innocent people.

We also reiterate our call on the parties involved in
the conflict to comply with the provisions of resolution
2216 (2015), to commit to a cessation of hostilities
and to establish a sustained process of dialogue and
negotiation that will allow for a peaceful, inclusive and
orderly political transition that meets the demands and
aspirations of the Yemeni people, and that is framed in
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Yemen.

Finally, we consider it important to reiterate the
request made by the former Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, to
create an independent international body to investigate
possible violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights, thereby preventing impunity from
silencing the voices of the thousands of victims that this
conflict has claimed.

