Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Council once again on the
situation in Somalia. Addressing the Council remains
a great privilege. Let me also take this opportunity
to congratulate your country, Madam, the United
Kingdom, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month.

The African Union stands in solidarity with the
population of Beledweyne and the state of HirShabelle
in general, who have had their livelihoods disrupted by
the recent floods. The floods have affected a substantial
number of people, of whom an estimated 231,000
have been displaced. That tragedy is compounding
the effects of insecurity in and around Beledweyne,
resulting in a significant number ofpeople being forced
to migrate to areas where they can seek shelter and
assistance. In an attempt to mitigate the impact of the
floods, we have seen a Somali-led the response in which
the Federal Government of Somalia, the HirShabelle
regional Government and individual Somalis, including
politicians and civil society members, are responding
to the humanitarian crisis in HirShabelle, particularly
in Beledweyne.

Working in collaboration with local partners,
troops of the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) on the ground have helped to
transport people from flooded areas - particularly
vulnerable older people, women and young children-to
higher ground. AMISOM. troops have also been assisting
the regional Government in repairing roads and
bridges damaged by flood water. While humanitarian
partners are scaling up their response, much more is
still needed. AMISOM. will also soon be providing
blankets, mosquito nets and plastic sheeting to over 800
displaced families in and around Beledweyne. That will
build on the health care that AMISOM. and the military
are already providing in their operational sectors.

When I briefed this organ at the beginning of this
year (see S/PV.8440), I described what the African
Union saw as optimism coming from Somalia. As we
draw towards the end of 2019, I wish to state that there
are still signs of hope radiating from Somalia and for
its people. I would also like to add that those signs
of hope are still fragile and require our continuing
collective attention. In my briefing today, I will seek
to highlight those signs of hope, which if sustained and
properly harnessed as we approach 2020, will lead us
and Somalia towards lasting peace and security.

While the Federal Government is committed to
maintaining and enhancing cooperative relations with
federal member states, we see efforts being deployed
aimed at finding a solution to relations with Jubaland
and Puntland. In fact, since my briefing in August
(see S/PV.8601), we have witnessed commendable
steps being taken by the Federal Government aimed at
achieving reconciliation and conflict resolution across
Somalia. What happened yesterday at Villa Somalia
is of extreme significance to the future of detente
and inclusive politics in the country. The most senior
leaders of the country have chosen to meet and discuss
its issues. We should welcome that development and
collectively continue to encourage and support those
Somali initiatives and harness all opportunities to help
diffuse tension and promote understanding.

In Galmudug, we welcomed the efforts that led to the
successful reconciliation conference in Dhuusamarreeb
in September, at which the presence of AMISOM. troops
helped to enhance the required conducive environment.
We witnessed more than 700 representatives from
11 clans reach consensus on modalities aimed at
unifying Galmudug. The Dhuusamarreeb conference
represents an example not only of the progress made
in achieving inclusive politics but also of the solidarity,
positive concurrence and complementarity of efforts
between AMISOM. and the Somali National Army, on
the one hand, and civilians, on the other, in supporting
and helping to advance the political process across
Somalia. We need to continue to work to ensure that
the current misunderstandings in that regional state
are overcome and that the process follow and continue
its route. While AMISOM. troops will maintain their
presence in Dhuusamarreeb, with the consent of all
parties, including Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama'a, we look
forward to a peaceful outcome of the second phase of
the political process and urge all stakeholders to refrain
from any action that could delay the establishment of an
inclusive Galmudug administration.

We are equally encouraged by the momentum
gained through the peaceful resolution of the clan
dispute between the Xeraale and Huurshe communities,
an initiative led by Prime Minister Khayre in
September. Similar efforts have also been extended to
South-West state by the Federal Government. We have
seen the Federal Government work in partnership with
the South-West administration to undertake a series of
consultative visits to Baidoa, Bay, Hudur, Bakool and
Merca to engage local communities. The impact of that
outreach is bringing local communities closer to each
other and the Government. A good example of that is
the recently held Government-led social reconciliation
workshop for South-West traditional elders in October.

On the constitutional review process, the Minister
of Constitutional Affairs, the Oversight Committee
and the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission continue to meet, consult
and carry out outreach work. With most of the technical
work nearly completed, AMISOM. will continue to call
for dialogue and political engagement in line with the
2020 Mutual Accountability Framework commitments,
with a view to completing the debate and adopting the
federal constitution by June 2020.
Regarding elections preparations, the African
Union continues to see real commitment by south
Somalia to deliver on that key milestone. But before
speaking more about that progress, allow me to first
welcome the reaffirmation of the commitment by
Mr. Mohamed Farmajo in September at the General
Assembly (see A/74/PV.7) to hold universal elections in
the last quarter of 2020.

While the passage of the electoral bill and the
political pact bill remain critical next steps, we must
not lose sight of what has already been achieved.
Progress has been made during the past three months
on reviewing the electoral bill, with the commendable
work of the 15-member ad hoc parliamentary committee
completing consultations with all federal member
states. We also witnessed the recent positive steps in
the appointment of the national electoral security task
force and the development of the draft joint concept for
security for voter registration under the provisionally
approved list of potential voter registration sites.
The African Union will continue to work with the
Government and the National Independent Electoral
Commission on all aspects of electoral preparations.

In that regard, AMISOM. has realigned itself to
better support preparations for the elections. We now
have a dedicated AMISOM. election cell, the police
component of which, in cooperation with other partners,
has helped develop the draft joint concept for security
for voter registration, which is now being considered by
the electoral task force.

Furthermore, to ensure that the African Union
is strengthening its support to the electoral security
task force, I am pleased to report that, following a
meeting on 19 November with the Somali Police
Force Commissioner, General Ali Hassan Mohamed,
in his capacity as the electoral task force chair,
AMISOM. will be providing assistance to develop an
election communication strategy for public security.
The communication strategy will be an extension of
AMISOM's ongoing election awareness support to the
National Independent Electoral Commission, focusing
on persuasive communication to assure and deepen
confidence in the security preparations prior to, during
and after the 2020-2021 elections. That will also include
continuous outreach engagement with community
policing, with an emphasis on informing the general
population of their safety and security at the polls.

Al-Shabaab remains a threat to peace and security
in Somalia, with its targeting of innocent civilians,
Government facilities and personnel, security forces
and international partners, including AMISOM.
Despite the group's ability to destabilize, AMISOM. has
observed a decline in the group's activities since the
beginning of October. In our assessment, a combination
of three factors substantiate that fact.

First, 2019 continues to see an increase in the
number of lethal strikes against Al- Shabaab by partners,
particularly concentrated strikes in the Lower Shabelle
and Lower Juba areas. The impact of those strikes is
now forcing Al-Shabaab to disperse and hide where it
cannot be easily identified, isolated and targeted.

Secondly, with the arrival of the Somali rains,
Al- Shabaab has found it increasingly difficult to operate
along a number of main supply routes. In real terms,
those have seen a reduction in improvised explosive
device attacks and Al-Shabaab ambushes.

Thirdly, the successive and successful bridge town
operations, together with the mobile search and find
operations against Al-Shabaab, conducted jointly by
Somali security forces and AMISOM, have pushed
Al-Shabaab back. The resulting effect has been for
Al-Shabaab to contend with ceding more territory in
key areas. Despite the overall reduction in Al- Shabaab's
activities during the reporting period, Al-Shabaab
continues to focus on Mogadishu, in spite ofthere being
enhanced security measures now in place in the city.
An illustration ofAl-Shabaab's focus was witnessed on
13 October when Al-Shabaab fired nine mortar rounds
at the Aden Abdulle International Airport zone, within
which the AMISOM. and other partners of the United
Nations compounds are located. Those mortar attacks
resulted in eight people sustaining injuries.

Turning to the status of the implementation of the
transition plan, I am pleased to report that AMISOM,
in support of the Somali security forces, continues
to register tangible progress in implementing the
transition. Despite grappling with challenges on the
operational pillar of the transition, during the reporting
period AMISOM. successfully accomplished some key
tasks in support of the Somali security forces. Those
include capturing territories from Al-Shabaab and
transferring the security responsibility.

In August, AMISOM. and the Somali security forces
jointly recovered Awdheegle, the third bridge town in
Lower Shabelle. Awdheegle is still being jointly held
by AMISOM. and the Somali National Army. That is
building on our previous recovery operations of three
bridge towns in the Lower Shabelle.

As part of extending military operations under
the transition, also in August, AMISOM. conducted
targeted operations to disrupt Al-Shabaab's activities
in Cowsquori and Dare Salam, both in AMISOM
sector 2. Meanwhile, in Warsheikh in September, and
in line with the transitional requirements, AMISOM
transferred security responsibilities over that town to
the Somali Police Force. The Force is still holding that
town at present, and that is something ofwhich we must
take note.

As AMISOM. proceeds with the implementation of
its obligations under the transition plan, the next steps
would be to complete the recovery of the remaining
bridge towns in Lower Shabelle and proceed to
implement other earmarked benchmarks for the second
phase of the plan. To that effect, the current derails
are a factor that needs to be taken into account. The
other factor is the need to fill the current gaps with
regard to force generation. That is a central factor in
ourjoint effort to accomplish our mandated tasks in the
area of defence and security. Military pressure against
Al-Shabaab needs to be continuous and unremitting to
dependably yield the expected results. The enhancement
of our capacity to collect and process good, timely and
actionable intelligence and the mobility of the forces to
conduct effective targeted operations, with the required
elements of speed and surprise, combined with the
capacity to sustainably hold the recovered territory,
remain essential for us to achieve our transitional
objectives in the way they have been planned and
approved by the Council and by the African Union
Peace and Security Council.

For that, more well-trained and well-equipped
Somali battalions of the Somali National Army,
supported and complemented by other components of
the Somali security forces, are required in the theatre
of operations. We are cognizant of the contribution
of partners in that regard but the facts on the ground
clearly show that more support and a more sizeable
response are needed.

The African Union looks forward to the upcoming
force generation conference in Mogadishu in December
in terms of support for the transition requirements. We
equally welcome the decision of the European Union
to redirect part of its staff and support to funding the
federal Darwish training as part of the force generation
effort. In parallel with our operational activities on the
military front, the AMISOM. police continue to support
the enhancement of the institutional capacity of the
Ministry of Internal Security and HirShabelle regional
state, to mention but a few.

