The Secretary-General: Let me begin with an
update on the terrorist attack on United Nations House
in the Nigerian capital of Abuja. We have all
condemned this terrible act. As many of us have noted,
it was an assault on those who have devoted their lives
to helping others. This has been the second major
terrorist attack on United Nations premises this year.
The first, of course, was in Mazar-e-Sharif, where
seven people died, including three United Nations
staff.

In the Abuja incident, a total of 23 people were
killed, 11 of whom were United Nations staff,
including one international - a young Norwegian
woman named Ingrid Midtgaard, from Oslo. More than
80 were wounded. Within minutes of the initial reports,
I asked the Deputy Secretary-General, Asha-Rose
Migiro, and our head of security, Under-Secretary-
General Gregory Starr, to go to the scene. They
returned yesterday and have briefed me.

What we know is that this attack was the work of
a suicide bomber who rammed a sport utility vehicle at
high speed through the exit gates of the United Nations
compound. United Nations House in Abuja, home to
26 United Nations agencies and programmes, is a well-
built structure with robust security measures. This
attack, therefore, is cause for a serious reassessment,
not just in Nigeria and not just in high-threat locations,
but worldwide.

We will be undertaking a full review of the
incident itself and of our security measures at United
Nations House. We will also be initiating a global
threat review shortly. I will share the results with the
Council at the first opportunity. Meanwhile, we are
doing everything possible to assist the victims and their
families. That will include trauma counselling for those
who might need it.
This afternoon I will report to the General
Assembly, and on Thursday the Deputy Secretary-
General will hold a town hall meeting in New York to
discuss the tragedy. Clearly, the United Nations and
our people are being targeted more and more often by
terrorists worldwide. Too often, it seems, we are
considered a soft target.

The security of our staff working overseas must
be paramount. We must draw the lessons to be learned
from Abuja. And together, we must commit the effort
and resources to implement them. Our goal must be to
stay, and not to leave, in difficult security conditions.
We must continue to carry out our vital work and not
lock ourselves behind fortresses. We must manage risk,
not become risk-averse.

I would like to close by thanking His Excellency
President Goodluck Jonathan and the Government of
Nigeria for their assistance in the aftermath of the
attack. Once again, I extend my deep sympathies and
condolences to the victims and their loved ones, and I
salute the courage and dedication of our United
Nations team in Abuja, for Whom this is such a sad and
terrible blow.

Council members have seen the latest reports
from Libya. I think we can all be encouraged by the
current trends. Yesterday, we received confirmation
that members of Muammar Al-Qadhafi's family have
sought asylum in Algeria. The National Transitional
Council appears to be largely in control of Tripoli and
other cities. Fighting continues in some parts of the
country, most notably in Sirte, Sabha, Zuwarah and
points south. Yet I think that we may now hope for a
quick conclusion to the conflict and an end to the
suffering of Libya's people.

Over the past week, I have spoken on several
occasions with the Chairman of the National
Transitional Council, Mr. Mustafa Abdel J alil, and with
many other world leaders. We discussed the United
Nations role in Libya in the months ahead, including
such areas as election assistance, transitional justice
and policing, as well as urgent humanitarian needs.

We will continue these discussions in Paris on
Thursday at the summit-level meeting of the Libya
Support Group. My Special Adviser on post-conflict
planning for Libya, Mr. Ian Martin, and my Special
Envoy for Libya, Mr. Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib, will
accompany me, along with the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe.
11-48382
Meanwhile, on Friday 26 August, I held a video
teleconference meeting with the heads of the League of
Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the African Union and the European Union. All agreed
that, at this critical moment, the international
community must come together with an effective, well-
coordinated programme of action. All agreed, as well,
that the United Nations should lead that effort.

Following that meeting, the Council of the
League of Arab States held an extraordinary ministerial
session in Cairo on 27 August. I understand that there,
the League of Arab States agreed that the National
Transitional Council should fill the seat of Libya in
meetings of the League of Arab States. The meeting
also called on the United Nations to allow the National
Transitional Council to do the same at the United
Nations itself.

Also, on 26 August, the Deputy Secretary-
General participated at the African Union (AU) Peace
and Security Council meeting in Addis Ababa. There,
too, African leaders stressed the need for national
reconciliation and underscored the AU's commitment
to working with all Libyan stakeholders to stabilize the
country.

We must act quickly and decisively to meet the
considerable challenges ahead. The humanitarian
situation in Libya demands urgent action. We are
beginning to see signs of progress. According to some
reports, large caches of medical supplies and food were
discovered over the weekend by the transitional
authorities, apparently stockpiled by the former
regime. Hospitals are reopening. The World Food
Programme has sent in a large humanitarian convoy
from Tunisia, carrying water, medical supplies and
blood donated by the Government of Tunisia. The
World Health Organization is sending 45 tons of
medical supplies as part of that same effort.

Tripoli's seaport is now open and functioning -
an essential step forward in getting international relief
supplies and workers into the country. However, water
supplies are critically short. According to our latest
reports, an estimated 60 per cent of Tripoli's
population is without water and sanitation. UNICEF
engineers are working to repair the pumping stations
that conduct water from the Great Man-Made River to
the capital and other areas, but we do not know how
long it will take to restore service. Clearly, ongoing
security concerns make the situation precarious at best.
It is essential that sufficient fuel and spare parts
be available if we are to avoid further shut-downs of
the water system. Meanwhile, we are working urgently
to mobilize other resources for the delivery of water,
including tanker trucks. In the coming days, we will
likely request urgent international assistance in that
matter.

It was vitally important that the Sanctions
Committee acted to release $1.5 billion in frozen
Libyan assets for humanitarian assistance. The first
allocation of these assets - $110 million - has just
been made. Further action will be needed in the coming
days. I appeal to the Council to continue to be
responsive to the requests of the transitional authorities
for funding.

Also on the humanitarian front, let me note that
the International Organization for Migration
successfully evacuated approximately 1,000 migrants
and third-country nationals from Tripoli on 28 August.

Lastly, with regard to human rights, during recent
days we have seen growing evidence of summary
executions, torture and human rights violations. They
will be looked into by the International Commission of
Inquiry for Libya, which is expected to submit its first
oral update to the Human Rights Council on
19 September.

I cannot overstate the urgency of this moment.
Time is of the essence. The people of Libya are looking
to the international community for help. The
transitional Government will outline specific requests
in the coming days.

My aim is to get United Nations personnel on the
ground as quickly as possible, under a robust Security
Council mandate. My Special Adviser, Mr. Ian Martin,
has been consulting daily with the National
Transitional Council and other Libyan stakeholders, as
have I and other senior members of our team. In our
response, the United Nations will operate under three
fundamental principles.

The first principle is national ownership. Libya's
future is for Libyans to decide. We will act in
accordance with their needs and desires, not vice versa.

The second principle is rapid response and
delivery. Mr. Martin and his team have been engaged
in a preparatory process to enable the United Nations
to respond swiftly to the requests of the Libyan
authorities. It appears from our consultations with the
National Transitional Council that such requests will
focus mainly on five areas: restoring public security
and order and promoting the rule of law; leading
inclusive political dialogue, promoting national
reconciliation and determining the constitution-making
and electoral process; extending State authority,
including by strengthening emerging accountable
institutions and the restoration of public services;
protecting human rights, particularly of vulnerable
groups, and supporting transitional justice; and taking
immediate steps to initiate economic recovery.

Our third principle is effective coordination. Our
most important job will be to ensure that multilateral,
regional and bilateral efforts are complementary and
correspond to Libyan wishes. In turn, that will require
Libya's transitional authorities to provide clear short-
and longer-term priorities. Our teams on the ground
will work closely with the country's leadership to
ensure that confusion and duplication of effort are kept
to a minimum and that time and financial resources are
not wasted.
We are all acutely conscious of the magnitude of
the challenge in Libya and of the enormous opportunity
to help the Libyan people to build a more democratic,
prosperous and stable future. In coming to their
assistance, we must speak and act as one. In our
response to the post-conflict challenge, we must be
proactive and effective. Yet, at the same time, we must
be sensitive to the complex needs and desires of the
Libyan people themselves.

As I said earlier, the future of Libya must be led
and owned by the Libyan people themselves. Their
needs and priorities for national unity, reconciliation
and inclusiveness will be the foundation of our efforts
in the days and months to come.

