Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his briefing. We once again reiterate
to him our support and gratitude for the work he
is undertaking.

My delegation recognizes the efforts that the
people and the Government of Syria are carrying out
in the fight against Da'esh. We reiterate our vigorous
condemnation of all acts of terrorism and underscore
that any such act is by its very nature criminal and
unjustifiable, irrespective of where, when and by
whom it is committed. In that regard, we believe it is
important to take all the measures necessary to avoid in
the short term the re-organization or emergence of new
terrorist groups. We stress that it is imperative to pool our
efforts to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) and achieve the four key objectives of the
Geneva negotiations, namely, combating terrorism
and ensuring governance, a new constitution and new
elections to be held under the supervision of the United
Nations. We believe that any unilateral military action
is totally illegal and contravenes the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, such actions
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic and jeopardize the roll-out
of the road map put together under the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015).

We welcome all the meetings that have been held at
various levels aimed at a stable peace, and we encourage
all the relevant stakeholders to align their efforts to
achieve the political decisions that are urgently needed.
In that regard, we highlight the agreements reached
this month by the Presidents of Russia and the United
States on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation meeting. We underscore their commitment
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, to
a reduction of violence and to compliance with the
ceasefire agreements and conditions that will make
possible a lasting political solution to the conflict.

We also welcome the memorandum of principles
reached in Amman on 8 November among the Kingdom
of Jordan, the Russian Federation and the United States,
which reinforced the ceasefire initiative to continue
efforts to reduce and eliminate the presence of foreign
terrorist fighters and foreign combatants in Syria in
order to guarantee lasting peace.

We highlight the meeting hosted in Sochi on
22 November, whose outcomes and commitments
between Russia, Iran and Turkey reaffirm the resolve
to eliminate terrorist organizations, such as Da'esh
and the Al-Nusra Front. Such commitments will help
pave the way to reduce violenc and halt the flow of
refugees and allow us to begin the work to ensure the
safe and dignified return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

We welcome, and are following, the outcomes of the
latest meeting in Riyadh, where the opposition reached
agreements that could contribute to a peaceful solution
to this stage of the conflict. We also welcome the
efforts made in the framework of the current meetings
in Astana, which to date have become an important
aspect of the process of setting up de-escalation areas,
and thereby serving as a way of reducing violence
and ensuring stability in Syria. We hope that in the
upcoming rounds of the Astana process in December
we will be able to forge new agreements to benefit the
Syrian population.

We also look forward to the upcoming fresh rounds
of the Geneva consultations, where the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) should continue to serve as
the road map, all the more so if there is a commitment
on the part of the parties concerned to move further
along that path.

Nevertheless, we believe that it is also important to
make headway on the issue of detainees, hostages and
missing persons. That is a subject on which much more
needs to be done. It is also an issue that must feature
on the agenda of the upcoming Geneva meeting and in
further upcoming rounds of talks.

In conclusion, we reiterate our view that the only
way of resolving this conflict is through an inclusive
political process, which is led by and for the benefit ofthe
Syrian people. That will allow for a peaceful resolution
of the dispute between all parties involved. Such a
political transition must also safeguard the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and independence of Syria
through the means provided for under the Charter of
the United Nations.

