Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretariat and the
United Nations Special Coordinator, Mr. Serry, for the
briefing given us on the situation in the Middle East.
We agree with his evaluation of the recent events in
Palestinian-Israeli relations and also on the Syrian-
Lebanese track.

The position of the Russian Federation with
regard to the situation in the Middle East was given by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, in
his statement to the Security Council on 16 December
(see S/PV.6045). Therefore, I shall limit my statement
to a few remarks.

Of course, near the end of 2008, we would like to
have obtained more results from the Annapolis process,
and we agree with the concern over the humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories and the continued
settlement activities. We are also concerned over the
rocket attacks into Israel. But it is still important that,
in taking stock of the past year, the international
community be able to make some important
observations.

Russia is pleased with the results of the
ministerial meeting of the Quartet that took place on
15 December and its declaration, and Council
resolution 1850 (2008), adopted on 16 December. We
are grateful to those Member States of the Security
Council that supported this resolution, drafted by the
Russian Federation and the United States. In both
documents, we see set forth the primacy and the
irreversibility of the peace process in the Middle East,
which was designed to ensure the existence of two
States, Palestinian and Jewish, living in good-
neighbourliness, peace and security. We are convinced
that the parties must continue their painstaking work in
seeking mutually acceptable solutions to all essential
items on the bilateral agenda.

We cannot allow the political process in the
region to stall. Therefore, the Quartet and the Security
Council have reaffirmed their commitment to continue
and intensify joint efforts, which include regard for the
recently reaffirmed Arab Peace Initiative, which was
designed to establish the best possible atmosphere for
continuing the Arab-Israeli dialogue on all tracks in
2009.

It is incumbent upon the international community,
and particularly the Quartet, to help to ensure that the
negotiation process continue without interruption.
Russia unswervingly upholds a policy that favours the
Quartet's consistent fulfilment of the mission for which
it was in fact created.

The Quartet must energetically tackle the issues
of the establishment of a just peace and security in the
region, especially in the current serious circumstances.
We will in future try to enhance the effectiveness of the
Quartet and to support the efforts of Special
Representative Blair and the development of its close
cooperation with the League of Arab States in finding a
comprehensive Arab-Israeli settlement, including the
organization of an international conference on the
Middle East in the capital of Russia in 2009.

One of the priority issues in the context of a
Middle East settlement is the restoration of an intra-
Palestinian agreement on the basis of the observation
of the criteria set forth by the Quartet. That and other
urgent issues related to progress in the peace process in
the Middle East will be discussed in the course of the
forthcoming visit to Moscow of the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas.

Russia firmly and energetically supports the
efforts of the President of Lebanon and the
Government of National Unity to strengthen
agreement, State institutions and the constitutional
order in that country on the basis of a dialogue between
the leading political forces and the ethnic and religious
communities. We are prepared to continue to promote
the strengthening of the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, and also its peaceful,
democratic and crisis-free development, which is in the
interest of the Lebanese and the Middle East region as
a whole. In fact, these ideas were imparted during a
recent to visit to Moscow by the Lebanon's Defence
Minister, Mr. Elias Al-Murr, with whom there was also
discussion of issues of further development of
cooperation between our countries.

