Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to condemn in the strongest
terms the attack that took place today in Somalia and to
convey our sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of Somalia and to the families ofthe Victims.

I should like also to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for having convened this important
debate. We express our gratitude to the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson; Mr. Kofi Annan;
Ms. Caroline Anstey; and Ms. Rebeca Grynspan for
their briefings and the very useful information that they
provided.

Natural resources play a driving role in national
economies, and their exploitation can be a positive
factor in promoting development and strengthening
the mechanisms of social cohesion, co-development
and cooperation, in accordance with the provisions of
international law. There is no doubt that the transparent
and inclusive management of natural resources, - in
harmony with the rule of law, reflecting the political
orientations of the constitutional institutions of States,
and responsive to general and local interests-contribute
to economic growth and stability.

It is important to recall in the context of this debate
that every State freely enjoys full and permanent
sovereignty over all its wealth, natural resources
and economic activity, and may therefore use such
resources in line with its own national interests. All
Governments are responsible for ensuring conditions
conducive to the equitable distribution of the income
derived from the exploitation of natural resources in
order to promote humane, sustainable and inclusive
development, pursuant to its own priorities.

If the issue of natural resources is being addressed
in the context of today's debate, it is unfortunately
because, in some cases, such resources - being
either abundant or rare - contribute to sparking or
perpetuating conflict. In that regard, the Security
Council has established mechanisms to limit the use
of natural resources in financing or prolonging crises
or conflicts situations, particularly in the Mano River
basin and the Great Lakes region. With a view to
brevity, I wish to insist on the following three aspects
of this issue.

First, the difficulties encountered by States in
monitoring the vast expanses that harbour their natural
resources, controlling their borders, regulating the
exploitation of their natural resources and managing
them correctly are serious problems that need to
be addressed. It is important for the international
community and the various United Nations agencies to
coordinate their efforts better and provide the support
necessary to countries emerging from or in conflict
in order to strengthen their institutions and national
capacities, in full respect for their sovereignty. We
believe that the Peacebuilding Commission also has an
important role to play in that respect.

Furthermore, fair economic relations that ensure
sufficient resources for populations affected by conflict
and promote the sustainable exploitation of natural
resources can contribute to efforts to re-establish and
build peace. In that regard, the international financial
institutions, subregional and regional integration
processes, the private sector and civil society can play
a lead role.

Finally, the channels whereby natural resources can
contribute in some cases to conflict are closely linked to
the economic and social structures ofthe State, stability
and good governance. They therefore require integrated
approaches promoting peace and development. That is
why we believe that this important theme should be
considered in a context that transcends the issue of
peace and security. We should also address the issues
of development and the environment in the framework
of broadened consultations between the various United
Nations entities concerned.

