Mr. Sallah (Gambia): The situation in Rwanda is one
of the saddest in that troubled African region. The long
duration of the fighting in Rwanda has already claimed too
many lives and left a substantial number of other persons
internally displaced and an even greater number seeking
refuge in neighbouring countries.

International efforts to solve the problem and to bring
peace to the region are still proving elusive. My delegation
wishes to commend all those Governments and international
organizations that participated in the search for peace in the
Great Lakes region, particularly in Rwanda.

The situation in Rwanda is undoubtedly a threat to
peace and security in the region. As such, coordinated
international action is required to alleviate the suffering of
the Rwandan people and to help restore peace in Rwanda.

My delegation believes that the people of Rwanda bear
the ultimate responsibility for national reconciliation and the
reconstruction of their country. The Government of the
Gambia is, however, deeply disturbed by the magnitude of
the human suffering caused by the conflict. We are also
deeply concerned at the reports of continuing systematic,
widespread and flagrant Violations of international
humanitarian law in Rwanda. The victims of conflicts of
this nature are often innocent civilians, including women
and children.

It is in realization of this fact, and because of the
responsibility to ensure the maintenance of peace and
security the world over, that the Security Council and the
international community took steps to restore peace in
Rwanda. But ending a war is not easy, let alone one in
which the parties have easy access to war-making
materials.

In order to stem the flow of such war-making
materials to the warring parties, the Security Council, by
its resolutions 918 (1994) of 17 May 1994, 997 (1995) of
9 June 1995 and 1011 (1995), of 16 August 1995, placed
an arms embargo on Rwanda and on the warring parties.
Notwithstanding this move, arms continued to flow into
Rwanda as the relevant resolutions were violated with
impunity. This state of affairs necessitated the
establishment of the International Commission of Inquiry,
with the mandate to collect information on the sale or
supply of arms and related materiel to the warring parties
in violation of the resolutions.

The International Commission of Inquiry did an
excellent job in the discharge of its mandate. In its three
reports, it amply and ably catalogued the sources of arms
flows in Rwanda. My delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to commend the members of the Commission
for the work they have done.

The letter of the Secretary-General dated 22 January
1998 addressed to the President of the Security Council,
contained in document S/1998/63, clearly indicates that
the Commission did not finish its work. The Commission
also indicated in its report its desire to obtain information
from certain Governments in order to bring its
investigation to a successful conclusion.

The flow of arms in the Great Lakes region, and in
Rwanda in particular, continues to be a major cause of
concern. It is imperative, therefore, that the International
Commission of Inquiry be renewed so that it can carry on
its unfinished work. The draft resolution under
consideration would do just that. The Commission's
mandate is to collect information and investigate the
supply of arms to former Rwandan government forces,
identify the parties involved and make recommendations
relating to the illegal flow of arms in the Great Lakes
region.

My delegation believes that the reactivation of the
International Commission of Inquiry would contribute
positively to ending the persisting conflict in Rwanda and
the illegal flow of arms in the entire Great Lakes region.
The success of the Commission would, however, depend
on the cooperation of those States concerned in which the
Commission will carry out its mandate.

 

While my delegation fully supports the draft resolution
under consideration, the Government of the Gambia would
like to urge the Governments of all those States concerned
to cooperate fully with the Commission in the discharge of
its mandate and also to honour their obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

