Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

In 1992, I saw personally the horrible results of war
when I visited Beirut from my posting in Damascus.
I saw a city destroyed, and I saw the lives of people
damaged. At that time, I realized that there is one
key lesson from war: that we have to do our utmost to
prevent it and that the search for peace is a common
moral imperative.

Here I will address the issues of prevention,
accountability and reconciliation.

When it comes to prevention, strengthening
the international legal order is crucial. A stronger
international legal order reduces the chances of conflict
and is vital for the peaceful settlement of conflicts.

Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations is
crystal-clear to that effect and gives concrete options.
It is encouraging to see that these peaceful settlement
mechanisms are being used more and more often. Let
me give two examples.
The Netherlands strongly supports the United
Nations as a global actor in the field of mediation,
including through our substantial funding for the
Department of Political Affairs, and Jeff Feltman this
morning said important words to that effect.

When it comes to thejudicial settlement ofconflicts,
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, both housed in the Peace Palace,
are global symbols of the pursuit of peace by means of
law. Last year we celebrated the 100th anniversary of
the Peace Palace, and The Hague, as we know, has been
labelled the legal capital of the world.

Another crucial element of prevention is early
warning of conflicts. My Government highly values
the initiative of the United Nations under the "Rights
up front" action plan, which is very closely linked
to the very important concept of the responsibility
to protect, which we wholeheartedly support. The
United Nations has clearly demonstrated the close link
between peace, development and human rights. Human
rights violations function as an early-warning signal of
potential conflicts, and the Security Council should act
accordingly. We believe, and I would like to echo my
New Zealand colleague in saying, that there should be
better interaction between the countries on the Council
and those that are not on the Council - that there is
room for improvement.

When conflicts do occur, the United Nations must
make sure, and let me here echo Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson, that we have the reporting and
that we have the type of people who can do the work on
the ground on human rights and on the political side.

Mr. President, accurate reporting by the United
Nations is crucial to accountability and reconciliation,
as you mentioned in the concept note (S/2014/30, annex). I would like also to reiterate that accountability
is a condition for durable reconciliation and peace.
Mass atrocities and international crimes should never
go unpunished, regardless of whom the perpetrator is.
A direct link exists between prevention, protection and
prosecution, as my Minister, Mr. Timmermans, made
clear during the 10-year celebration of the International
Criminal Court. Prosecution also has a crucial
preventative effect.

Mr. President, as you stated, the narrative of a
conflict is important for reconciliation and resolution.
It is crucial that objective data and proof be conserved,
both during and after conflicts. The Netherlands, by
hosting and funding the Syria Justice and Accountability
Centre, is doing exactly that in the case of the current
Syria crisis.

The conservation of the records of the international
tribunals is equally important, as a point of reference
for the origins ofpast wrongs and future reconciliation.
The Dutch National Archives serve as the depository
for the Nuremberg Tribunal and the Special Court for
Sierra Leone.

As our colleague from Namibia said, in all phases of
conflict, before, during or after, the position of women
deserves specific attention. Women are crucial to the
prevention of conflicts, to protection during conflicts
and to reconciliation after conflicts. Therefore my
Government has worked closely with UN-Women in
recent months so as to have a group of Syrian women
invited to Geneva and to New York. We thank the
Security Council for having received them.

Allow me to conclude by reminding all of us that
the tools for lasting peace exist. The burden is upon
us to use them effectively. May our work be guided by
the wise words of Baruch Spinoza, who said, "Peace is
not an absence of war, it is a virtue, a state of mind, a
disposition for benevolence, for confidence, for justice".

Let us work towards a world in which we are partners
in bringing about peace, justice and development. It is
the ambition of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to be a
partner in that endeavour.

