Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, as the Ambassador of Kuwait
did, allow me to express our most heartfelt condolences
for the victims of Hurricane Florence and other natural
disasters in other parts of the world.

We also wish to welcome the representatives of
Japan and Korea to this morning's debate. We thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting, as
well as Ms. DiCarlo for her informative briefing.

On 30 August, the Security Council gathered to
hear the briefing on the midterm report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006). At its most recent meeting on this topic,
the Council ended up discussing the reasons behind
the blocking of the report as well as some members'
disagreement about certain aspects of its content. As
we have always said, we believe that the members of
the Council know better than anyone the difficulties
we encounter in discharging our mandate when we lack
unanimity among our members. That is why we call for
the work and decisions of the Committee to be reached
by consensus. The same is true for the case under
consideration - we must ensure that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea scrupulously adheres to
and implements the sanctions unanimously adopted by
the Council.

After the hopeful developments concerning the
commitment to denuclearize the Korean peninsula
expressed in April by the leader of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Kim Jong-un, alongside his
counterpart, Moon Jae-in, President of the Republic of
Korea, and later in Singapore during the June meeting
with Donald Trump, President of the United States
of America, with agreements that included a set of
principles to denuclearize the Korean peninsula, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes that the leaders
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea will
honour those voluntarily agreed commitments and seek
continued cooperation with the Security Council in order
to fulfil its obligations under the Council's resolutions.

We are here to do what is right, namely, to promote
international peace and security. As such, we must
respect and truly analyse the information or concerns
advanced by any member of the Council. In the case
under consideration, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea will always promote international law, nuclear
non-proliferation and negotiation. Those elements will
always guide our position.

We must come to an immediate and common
understanding of the aspects that affected the
stalemate in the negotiations undertaken in June
and April between the United States of America and
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and the
Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, respectively, on the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.

The world's nuclear weapons, many of them on
instant alert, continue to be counted in the thousands.
If we want to prevent cascading nuclear proliferation,
we need a major international effort and a sincere
will to destroy them all. That is the position of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea - we must destroy all
nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction
in order for the world to live in peace and tranquility
without having to fear the constant threat posed by
such weapons.

