Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank all the
briefers for the information that they provided us at the
beginning of this meeting.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following developments in the situation and the increase
in tensions in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. We
regret that the situation is increasingly deteriorating and
express our concern that, if the situation continues on
its current path, we may well arrive at an unsustainable
and undesirable scenario for both the Venezuelan
people and the international community. I would like
to state that Equatorial Guinea condemns all acts that
could jeopardize respect for human rights, that we
believe in freedom of expression and that all peaceful
demonstrations must be respected, as long as they
take place in adherence to the relevant laws in force in
the country.

I reaffirm my country's commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, which
categorically prohibit the use of force and advocate for
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
all States Members of the United Nations. We share the
concern of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees that the humanitarian situation in Venezuela
is going from bad to worse.

While we commend the timely and notable
solidarity of the countries of the region and the noble
work of the humanitarian agencies that are supporting
the 10 countries of the region hosting millions of
Venezuelans, it is nonetheless necessary that those
countries continue to keep their borders open and
ease their entry restrictions. In that regard, and as an
example, we acknowledge the efforts to encourage
international solidarity that Cuba has made and is
making to support many countries, not only in its region
but in other regions, in particular Africa, including my
own country, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, in the
areas of health and education, among others.

We are facing a real refugee and migrant crisis.
Approximately 4 million Venezuelans have left their
country. Given that situation, more must be done,
based on the Global Compact on Refugees, to provide
additional support for those who are leaving Venezuela
as well as for the countries that are receiving them.
Similarly, we call for the cooperation of those concerned
to ensure that the provision of humanitarian assistance
adheres to the regulations governing humanitarian aid
and that it reaches those in need without discrimination
or distinction of any kind.

Moreover, we remain convinced that, as the crisis
is a national problem of Venezuela, dialogue and
negotiations among national political actors are the best
way to overcome it. In that regard, it is crucial that the
parties concerned set up a negotiating table at which
the representatives of international organizations,
especially the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, serve as impartial mediators.

We welcome the Montevideo mechanism, the goal
of which is to preserve peace in Venezuela, based on
the principles of non-interference and the peaceful
resolution of the conflict.

We believe that, given this tense and turbulent
situation, all parties, whether directly involved or
not, should refrain from making statements or taking
actions that could be considered a threat ofuse of force,
so as to not substantially raise tensions further and lead
to an escalation in violence and cause greater harm.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that the crisis in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela requires all national
and international stakeholders to prioritize the interests
of the Venezuelan people over any personal or partisan
interests. Therefore, we once again urge political
actors to increase their efforts to facilitate a peaceful
negotiation scenario and to accept both the good offices
of the Secretary-General in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the involvement of United Nations
agencies and regional and subregional organizations in
order to reach a productive and sustainable agreement
for the political, economic and social strengthening of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

