Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I have
the honour and privilege to speak on behalf of the
presidency of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). I wish at the outset to welcome
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nicolas Tiangaye,
Prime Minister of the Central African Republic. I wish
to express to my congratulations and admiration for the
sacrifice he is making to save his country.

I should also like to welcome the presence of
Ms. Margaret Vogt, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Central African Republic. I
have taken note of her imporant and moving statement
on the situation in the Central African Republic.

I should like to quote His Excellency Mr. Idriss
Deby Itno, President of the Republic of Chad in his
capacity as the current Chairman of of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
speaking to his peers on 18 April at N'Djamena during
an extraordinary ECCAS summit on the situation in
Chad:

"The Central African Republic is like a wound
in the heart of Central Africa. Despite all remedies
proferred to resolve the crisis in the country, the
wound only appears to have been healed. We need
to engage seriously to end the situation of recurring
instability - this time decisively, I hope."

We must ensure that the wound does not turn into
gangrene and infect the entire subregion. The tell-tale
signs of such contagion are already present, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
clearly spelled out. Since 24 March, the security and
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic,
which had already been worrisome enough, has
deteriorated considerably. Uncontrolled armed groups,
comprised of many thousands of men, continue to
plunder, extort and commit atrocities across the extent
of the country's territory. The country's people await
in distress, in vain, concrete action by the international
community and the Economic Community of Central
African States in better protecting them.

The international community has condemned the
unconstitutional change that occurred in the Central
African Republic, as has the Economic Community
of Central African States in not recognizing the self-
proclaimed President. Subsequently, realpolitik led
ECCAS to advocate a plan for ending the crisis that,
while restoring some level of law and order, would take
into account the realities on the ground. The institutions
for an l8-month transition have therefore been put
in place, including a road map for the transitional
Government in order to redress the situation. The
political Agreements signed at Libreville on 11 January
set out the core commitments for the transition period.

As the Council is aware, following the coup, an
extraordinary ECCAS summit was held at N'Djamena
on 3 April. In addition to ECCAS member States,
participants also included His Excellency Mr. Jacob
Zuma, President of the Republic of South Africa, His
Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, President of the Republic of
Benin, as well as the United Nations, the European Union
and the International Organization of la Francophonie.
That meeting not only condemned the seizure of power
by force in the Central African Republic, but it also
called the leader of the Seleka coalition, Mr. Michel
Djotodia, the self-proclaimed President, to comply with
the Libreville Agreements.

At the end of the summit, the ECCAS Heads of
State proposed setting up a panel including all the
forces of the country capable of acting as the executive
branch and a constituent assembly. That is to take place
in the context of widespread involvement on the part
both of the Libreville signatories and civil society or
political elements. The principle of supporting the
transition through a monitoring committee and the
establishment of an International Contact Group,
including regional and international organizations
and bilateral and multilateral partners, was also
agreed to. All stakeholders in the Central African
Republic, including the self-proclaimed President, have
unconditionally accepted the road map proposed by the
ECCAS summit.

Against that backdrop, according to the most
recent information available to us, on the basis of broad
consultations, a National Transitional Council has been
put in place to act as a constituent assembly that involves
all of the country's stakeholders. As the Prime Minister
has emphasized, this constituent assembly's main task
is to draft a constitution in preparation for elections
within 18 months. The National Transitional Council
elected the head of the Sele'ka coalition as President for
the transitional period. However, the Council should be
expanded to make it much more legitimate and better
represent the people of the Central African Republic.

Prime Minister Tiangaye, appointed under the
Libreville Agreements, has had his term extended to
include greater powers, and he cannot be removed
during the transition period. If circumstances require,
the transitional President and the Prime Minister may,
by mutual agreement, carry out a reorganization of
the Government. The transitional President, Prime
Minister and other members of the transitional
Government cannot stand in the next elections. Under
the terms of the transition, a constitutional referendum
and parliamentary and presidential elections will be
organized on the basis ofa legal system and a consensual
time table will be established for a return to undisputed
democratic and constitutional order. It is clear that
nothing is possible without security for persons and
property, or without the material and financial resources
required by the transitional authorities to carry out their
duties. It is precisely to address such issues that ECCAS
agreed to establish an International Contact Group,
which held its first meeting in Brazzaville 3 May.

On the security front, it is imperative to neutralize
the armed gangs. To that end, we must bear in mind
the ECCAS N'Djamena declaration of 18 April,
which emphasizes the need for the cantonment of all
uncontrolled armed elements. It should also be recalled
that, in order to ensure a minimum of security for the
country, the Central Africa Multinational Force should
be increased to 2,000 troops, while the international
community should be strongly urged to support
MICOPAX with material and financial resources
in order to increase its workforce and enhance its
effectiveness. The Commission of the African Union
is called upon to take appropriate measures to evaluate
MICOPAX needs in the areas of staff, equipment
and financing. The task of generating forces based
on a concept of operations and a concept of logistics
support should have the support of Africa and the entire
international community.

The international community, in particular the
Security Council, has a duty to extend solidarity and
assistance to the Central African Republic, which is
in dire straits given the political and social chaos that
prevails in the country.

In the meantime, the Economic Community of
Central African States is doing everything in its power
to aid the people of the Central African Republic.
Its modest forces are working on the ground to help
the transitional authorities reduce insecurity as
much as possible. It is imperative that Africa and the
international community as a whole commit to concrete
action alongside ECCAS and get behind the transition
in order to help people in danger.

In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
that the transitional President of the Central African
Republic has just begun a visit to the countries of
the subregion, starting with Chad. On that occasion, The President (spoke in French): Thcrc arcno more
President Deby Itno, in his capacity as the current names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Chairman of ECCAS, urged the transitional President Council members to informal consultations to continue
to scrupulously respect his commitments, particularly our discussion on the subject.

that of ensuring that order and security are rapidly

restored and human rights respected. The meeting rose at 12'3') p.m.
