Ms. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Let me
add my words of appreciation to you, Madam President,
for selecting such an important topic for today's
open debate and for your delegation's excellent and
comprehensive concept note (S/2015/599, annex) on the
subject. This demonstrates once again your constant
dedication to the issue before us today.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union (EU). Given the detailed
EU statement, I would like to share with the Security
Council just a few additional thoughts from our national
perspective.

We share the View, as presented in the concept note,
that profound changes in the security environment and
the many new challenges linked to it have led to the
increased relevance and role of regional organizations.
Cooperation at the regional level can very often be
the most effective way of addressing many of today's
challenges, such as irregular migration, human
trafficking and smuggling, internal conflicts, energy
shortages or cybercrimes.

Regional organizations are often much better
positioned and equipped to understand and react to
the root causes of armed conflicts in their regions.
Many recent examples have shown the importance of
the involvement of regional organizations in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in mediation. The
role of the African Union in the resolution of the Mali
conflict, the positive engagement of the Economic
Community of West African States in finding a
peaceful solution to the political crisis in Burkina Faso,
and the continued efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to bring to an end to the
crisis situation in South Sudan are only a few examples
of the involvement of regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In that context, we see the need to develop closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in fields such as early
warning, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Let me recall that establishing strategic
and operational partnerships between the United Nations
and such organizations was recognized in the 2005
World Summit Outcome. Also, two important reports
published this year - by the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and by
the Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture - have
shown that the United Nations cannot succeed alone. We
should now do our best to turn their recommendations
into practice.

Europe has the longest and greatest experience in
building collective security institutions at the regional
level. This year we celebrate the fortieth anniversary
of the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, which laid the
foundation for the establishment of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The Ukrainian crisis has presented one of the
greatest challenges in the region in the field of security
issues. During that crisis, the OSCE has showed a solid
degree of efficiency and relevance and proved that it
is still worth a substantial investment to make it even
more effective. Poland would like to emphasize the
special role of the OSCE in the process of de-escalation
of the conflict in Ukraine. Unfortunately, not all parties
members of the OSCE have adequately supported the
efforts aimed at the success of the peace process. It is
also important that the safety and security of OSCE
personnel engaged in those activities be guaranteed by
all parties involved, and supported by the Members of
the United Nations, as is the case with peacekeeping
operations.

We recognize that sustainable development is
an important factor in addressing the root causes of
conflicts and tensions. Poland is the current President
of the Council of the Baltic Sea States. One of the
priorities of our presidency is to develop a new agenda
for sustainable development after 2015, which will pave
the way for the regional implementation of the global
sustainable development goals being elaborated in the
framework of the United Nations.

Finally, let me conclude by emphasizing the
importance of coordination and cooperation both
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
and among regional organizations themselves. I am
convinced that only by acting together, with the United
Nations at the centre of the multilateral system, and
with effective regional organizations having properly
developed capacities in the fields of early warning,
mediation, conflict prevention and resolution, can we
tackle the complex security challenges we are facing
today.

