Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the course of the Balkan crisis, the
region witnessed a variety of atrocities, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
the investigation of all crimes committed during the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina with respect to all
ethnic groups, including Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats. Do
we need to ask ourselves the question of who suffered
the most? If one looks at overall result of a decade of
conflict the territory the former Yugoslavia - when
hundreds of thousands of Serbs were driven from
their traditional places of residence - it is impossible
to avoid the conclusion that they suffered as much as
others, if not more.

In the region and the world, we have before us a
fundamentally important task, namely, to achieve full
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why we
support the initiative to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement through
steps aimed at rallying all peoples of the region in order
to ensure that the Balkans can move together towards
greater stability, security and inter-ethnic peace.

When a delegation from Bosnia and Herzegovina
first approached us about the need to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the tragedy at Srebrenica, we
agreed that it should be done in a solemn manner, given
the special sensitivity of the issue for people living in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region as a whole. We
said that what we needed to do was to emphasize the
positive ground that has been covered and to look to
the future. That is exactly what the delegation of the
United Kingdom was saying at the beginning when it
stated that it was ready to prepare a Security Council
draft resolution. However, the implementation of this
initiative has taken a different direction.

The draft resolution (S/2015/508) submitted by
the United Kingdom turned out to be unhelpful,
confrontational and politically motivated. It contains
distortions as a result of which the blame for the past is
basically placed on one people. The approach whereby
one responsible party is singled out for a war crime is
not legitimate and could result in even greater division
within Bosnian society. From the very beginning, we
tried to ensure that the document was balanced. We
proposed an alternative option based on a forward-
looking approach; however, our statements were
ignored.

In addition, the authors of the draft resolution used
the anniversary of the tragic events at Srebrenica to
introduce certain concepts that have not been agreed at
the international level, including intrusive approaches
to human rights that could lead to interference in the
internal affairs of States.

The British draft resolution immediately aroused an
extremely painful reaction in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and beyond. The diametrically opposed proposals
coming from the various entities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina serve to illustrate that the draft resolution
before us will not promote peace in the Balkans, but
will instead doom the region to tension and make the
prospects for sustainable peace ever more remote. That
reaction is in evidence in the letters addressed to the
members of the Security Council and to the Secretary-
General by the Serbian member of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the President of the Republika
Srpska and the President and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia. We also received similar letters.

This issue has been the subject of considerable
controversy in Bosnia and Herzegovnia - so much
so that we can even talk about the real threat that it
could undermine the country's stability, so hard-won
through the implementation of the Dayton Agreement.
In addition, more broadly, we cannot overlook the
attempts to exert political pressure on Banja Luka and
Belgrade.

We are convinced that the role of the Security
Council should be to strengthen the foundations
of international peace and security, rather than
undermining them. Everyone must do his own job.
Let historians analyse the vicissitudes of the conflict
in the former Yugoslavia and its genesis, including the
role of the various countries and alliances that took
hasty decisions. Let experts help the Secretariat and
the international community to understand where our
weaknesses lay. But let us not immerse the Security
Council in historical events, for we already face too
many unresolved issues in the contemporary world.
Let them do their work. Let them give us the necessary
assessments. Let the national and international
tribunals render their verdicts. Justice must prevail.
All perpetrators, regardless of their ethnic or religious
affiliation, must be punished.

Given that there is no consensus on this issue in
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself - as the Council is
aware, neither in the country's Parliament or among the
members of the Presidency - the Council's adoption
of this draft resolution in its present form would be
completely counterproductive and lead to greater
tension in the region.

A major commemoration will be held in Srebrenica
on 11 July. It is important to note that the Serbian
leadership will participate in the event, and it would be
wrong for us in the Security Council to prejudge it by
adopting a destructive document or by demonstrating
that the Council's members are split. We therefore
appeal to the authors of the draft resolution and to you,
Mr. President, not to put the draft resolution to the vote.
Otherwise, we will be forced to vote against it for the
reasons I have set out here.

If it turns out to be inevitable, our negative vote will
not mean that we are indifferent to the suffering of the
relatives of the victims of the tragedy at Srebrenica and
elsewhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We ourselves
have been through a lot.

In future, we will continue to make the utmost effort
to consistently implement the Dayton Peace Agreement
and effectively contribute to further normalization
of the situation in the Balkan region, including by
promoting reconciliation, ensuring that there is a
genuine collective security system and promoting an
atmosphere of trust and cooperation. We believe that is
something all of us need to aim for.

I would like to reiterate my proposal not to put to
the vote the draft resolution we have before us.

