Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month, and to
assure you of our support. I also warmly congratulate
Ambassador Karen Pierce on the United Kingdom's
excellent presidency last month. And I thank Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Mr. Robert Mardini and Archbishop
Warda for their very informative briefings.

Iraq, a country that has suffered so much, is going
through a period that is critical to its democratic future.
Since 1 October, the Iraqi people have been making

legitimate demands - demands for a life in dignity
and freedom, as Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert has just
pointed out - in the context of demonstrations that

have remained essentially peaceful. The systematic
crackdown on demonstrators and the excessive and
disproportionate use of force against them, which
has led to the deaths of more than 400 Iraqis, is
unacceptable. France strongly condemns them. We
extend our condolences to the families of the victims
and our support to the injured. The circumstances of
such repression must be fully brought to light, and
those responsible must be brought to justice. We call
on the Iraqi authorities to guarantee the freedom of
expression, assembly and demonstration, as provided
for in the country's Constitution. Threats against
health workers, the intimidation of journalists and
human rights defenders and the arbitrary arrests of
demonstrators must stop. All parties must refrain from
using violence.

Given that crisis, which is unprecedented since
the military victory against Da'esh, inaction is not an
option. Without a swift and credible response, further
Violence and deterioration of the economic and social
situation could plunge Iraq into chaos. Such a tipping
point would bring about consequences not only for
Iraq but also for the stability of the Middle East and
international security. Da'esh cannot but benefit from
the destabilization of Iraq. We are aware of the scale
of the challenges facing the country: the threat of a
Da'esh resurgence; the consequences of the war in
Syria, further aggravated by the Turkish offensive in
the north-east of the country; the worrisome situation
of refugees and displaced persons; a social fabric
weakened by years of conflict; and an economy in need
of rebuilding.

Real progress has been made in recent years. It
must be preserved, especially with regard to the strides
made in the fight against Da'esh. We recalled that
point at the meeting of the Global Coalition against
Da'esh held at France's initiative in Washington, D.C.,
on 14 November. Iraqis know that they are not alone
against Da'esh and that they can count on the support
of the international community.

At the same time, however, it is important to
provide a credible response to the aspirations expressed
by Iraqis in recent weeks. That hinges on genuine and
democratic dialogue, which, as Archbishop Warda
mentioned, is the only way to safeguard Iraq's stability
over the long term. To create the conditions for such
a dialogue, Iraq must quickly form a Government
capable of adopting the necessary emergency measures.
I would mention in particular the electoral law reform,
the effective reintegration of paramilitary groups under
the authority of the Prime Minister and the adoption of
robust anti-corruption measures.

France fully supports the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Hennis-
Plasschaert in that regard. I would like to commend
here her firm commitment to overcoming the crisis in
a concerted manner. Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian met with her yesterday and
expressed his support.

We also support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in particular
its efforts to promote reconciliation among the various
components of Iraqi society, stabilization, especially in
disputed territories, and the political process. UNAMI's
efforts to support the dialogue between Baghdad and
Erbil and its commitment to contribute to the resolution
of the issue of the missing persons of the Gulf War are
also crucial. We recall the importance of the work
being carried out in consultation with all segments of
civil society, in particular with regard to strengthening
women's participation in public life. UNAMI's action
will also be instrumental in helping Iraq adopt needed
economic and social reforms.

On the path to democratic dialogue and the reform
necessary to avoid the twin pitfalls ofcommunitarianism
and corruption, Iraq must be able to count on the
resolute support of the international community, and
the Council must remain mobilized alongside Iraq
in the years ahead. For its part, France will remain a
steadfast partner to support Iraq's imperatives. Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs Le Drian visited Iraq
in October to recall the importance of the strategic
partnership between our two countries and express
France's support in the fight against Da'esh and beyond.
We intend to remain partners in the stabilization and
reconstruction of the country and lend our support to
Iraqis at this crucial time for the future of the country.

