Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), Mr. Peter Maurer, and the International
President of Medecins Sans frontieres (MSF) ,
Ms. Joanne Liu, for their very inspiring, concrete and
operational briefings, which reflect a unanimous desire
to put an end to attacks against medical facilities and
health-care personnel.

Allow me here, on behalf of France, to again pay
tribute to the self lessness, courage and exemplary action
of MSF and ICRC personnel and of all humanitarian
workers working in increasingly difficult conditions,
who have now themselves become targets as a result of
their dedication to Victims. Their work and commitment
are a source of inspiration and admiration.

Whether it be in Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Iraq,
Afghanistan or anywhere else, attacks on health workers
have increased over the past few years. The Council
had to act, and therefore took up this issue and adopted
by consensus resolution 2286 (2016), whose goal is to
rapidly strengthen the protection of medical workers
and health facilities in conflict zones. I commend in
particular the mobilization of the penholders regarding
that very important question.

Since the adoption of the resolution, attacks on
health workers have continued. The Secretary-General
has told the Council that in Syria, eleven hospitals were
bombed in August - three in Aleppo, four in Idlib,
two in Homs, one in Damascus and another in Darayya.
These facilities are now closed. Since mid-July, the
eight hospitals that remain open in eastern Aleppo
have all been damaged at least once by bombing and
shelling - four repeatedly so. Just today, the two largest
hospitals in eastern Aleppo were hit by intentional air
strikes that temporarily put them out of service. If
those are not war crimes, then I honestly do not know
what war crimes could possibly be. The Secretary-
General - whom I thank on behalf of France - was
especially clear on this issue.

In Yemen, the Abs hospital was bombed on
15 August, claiming 19 lives and injuring 24 people
and forcing MSF to evacuate its personnel. I could cite
numerous other examples.

The Council must follow up on its decisions and
has accordingly asked the Secretary-General to submit
to it concrete recommendations for the implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016). France welcomes the letter
(S/2016/722, annex) of the Secretary-General and
supports its main recommendations. Similarly, we will
give our full consideration to the proposals made by
Mr. Peter Maurer and Ms. Joanne Liu.

The increasing attacks against medical facilities
and health workers remind us that the principles of
humanity enshrined by international humanitarian
law need to be applied, strengthened and supported
everywhere and in all circumstances. It is a daily
struggle. In that regard, France takes this opportunity
to call on countries that have not yet done so to ratify
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions.

In addition to the attacks, preventing access to
health care is increasingly used by the parties to the
conflict as a tool of war. In Syria, the obstruction of the
delivery of medical supplies by the authorities continues
despite the commitments they have undertaken, and
more than 8,000 kits were removed from convoys
in August. Access to humanitarian assistance, in
particular to medical supplies, must be the norm and
not the exception.

Lastly, the protection of medical personnel cannot
be effective without fighting impunity. The attacks
against hospitals, medical facilities and medical
personnel are war crimes. Those responsible must be
brought to justice. Faced with the increasing number
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights, impartial and independent investigations
to determine the facts are indispensable. That demand
to determine the truth will enable Security Council
members to come together in carrying out effective
and resolute actions. As members knows, France will
remain particularly vigilant and fully mobilized in this
literally vital role.

