Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and Ms. Samar for their briefings, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Raz, for
her statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his enlightening report (S/2019/493).

The increasing engagement of the international
community in achieving peace in Afghanistan is
important. It is critical to seize the momentum and build
on the achievements of the past 18 years. This will be
sustained and enhanced only throughjoint efforts.

Over the past two decades, Afghanistan has
gone through an unprecedented transformation.
Improvements in the fields of security, democracy,
governance, economic development and human rights
should be commended. These achievements are not yet
at the point of no return and major challenges remain
to be tackled. As indicated by the Secretary-General in
his report, the security situation remains volatile, with
a consistently high number of incidents. The stability
of Afghanistan, and subsequently that of the region,
will depend on improved security. Turkey remains
committed to standing by the Afghan people in this
transition process, including in the fields of security
and development.
At this critical juncture, any attempt towards peace
should be designed with the active participation and
contribution of all segments of the Afghan society.
Sustainable peace is possible only with genuine
reconciliation. The Afghan people cannot sacrifice
the achievements they have made at high cost. For
instance, since 2001 the status of women has changed
profoundly. Now, Afghan women are rightly adamant
in calling for a peace process that protects their gains.
Some 2.5 million of the 8 million students enrolled in
Afghan schools are girls. None our efforts towards the
empowerment of girls and women should be wasted.
Ensuring women's participation in elections, peace
negotiations and overall engagement in governance and
Government will help preserve the gains that we have
made to date.

We can achieve lasting peace and stability in
Afghanistan only with the support of neighbouring
and regional countries. The continued constructive
engagement of the international community with
regional actors is essential to enable an atmosphere
conducive to genuine cooperation. The region has
demonstrated on various occasions its readiness to
resolve its own issues and to transform common
problems into areas of mutual benefit. Started in 2011,
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process is a unique platform
bringing all regional countries and international
stakeholders together. We are pleased to host the next
senior officials meeting of the Istanbul Process on
25 June in Ankara.

Increased trust and cooperation between Pakistan
and Afghanistan are also imperative to the stability of
the region. As announced by President Erdogan, we are
ready to deploy efforts for the next Turkey-Afghanistan-
Pakistan Trilateral Summit.

The holding of inclusive elections and the conduct
of a truly representative peace process will be a
litmus test for all of us. We should make sure that any
decision to withdraw from the country does not give
the impression that the international community is
disengaging. We cannot afford to leave Afghanistan
in a power vacuum. At the same time, we should all
support the efforts of the Afghan Government to make
peace with the Taliban while protecting democracy and
individual rights, especially the rights of women. The
desire of the Afghan people for peace and democracy
should prevail.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
repeat what has been said many times in the Chamber. An
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process is central to achieving long-lasting peace
in the country. Turkey will remain in solidarity with
the Afghan people and will continue to contribute to
a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan, as it has
done for many decades.

