Mr. Hassouna (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to extend to you, Sir, my
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Allow me also to express my sincere appreciation for
your speedy response to the request to convene this
open Security Council meeting on a matter of great
importance, not only to the Arab, Islamic and Christian
world, but to all members of the international
community at large.

The Security Council is meeting today at the
request of the Arab Group at the United Nations, with a
view to considering the Israeli assault on Al-Haram Al-
Sharif in occupied East Jerusalem and the Israeli
campaign of repression against Palestinian civilians in
all the occupied Palestinian territories.

Security Council members and others who have
spoken here during the past two days unanimously
believe that the bloody events in occupied East
Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian
territories, even within Israel itself, were ignited
because the extremist leader of the Likud Party, Ariel
Sharon, supported, regrettably, by the Israeli
Government, violated the sacred character of the Al-
Haram Al-Sharif plaza. This violation has clearly
roused Palestinian feelings and the feelings of all
parties in the Islamic and Christian worlds, because the
circumstances have affirmed Israel's arrogant disregard
for the sanctity and dignity of those sites for the sake
of achieving vested political interests and goals.

Moreover, there is an international consensus that
the large and growing number of Palestinian victims -
be they men, women or children - is due to the
excessive use of force by the Israeli forces and their
aiming of their most sophisticated and lethal firepower
at the torsos of those civilian martyrs. This information
comes from the testimonies of human rights
organizations and other impartial groups, such as
Amnesty International and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. Allow me to take this opportunity to
extend our heartfelt condolences to the families of the
innocent victims.

The League of Arab States was the first
international organization to view these grave events
with concern and seriousness. The Council of the
League of Arab States has been discussing these
painful developments since they began. It took up the
matter at an emergency session on 1 October 2000. It
has laid full responsibility at Israel's door for the
eruption of recent events, and has called upon the
international community to pressure Israel to withdraw
its forces from around Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the
flashpoints around Palestinian towns. It has also called
for an international investigation into Israel's crimes
against the Palestinian people and for the prosecution
before an international criminal court of Israelis
responsible for those crimes. Furthermore, the Council
of the League of Arab States has called upon the
Security Council, and on its permanent members in
particular, to fully assume their responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and for the protection of the
Palestinian people by implementing internationally and
legally binding resolutions and the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War.

At a time when humanity has just taken its first
steps into the new century that ushers in the third
millennium; at a time when humanity aspires to wipe
from the world's face the tears shed during the last
century; and at a time when humanity is trying to
inspire itself with wishes and desires to make serious
attempts to ensure peace for all, we find that Israel's
aggressive forces - which hate peace - are
determined to follow a path that goes against the path
of peace that the countries of the world aspire to
follow. Our Arab States have indeed chosen peace as a
strategic choice. The massacre at the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
in which the blood of unarmed civilians was shed and
the wishes of humanity at large for peace were scuttled,
is an eloquent testimony to Israel's violation of all
international instruments on human rights and the
protection of civilians and children, in whose drafting
and ratification we all participated and that we
committed ourselves to respect. It is altogether
unacceptable to allow Israeli violations to pass without
measures of deterrence and punishment.

We are fully aware of the gravity of the situation.
The League of Arab States therefore calls upon the
Security Council immediately to intervene in fulfilment
of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We call upon it to
intensify its efforts to put an end to Israeli aggression,
to provide protection for the Palestinian people, to take
every necessary measure to force Israel to end its
unfounded, unjustified and provocative violations and
to have that country fully withdraw its forces from the
area around Al-Haram Al-Sharif and all occupied
Palestinian towns, in implementation of internationally
binding resolutions.

Those resolutions all affirm that East Jerusalem is
an integral part of occupied Palestinian territories, to
which Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and all
provisions of international law on occupied territories
apply. If the United Nations is truly interested in
promoting respect for the rules of international justice,
if it cares about the rule of law, and if it wishes to
implement the principle that places all States on an
equal footing and calls on them all without exception
to implement fully the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and other provisions of this
Organization, then the League of Arab States maintains
that it is high time to force Israel to implement United
Nations resolutions, which are legally binding on all
States.

I refer in particular to the resolutions of the
Security Council dealing with Al-Quds, Israeli
settlements, the withdrawal from all occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories, and respect for the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. In our
view, if these international resolutions had been
implemented by Israel in the first place, the United
Nations would not be facing this explosive situation in
the Middle East and we would not be witnessing today
the collapse of all efforts made to establish a lasting
peace in the region.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States
expresses the hope that the ongoing worthy efforts
aimed at salvaging the peace process will succeed. We
would stress, however, that when the Arab nation opted
for comprehensive and just peace in accordance with
the internationally binding resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and the principle of land for peace, it did so
because we believed that Israel would in turn commit
itself to withdrawing its forces from all occupied Arab
territories and to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

