Mr. Lake: Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-
General, my friend and colleague Leila Zerrougui and
you, Sir, for your leadership on this issue. Let me also
commend and thank the Security Council for its nine
resolutions to help end the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict and for giving voice to those
children through this debate. I look forward to hearing
from Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, who in 2001, at the age of
14, became the first-ever former child soldier to brief
the Council (see S/PV.4422), and who now supports
former child soldiers in Sierra Leone. My remarks will
be as brief as they are heartfelt.

When children are killed in indiscriminate attacks
on schools or hospitals, when a boy is maimed by
a landmine, when rape is both a weapon as well as a
crime - the world is rightly outraged. But what of
the atrocity of a boy being recruited at gun-point into
an armed group; of a girl kidnapped from her school,
traumatized by abuse and then given a gun and made to
fight; or of any armed force sending children to battle
to kill and die? In that regard, too, our outrage must
be matched by action to end the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict anywhere and to support
survivors while giving them the tools they need to
rebuild their own lives and the future of their societies.

In recent years, the world has made real progress:
better documenting and responding to grave violations
against children; holding perpetrators accountable
through investigations, prosecutions and disciplinary
measures such as those imposed by national authorities
in Colombia, Myanmar and Siena Leone; and developing

effective responses, including counselling and
vocational training, to help children break the physical
and psychological bonds that have imprisoned their
lives and threatened their futures. But more must be
done. Just as the global community has a responsibility
to end grave violations against children, each nation,
too, has a responsibility to keep children from entering
the ranks of its armed forces in the first place, as does
every armed group.

Focused national action is at the heart of our new
advocacy effort entitled "Children, not soldiers",
through which United Nations agencies are working
in partnership with eight Governments to prevent and
end the recruitment and use of children in Government
forces. Six of those countries - Afghanistan, Chad,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar,
Somalia and South Sudan - have signed action plans
with concrete, time-bound steps to make that happen.
Yemen is finalizing its plan, and the Sudan is now
in discussions with the United Nations to develop its
plan. But Governments cannot be asked to act alone. To
translate those plans into measurable action, the United
Nations must continue to provide resources, advice
and technical assistance to help Governments identify
and release children from their ranks and establish
measures to prevent children from ever entering those
ranks again.

Verifying the ages of soldiers is an important first
step. With United Nations support, Chad accelerated
efforts to screen its troops last year, and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been working closely with
United Nations agencies to identify and release children
from its security forces. Birth registration, a child's
passport to protection, is also essential. The action plans
developed by both Chad and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo include national birth registration campaigns
to register every child.

Prevention also requires greater awareness at the
community level. The Government of Myanmar joined
forces with the United Nations to invest in a television,
radio and billboard campaign to inform communities
that child recruitment was prohibited, along with a
phone number to report cases.

Beyond prevention, we cannot forget the specific
needs of child soldiers who are emerging from conflict
and need help in reintegrating into society. A country
that invests in counselling, educating and training
those children is not only investing in their futures,
but in its own future as well. That is why UNICEF is
working closely with countries to support their efforts
to educate and train those children, helping them find a
place in their communities.

On a recent visit to the Central African Republic a
few weeks ago, I met a young woman who was 14 years
old when she joined the Seleka. Without training, she
was thrust directly into battle, fighting on the front
lines against Government forces and witnessing acts of
violence and atrocities no child should ever see. I asked
her about her hopes for the future now that she was
free. She told me that she wanted to be reunited with
her parents, who remained missing. With the support
of social workers, that young woman will soon begin
professional training, still haunted by the nightmare
that she has endured, but dreaming, too, of a better
future for herself, her family, when she finds them,
and, indeed, her country. Her story personifies horror
but also hope: the horrors faced by children associated
with armed forces and groups but also the hope that,
with support, investment and encouragement, we can
help these young men and women rebuild their lives,
transform themselves and their societies and help their
countries emerge from the shadow of conflicts that have
included the horror of children losing their childhoods
and even their lives.

