I would like to warmly welcome Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda, and I thank her for her comprehensive briefing to the Security Council. The announcement yesterday of the arrest, surrender and transfer to the International Criminal Court (ICC) of Mr. Kushayb, suspected of war crimes and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in Darfur, is a major breakthrough that Belgium strongly welcomes. It is not only a significant development in the situation that the Security Council referred to the ICC, but, more broadly, for the cooperation with the Court. Once again, we have to underline that the ICC cannot implement its mandate effectively without the assistance of States. We would therefore like to congratulate the Central African Republic, France, Chad and the Netherlands, as well as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, for their support to the Court and their cooperation. The political situation in Darfur has continued to change positively since the Prosecutor's last briefing in December (see S/PV.8691), including in the field of justice. In February, we were encouraged by the Government's commitment to transitional justice processes and statements regarding cooperation with the ICC. We welcome the fact that accountability for crimes in Darfur remains a central issue in the peace negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and rebel groups in Juba. We now invite the Sudan to reply positively to the Office of the Prosecutor's call for dialogue in order to explore all options available to facilitate fair and genuine proceedings against the four other suspects in the Darfur situation, at The Hague or in the Sudan. In accordance with the principle of complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statute, the Sudanese authorities could indeed fully implement their international obligations by initiating prosecutions in the Sudan for the crimes detailed in the ICC arrest warrants, provided that they respect the principles set out in the Statute. In the meantime, however, they remain bound by their obligation to cooperate with the Court, in accordance with resolution 1593 ((2005). This not only involves the arrest and surrender to the ICC of the individuals concerned, but also implies granting the Office of the Prosecutor access to the Sudan's territory so that it can conduct its investigations there for the first time since 2007. It is the cooperation of all States, more than only the Sudan, that is essential to advancing justice for the most serious crimes in Darfur, as demonstrated by the arrest of Mr. Kushayb. In that regard, Belgium encourages neighbouring States to provide the necessary support to the Office of the Prosecutor in its efforts to track Mr. Banda, who remains a fugitive from the Court. We also invite all United Nations missions and agencies to strengthen their cooperation with the ICC in Darfur. Just over 15 years ago, the Council referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC (see S/PV.5158). Today the hope of the victims has never been greater, not only for accountability but also with regard to achieving and sustaining peace. As attacks on civilians and humanitarian aid workers continue in Darfur, as well as violence against internally displaced persons and incidents of sexual and gender-based violence against women and girls, we need justice more than ever. Belgium therefore counts on the Council and all United Nations Member States to support the Court, as well as the Sudanese authorities, in order to put an end to impunity in Darfur and, as a consequence, participate in a solution for lasting peace in the Sudan. Finally, I would like to come back to the Prosecutor's briefing on the situation in Libya last month (see S/2020/371). On that occasion, I expressed Belgium's deep concern over recent threats made against the Court's officials and their families. Unfortunately, the situation has further escalated, and we expect new measures in the coming days. This is very concerning. I must once again reiterate Belgium's unwavering support for the ICC as an independent and impartial judicial institution. More than ever, the Court and its entire staff can count on my country to continue to uphold and defend the principles and values enshrined in the Rome Statute as well as to preserve its integrity. 7124
