Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I hank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. In our national
statement, we will respond to the helpful concept note
(S/2016/586, annex) by outlining four high-priority
issues that we believe need to be addressed in order to
ensure effective peacebuilding in Africa.

First, we need to tackle the root causes of conflict.
We cannot talk seriously about promoting peace
without exploring the factors that threaten it in the first
instance. That was evident during the recent processes
leading to the adoption of the peacebuilding resolutions
by the Security Council and the General Assembly,
as well as last year's negotiations of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) - especially SDG 16.

The need to understand the drivers of conflict is
nowhere more present than in countries emerging from
crisis. In such cases, peace is at a stage of such fragility
that it is more easily destroyed than sustained. As we
in Ireland have seen through close engagement with
our partner countries such as Liberia and Sierra Leone,
multi-stakeholder conflict analyses must ensure that
peacekeeping mission drawdowns are backstopped by
the technical and financial support needed to build the
capacity of national institutions to sustain peace.

I am happy to say that we are moving in the
right direction. Last Tuesday in this Chamber (see S/PV.7747), we heard the Permanent Representative
of the Central African Republic welcome the renewal
of the innovative mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, which is tailored to
specific national priorities. Moreover, a focus of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on transitional
settings and the provision of catalytic, post-conflict
funding through the Peacebuilding Fund has also
yielded very encouraging results. Those are the kind
of initiatives that we need to see more of if SDG 16 and
the objectives of the peacebuilding resolutions are to be
achieved.

A second high-priority issue is conflict
prevention. For many years, conflict prevention has
been underresourced and underevaluated. The case
of Burundi has reinforced for us the urgent need for
investment in conflict prevention. During this year
mediators in that country have dealt with roughly 430
cases a month, receiving requests for interventions
from community members, local authorities and, in
some cases, provincial governors.

The financial resources needed to empower a
mediator to intervene in one conflict are almost
inconsequential compared to the enormous costs
arising from dealing with the fallout of conflict after
it has escalated. Ireland has been pleased to support
such mediation through investment in the Global
Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action, which was called
for by the Global Study on resolution 1325 (2000).
We also welcome the work already undertaken by
the current and past Chairs of the PBC in forging a
stronger role for the Commission in conflict prevention,
particularly through its potential for interaction with
the Security Council. We look to advance such progress
and explore how it can bolster other United Nations
activities, such as the Secretary-General's Human
Rights Up Front initiative.

Thirdly, as other speakers mentioned, we must
include youth and women. Thus far, we simply have
not done enough to include women and young people
in peacebuilding. The global study on resolution 1325
(2000) showed us that the inclusion of women in peace
processes has led to a 20 per cent increase in peace
agreements lasting at least two years, which rises to a
35 per cent increase over 15 years. We also saw at first
hand the crucial role for women in building peace on
our own island of Ireland. The lessons we learned have
informed our efforts to advance the women, peace and
security agenda both nationally and internationally and
have also been shared with partner countries, such as
Liberia.

The case for supporting the youth, peace and
security agenda is just as clear, particularly in Africa.
According to some sources, by the end of this century
almost one half of the world's youth will be African.
Ireland is exploring ways to answer the call of the
peacebuilding resolutions to increase the participation
of youth in building peace in Africa, including through
our trade and development links.

Finally, we must prioritize African ownership of
Africa's peacebuilding. There will be no peace in Africa
that is not led by Africans. Similarly, African economic
growth will only be sustainable if it is driven from
within. We firmly believe that efforts to strengthen the
United Nations peacebuilding engagement in Africa
will succeed only ifthey are designed and implemented
in full cooperation with African stakeholders and with
the full participation of all African States.

Increasingly, the strength of such collaboration is
being harnessed. Examples include the ground-breaking
partnership between the Peacebuilding Fund and the
AU Commission in Burundi, as well as the growing
focus of the PBC on building stronger ties with the AU
and African sub-regional organizations. Region-to-
region initiatives, such as the Africa-EU partnership,
which can be seen in the form of the African Peace
Facility, are also encouraging.

Not only must we break down silos so as to forge
a whole-of-United Nations approach to peacebuilding,
we must do that in a way that supports Africa's own
policies and objectives. That is no mean feat, and we
welcome initiatives like today's debate. They afford us
an opportunity to share experiences on how we have
been doing so far but, more importantly, to listen to
ideas on how we can do better.

