Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

Allow me to start by thanking President Bachelet,
you, Sir, and the Chilean presidency of the Security
Council for the initiative to convene this timely
debate. We also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Patriota of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Gbowee for their comprehensive briefings.

Regrettably, we are reminded by numerous conflict
situations of the imperative need to address the
underlying causes of conflict by promoting sustainable
development, inclusion, equality, the rule of law, respect
for human rights and inclusive political processes that
leave no one behind. The promotion of all of these
things might not fall primarily within the remit of the
Security Council; however, the results of the lack of all
of those factors can be found across the agenda of the
Council.

Security and development are closely interlinked,
mutually reinforcing and key to attaining sustainable
peace. Building sustainable peace is inextricably linked
to inclusive development. Sustainable peace requires
respecting the needs of the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable and realizing their economic, social and
cultural rights. The economic and political integration
of marginalized populations is a determining factor for
peace and security.

Sustainable development requires that human rights
and fundamental freedoms be respected, protected and
fulfilled. It requires the promotion of the freedoms of
expression, opinion, assembly and association, both
online and offline, as the representative of Lithuania
and other speakers have already recalled today.

Sustainable peace requires that we ensure that
no person is denied universal human rights and
basic economic opportunities. It requires that we
promote freedom of religion or belief and that we
fight discrimination in all its forms on grounds of
race, ethnicity, age, gender or sexual orientation and
advocate for the rights of children, persons belonging
to minorities, indigenous peoples, refugees, migrants
and persons with disabilities.

Sustainable peace requires gender equality and
the participation and empowerment of women and
girls. Women are agents of peace and development.
They should no longer be victims. At all stages of the
process of building peace, signing peace agreements
and introducing development programmes, we need a
stronger role for women.

Sustainablepeace requires combatting discrimination
and addressing the structural causes of poverty,
inequality and violence, including by strengthening
effective inclusive and democratic institutions, good
governance and the rule of law. Sustainable peace
and sustainable development require peaceful and
inclusive societies, democratic governance and the
rule of law. Inclusive development based on consensus,
participation and consultation diminishes the risk of
conflict and enables long-term stability and sustainable
peace. Development requires an independent judiciary,
a reliable police force and a public sector free of
corruption. Development depends on an active private
sector, acting as a partner. To allow for this, institutions
need to be legitimate, accountable and efficient. A
stable, predictable and transparent legal regime creates
an environment conducive to investment, enterprise
and growth; it ensures equal opportunity and equitable
access to basic services, which are indispensable for
social development and inclusive societies.

Countries that have come out of conflict have also
highlighted the importance of tackling these issues. In
that context, I would like to commend the work done in
follow-up to the Dili Declaration by the fragile States
concerned.

Illicit financial flows from trafficking, smuggling,
corruption or money-laundering endanger both peace
and development.

We need strive to address most of this outside the
Security Council. The requirements for sustainable
peace are, first and foremost, our own responsibilities,
in regions and in Member States. But if these
requirements are not met, it will often be the Security
Council that will have to address the consequences in
an effective and timely manner.

The Council has often included such considerations
of inclusive development and political processes in
statements, resolutions and mandates. In order to be
prepared for timely and effective responses, the Council
could explore new and innovative ways of working with
different actors, including with civil society. Existing
tools, such as Arria Formula meetings, should be better
utilized. The best prevention ofconflict remains support
for democratic governance, respect for human rights
and economic development. The EU's development
policy today emphasizes our strong engagement in
countries most in need, including those that are fragile.
Significant support granted by the European Union
goes to security sector reform, the rule of law, justice
and governance.

With the adoption of the comprehensive approach
of the European Union's development policy and
our resilience policy, the accent is also put on better
connecting different interventions and instruments of
the EU so as to become a more effective and strong
partner for Governments and other international actors.
In Mali and Somalia, we are deploying the full range
of our instruments, from the Common Security and
Defence Policy missions to development programmes,
which address, with a longer-term perspective,
governance, the rule of law and building resilient
livelihoods. Our development toolbox has improved
with the design of conflict-sensitive and human rights-
based development interventions. An important part
of our work is supporting national authorities to tackle
transnational threats - such as terrorism, narcotics
trafficking and piracy - and working both with
national Governments and with regional organizations.
The European Union is also enhancing its early-warning
capacities in order to identify risk trends, address the
gap between warning and response, and foster a long-
term, comprehensive approach to preventive action
before violence erupts.

The Security Council should address peacebuilding
as early as possible and strengthen the use of the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
various reviews to take place this year need to fully
take into account the security/development nexus. This
year's review ofpeace operations must also particularly
take into account the multidimensional nature of
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeepers have helped
organize participatory political processes, including
elections, in various conflict-affected countries. In
doing so, they have been supported by the European
Union. In 2014, peacebuilding achievements have come
under threat, due in particular to the Ebola epidemic.

Lastly, the security/development nexus is also
relevant as we seek to address the threat of terrorism.
In its counter-terrorism work, as in other areas of our
work, the European Union tries to take a comprehensive
approach, including integrating capacity-building
measures into the overall development and security
assistance to third countries and coordinating with
key partners. We recognize that concrete progress in
the areas of security, justice, human rights and the rule
of law are critical both for tackling terrorism and for
achieving sustainable development.

In view of the other important events that are
happening here in this building today, I would also
like to conclude by underlining that we call for a post-
2015 development agenda that is people-centred and
based on human rights, and combats discrimination,
including gender inequality and gender-based
violence. The agenda should address the structural
causes of poverty, inequality and violence, including
by strengthening effective, inclusive and democratic
institutions, good governance and the rule of law. Only
by addressing all these elements will the new agenda be
truly transformative.
