Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to begin by expressing its
appreciation to you, Mr. Minister, for your presence
here today and for your decision to preside over this
important meeting. We are also grateful for the
presence of Mr. Peter Piot, the Executive Director of
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), and for his statement. We would also like
to express our satisfaction at the results of the
Thirteenth International AIDS Conference recently
held in Durban, although the results may not have been
as promising as we had hoped.

Peacekeeping operations have become a Vital
means through which this Council can discharge its
primary responsibility. The mandates designed for such
operations and the results that they have achieved have
been subjected to various forms of criticism. However,
it is incontestable that such missions are the main tool
that the international community has today to maintain
international peace and security. These operations
require a significant contribution in human and
material resources on the part of a number of Member
States which, like Argentina, from the outset have
favoured peacekeeping operations and taken an active
part in them. In order to maintain the level and the
quality of such contributions, it is essential to minimize
as much as possible the risks to which the personnel
participating in these missions are exposed.

Argentina supports the draft resolution on which
we are about to vote. We regard it as one further step in
this campaign of risk reduction additional to those
taken by a number of Member States, including ours,
when we asserted the need to enhance the security of
United Nations and associated personnel in the context
of peacekeeping operations. It is true that the question
of AIDS is not the only problem facing the personnel
of such missions. However, we need to bear in mind
the fact that this disease is one of the factors that have
caused loss of life in these missions. Such losses could,
perhaps, have been avoided through better preparation
and training of the personnel serving in such missions.

With regard to the global dimension of the AIDS
question, Argentina reaffirms here the points it raised
in our debate on 10 January, in particular the
relationship that exists between this grave problem and
the concept of human security and the set of measures
which we recommended for adoption on that occasion.

The endeavours of the international community to
contain this disease must continue. Only the concerted
efforts of all relevant actors, in particular the countries
in which the most effective medications to treat this
disease are produced, will make it possible to prevent
AIDS from becoming a threat to international peace,
stability and security in the future.

