Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to express our satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council as the
representative of a country that is well known for its
full commitment to the firm principles guiding
international relations and that has friendly relations
with my own country. We have no doubt that, with
your wisdom, you will lead the Council's deliberations
to the success to which we all aspire. We also
commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Mexico, for the skilful manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council last
month. In addition, we thank the representative of the
Secretariat for his valuable briefing today.

Once again, the Sudan was not surprised by the
crocodile tears that Chad shed before the Security
Council. We have never been surprised when Chad has
rushed to accuse our country, which is not involved in
the internal conflicts that have intensified between
Chad and its opposition. That has become a consistent
and well-known method of the Chadian Government.
We have not been surprised at Chad's tendency to
blame the Sudan - in ploys that no longer deceive
anyone anywhere in the world - for its own failure to
honour commitments under the agreements that it has
signed with Chadian factions against the Sudan.

What is happening in Chad is an internal affair
that the Sudan has nothing to do with. On several
occasions, the Sudan has called for independent
mechanisms to investigate Chadian allegations that
were made to conceal Chad's domestic failures and to
mask its plans for aggression against the Sudan.

Yet, as is well known, Chad continues to avoid
meetings of the Contact Group stipulated in the Dakar
Agreement, and member States of the Group can testify
to that fact. A lack of political will on the part of the
Chadian leadership to implement its agreements with
the Sudan has become entirely clear to everyone.

We would like to draw attention to the fact that
Chad has made a habit of covering its criminal
activities on Sudanese territory by bringing complaint
after complaint to the Security Council, and by
multiplying its false accusations whenever it plans an
act of aggression against our country.

There is abundant evidence. We recall the
aggression carried out against Omdurman on 12 May
2008: a few days prior to the attack, Chad complained
to the Security Council in order to pre-emptively cover
it up. We assure the Council that these latest
accusations against the Sudan are yet another obvious
and clear manoeuvre to cover up intensive aggression
that is taking place and that will be carried out by the
Justice and Equality Movement from Chadian territory
against positions and sites of a party to the Darfur
Peace Agreement.

The Movement attacked the area of Forawiya on
5 May and took the area leader as prisoner, and on
6 May it attacked the area of Abu Kumbra. At this very
moment, the Justice and Equality Movement, which is
supported by Chad, is conducting attacks on several
areas east of Djebel Mara and around Djebel Moun,
relying on major logistical support from the
Government of Chad. This support takes the form of
200 Land Cruisers, 22 four-barrelled guns, 60 DShK
guns, 150 Karnov machine guns and 20 oil tank trucks,
in addition to other military support. Through this
Chadian support, the Justice and Equality Movement
has resumed its military activities in Darfur, having
been compensated by the Government of Chad for the
losses it incurred during its attack on Omdurman.

In clear violation of all relevant provisions of the
agreements, the Government of Chad has facilitated the
Justice and Equality Movement's entry into the refugee
camps in eastern Chad, allowing it during the past few
months to conduct conscription campaigns among the
refugees and displaced persons. They have even
recruited children and used them in their irresponsible
adventures. Reports submitted to the Council by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
testify to that state of affairs.

Everyone has to recognize and admit that our
neighbour Chad has complicated internal problems that
predate the Darfur problem by decades, and for which
a peaceful and comprehensive political settlement is
needed. Avoiding the facts and levelling accusations
against others will not help to bring about the peace
and stability that we in the Sudan are eager to see as
soon as possible, for we know that in the stability of
Chad lies the stability of the Sudan as well.

Therefore, Chad's accusations that the Sudan is
destabilizing Chad are without merit, as they are
intended to cloak an act of aggression that is taking
place now and to divert attention from the real
problems of Chad. As members of the Council know,
the Sudan is eager to bring about stability in Chad. Our
initiatives and contributions are in no way transient:
bringing about stability in our neighbouring State is
our strategic goal, to which the Sudan has devoted
considerable efforts over the decades, well before the
problem of Darfur arose. The Government of Chad
knows very well that the Sudan sought to achieve
national reconciliation in Chad throughout the 1970s,
1980s and 1990s.

The Government of Chad also knows that, at the
initiative of the Government of the Sudan and under its
auspices, reconciliation between the Government of
Chad and the opposition culminated in the signing of

the N'Djamena Agreement of 14 May 1993 between
the National Front of Chad led by Mr. Elharith and the
Government of President Idriss Deby. The Government
of Chad knows very well that the Sudan led a
mediation initiative to address the problems that arose
between Chadian President Idriss Deby and his former
Defence Minister Abbas Koty. That mediation led to
the conclusion of the Tripoli Agreement of 14 August
1993, under which the former Defence Minister
returned to Chad. But Chad's record of eliminating all
those who oppose it is well known to all.

Chad knows very well that the Sudan led the
reconciliation efforts between President Idriss Deby
and the National Reform Council group. That
mediation culminated in the Reconciliation Agreement
of 1995.

On 22 October 1997, Khartoum hosted the
reconciliation meeting between the Government of
Chad and four opposition factions, which culminated in
the conclusion of the Khartoum Agreement between
both sides and the return of the opposition parties to
N'Djamena in a Sudanese aircraft accompanied by a
high Sudanese official. The Government of Idriss Deby
knows that in July 1999 the Sudan led reconciliation
efforts between the Government of Chad and the
National Movement for Democracy and Development
led by Moussa Madela.

Those are only a few examples of the
reconciliation agreements that were brought about
through the initiative of the Sudan, and under its
auspices before the Darfur problem arose. Yet some
have claimed that the problems flowed from Darfur
into Chad rather than acknowledging that Chad had its
own chronic and difficult problems.

Regarding the agreement between Chad and the
opposition groups, in which the Sudan has played a key
role, we refer as an example to the participation of the
President himself in the reconciliation and mediation
effort that led to the conclusion of the Sirte Agreement
between the Government of Chad and the main
opposition factions on 25 October 2007, under the
auspices of President Muammar Al-Qadhafi of Libya.
Over the years, the Sudan has remained a constructive
party in all the efforts, including bilateral and regional
mediation initiatives, between President Idriss Deby
and the Chadian opposition.
It is sad indeed that I am obliged to describe to
the Council Chad's constant attempts to undermine the

agreements that have been reached and to which the
Sudan remains unilaterally committed. Those
agreements include the Tripoli Agreement of
8 February 2006, the Khartoum Framework Agreement
of 28 August 2006, the Riyadh Agreement of 3 May
2007, the Dakar Agreement of 13 March 2008 and the
recent Doha Agreement of 3 May 2009, on which we
were negotiating just as the Government of Chad and
the Justice and Equality Movement were preparing
their criminal invasion, which is now under way and
which Chad is attempting to conceal under a multitude
of accusations against the Sudan.

We look forward to Chad turning its attention to
the resolution of its own internal problems. We look
forward to it ceasing its continued attempts to
destabilize the Sudan and prolong the war in Darfur,
using the Justice and Equality Movement to that end,
and putting an end to its blatant allegations. The Sudan
already has enough priorities and challenges to face,
and it has nothing to gain by interfering in the internal
affairs of any other country, let alone those of the
Government of Chad. The Sudan attaches great
importance to Chad and knows that it will be
affected - negatively or positively - by anything that
happens in Chad. In View of the kinship that links us
with the tribes and all the people of Chad, we hope that
the Government of Chad will have the courage to
address its internal problems and fulfil its
commitments in that regard.

Levelling accusations at the Sudan will not help
Chad. The international community must recognize too
that Chad has chronic problems that predate the Darfur
issue. The Government of Chad must acknowledge the
Sudan's good-offices efforts rather than making
baseless accusations. It must show the political will to
8

fulfil the aspirations of both peoples to a stable and
safe environment, something to which my country is
committed.

Chad's repeated recourse to the Security
Council- with the well-known support of one
member of the Council which seeks only to further its
own strategic interests in the region - is not in the
interest of Chad or its people and does not serve the
stability of these two neighbourly States. Nor does it
serve the credibility of the Security Council.

If it truly wishes to help the sister Republic of
Chad, the Security Council must advise it first to seek
reconciliation among its own people and not to ignore
regional mechanisms such as the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States, which is making praiseworthy
efforts to build peace in the region. The Security
Council has been calling for a larger role for regional
arrangements, and it should translate its words into
deeds. It is strange indeed that Chad should rush to the
Security Council in this way at the very time when the
African Union Peace and Security Council is considering
this matter.

I wish in conclusion to assure the Council that the
Sudan is fully committed to the policy of good-
neighbourliness and to implementing all agreements
concluded between our two States, in the interests of
peace and stability.

