Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to convey the heartfelt
congratulations of the Government of Senegal to
His Excellency Mr. Adama Barrow, President of
the Republic of The Gambia, who has just officially
assumed office following the oath-taking ceremony that
took place in the Embassy of The Gambia in Dakar. The
ceremony took place in the presence, inter alia, of the
Senegalese authorities; the diplomatic corps accredited
to Senegal, including ambassadors of Security Council
members; and Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.

In this regard, we welcome the joint communique
issued by the United Nations, the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) at the conclusion of the ceremony, thereby
strengthening the united approach that had consistently
prevailed in the management of this issue. Senegal
takes this opportunity to express its full gratitude to
the international community for its unwavering support
and firmness, which led to this outcome.

The draft resolution before us, submitted by the
Senegalese delegation, is part and parcel of the ongoing
diplomatic and political efforts ofECOWAS, the African
Union and the United Nations to find a solution to the
post-electoral situation in the sisterly Islamic Republic
of The Gambia. In Senegal, we say that Gambia is more
than our neighbour. Senegal, as a State of the region,
therefore thanks all members of the Security Council
for their support for and solidarity with the efforts
of ECOWAS and the African Union to overcome the
attempt to usurp the will of the sovereign people of
The Gambia, democratically expressed on 1 December
2016. In that regard, I must stress the appeal made
today by President Adama Barrow to the international
community, and in particular ECOWAS, the African
Union and the United Nations, to help ensure respect
for the sovereign will of the people of The Gambia.

In the light of all I have said, the Senegalese
delegation calls on all Council members to vote
unanimously in favour of the draft resolution before us.

