Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): After
the vote on draft resolution S/2015/562 introduced
by Malaysia and sponsored by many other countries
affected, including mine, by the grief of their citizens,
as well as by several members ofthe Security Council, I
wish first of all to express our solidarity with Australia,
Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine, our partners in
the Joint Investigation Team. Our judicial authorities are
making every effort to shed light on the circumstances
of the destruction of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
and ensure that justice is rendered to the families and
next of kin of the victims of this tragedy.

What we were proposing today to the Council, the
establishment of an international tribunal, would have
made it possible to reach this objective. Despite the
solid legal grounds on which the proposal was based
and the broad support it enjoyed, it was not possible
to reach an agreement on it within the Security
Council, which we can only regret. We must remain
committed so that justice can be done, for this is our
responsibility towards the victims and their next of
kin. This responsibility is shared by our five countries
and by the other grieving nations as well as by all
countries which, like us, consider that impunity not
only is unacceptable, but could also have disastrous
consequences for international peace and security.

We are ready to move forward and intensify our
contacts and demarches in order to make a reality of
what resolution 2166 (2014) asking of us - that all
States associate fully with the efforts undertaken to
assign responsibility. This has to be done in full respect
of the law, which is essential for the victims and their
families and friends, and without falling into the trap of
any kind of politicization.

We commend the progress achieved by the
international air safety investigation carried out in
accordance with the guidelines ofthe International Civil
Aviation Organization. The Joint Investigation Team,
in which the Belgian judicial authorities participate,
is pursuing its inquiry in a totally independent and
objective way, in cooperation with all interested parties.
We must ensure that this essential work has a judicial
follow-up that will meet the expectations of the families
and next of kin of the victims, in a timely manner, so
that impunity will not prevail over the rule of law and
human dignity.

