Judge Agius: I am deeply honoured to address
the Security Council once again as President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and to do so under the presidency
of France. I would like to thank the President for the
attention his country has given, and continues to give,
to the matters that the Tribunal currently has pending
before the Council.

In the Tribunal's completion strategy report
(8/2016/454, annex), of 17 May 2016, members will find
a comprehensive statement of activity covering the past
six months. Further to that report, please allow me to
give a brief overview of the current status of the Tribunal
and measures undertaken to complete its mandate and
ensure a smooth transition to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

We are reviewing the performance of the Tribunal's
completion strategy at the best possible time with regard
to results. I am pleased to report that, since my previous
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7574), in December
2015, every single case scheduled to be completed
within the reporting period has been disposed of on
time. Judgments were delivered in the appeal case
of Stanisic' and Simatovie and in both the trials of
Radovan Karadiie and Vojislav Seselj. In addition, on
14 December 2015, the judges of the Appeals Chamber
delivered the final judgement in the largest appeal
case ever adjudicated by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, namely, the Nyiramasahuko et al.
case, otherwise known as the Butare case. Following
those judgments, only two trial cases, involving two
individuals, and two appeal cases, involving eight
individuals, are ongoing. One of the appeals, namely,
the Stanisie and Simatovic' case, is scheduled to be
finally disposed of on 30 June, as I promised to the
Council in December.

In relation to the trial of Mr. Goran Hadiie,
the Council will recall that, on 26 October 2015, the
Trial Chamber found, by a majority decision, that the
accused was fit to stand trial, but decided to stay the
proceedings for an initial, renewable period of three
months and to continue his provisional release. The
prosecution appealed that decision and, on 4 March,
the Appeals Chamber, presided over by me, granted the
appeal in part. The Appeals Chamber invited, inter alia,
the Trial Chamber to reassess as promptly as possible
the accused's fitness to stand trial. On 24 March, with
a public redacted version filed on 5 April, the Trial
Chamber found, by a majority decision, that the accused
was unfit to stand trial and stayed the proceedings
indefinitely. I can share with members of the Security
Council that I have been personally monitoring the
developments in the Hadeie case throughout this entire
period, mainly due to the advanced stage ofthe accused's
illness. However, there have been developments since
the completion strategy report was issued that I would
like to update members on.

First, concerning the judges on the Bench, I
reported to the Council in May that one judge had been
transferred as of 1 May to the International Criminal
Court to assume his functions as judge there, while
remaining available at the ICTY for any pending matter
on the Hadeie case. At the same time, the two other
judges on the Bench indicated their readiness to explore
cost-neutral solutions to their remuneration during
the indefinite stay of the trial. Arrangements were in
the process of being made with both judges when, on
19 May, the Prosecutor filed a motion for the formal
termination of the proceedings in the Hadeie case.
The defence has responded, and also agrees that the
case should be terminated. I expect the Trial Chamber
to issue a decision soon, hopefully before the end of

this month.
Following the delivery of appeal judements in the

Stanisie and Zupljanin case and the likely termination
of the Hadeic' case, the terms of office of four judges
will come to an end and the Tribunal will be left with a
total of seven judges. In line with existing downsizing
plans, staff members assigned to those cases will either
depart the Tribunal following the completion of the
cases or be reassigned to other cases.

With regard to the Mladie trial, I am very pleased
with its progress and can confirm that the existing
forecast of November 2017 remains unchanged. In
relation to the Prh'e et a]. appeal, I again wish to draw
to the Council's attention the fact that the case is the
most voluminous appellate case in the history of the
Tribunal, and will require not only time but adequate,
uninterrupted resources. I can assure members that
the Appeals Chamber, with myself as presiding judge,
remains fully committed to completing the case by that
date. I am pleased to note that the projected completion
date of November 2017 has remained unchanged since
it was first reported to the Council, in the November
2012 completion strategy report, and confirmed in all
subsequent reports.

Let me now move on to contempt matters. As
the Council is aware, following the arrests of Ratko
Mladic' and Goran Hadzie, in 2011, there are now no
outstanding ICTY fugitives charged with serious
Violations of international humanitarian law. However,
in a pending contempt case, there are currently three
ICTY indictees whose arrest warrants are yet to be
executed: Petar Jojie, Jovo Ostojie and Vjerica Radeta.
I emphasize that the arrest warrants were issued over
16 months ago, on 19 January 2015. On 18 May 2016,
the Representative of the Republic of Serbia informed
the Trial Chamber of a first-instance ruling of the
same date, issued by a single judge of the War Crimes
Chamber of the High Court in Belgrade, which held
that the conditions for surrendering and arresting the
accused had not been met. This ruling was confirmed
on 18 May by a chamber of three judges of the same
Court, and the Republic of Serbia communicated both
rulings to the Tribunal on 20 May.

Interference with the administration of justice
strikes at the heart of what the Security Council and the
Tribunal have, together, painstakingly and at great cost
endeavoured to build since the birth of the Tribunal, and
undermines the Tribunal's ability to carry out its work
efficiently and fairly. Significantly, the single judge
in Serbia who has now decided that the conditions for
transfer of the three indictees have not been met is the
same judge who eight years ago in the Petkovie case
decided exactly the opposite. Something is not right.
Significantly also, and contrary to its own previous
decisions, the High Court in Belgrade has now, to my
enormous surprise, affirmed that Serbia has no duty to
cooperate with the Tribunal on matters of contempt.
This is very troubling and makes it imperative for
me to express my serious concerns. I consider this
development to be a grave step backwards from the
status quo on cooperation with the Tribunal and an
unacceptable disregard of the primacy of Tribunal
law over domestic law of Serbia, mandated by the
Security Council.

The Republic of Serbia has a duty to fully cooperate
with the Tribunal in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and the statute of the Tribunal. This means
that Serbia has the duty to take any measures necessary
to implement the provisions of both Security Council
resolutions and the statute, including the obligation to
comply with requests for assistance or orders issued
by the Trial Chamber under article 29 of the Statute.
Concluding these contempt proceedings is of the utmost
importance to the Tribunal. I repeat that interference
with the administration of justice undermines the
integrity of our entire system. I remain hopeful that if
there is good will, a solution can and will be found that
will ensure compliance. On the Tribunal's part, I can
assure Council members that everything is ready to
ensure a speedy and fair trial once those three indictees
are transferred to the Tribunal.

Turning to other matters, as Council members can,
see our trial and appeal activity is in the final stretch.
Given the Tribunal's results in the last reporting
period, any concerns about the Tribunal's commitment
to concluding proceedings by the end of 2017 should
be put to rest. At the same time, one serious hurdle
remains - the matter of staff retention. As previously
reported, this is an enormous challenge that cuts
across all areas of the Tribunal's operations. While
we are fully committed to the downsizing process, I
must again stress the urgent need for the Tribunal to
be able to retain our experienced and specialized staff
members in order to complete our work on time. In
our penultimate year of operation, experienced staff
members continue to leave the Tribunal to take up more
secure employment, and there is no doubt that the rate
of attrition will increase as the end draws near.

The Tribunal is doing all it can to retain its staff,
but without appropriate assistance and concrete
measures it may face serious problems. The impact
of staff attrition will be particularly damaging in the
second half of the final year of the Tribunal. Past
Presidents and I have called upon the Secretariat, the
Security Council and the General Assembly to assist
us in implementing strategies to retain staff. I again
call upon the Council to assist us before we reach the
point of no return. As President of the Tribunal, I have
the ultimate responsibility of ensuring that all cases are
concluded and that the Tribunal itself is closed on time.
I also have the responsibility to ensure that our highly
qualified administrative and judicial staff are working
in motivating conditions that are also satisfactory at the
contractual level. Affording the Tribunal appropriate
predictability by providing staff with incentives, such
as an end-of-service grant, will be a necessity if we
are to maintain a high quality of staff and the capacity
to conclude all our judicial work on time. This last
chapter of the life of the Tribunal presents not normal
but exceptional operational circumstances that call for
or require exceptional remedies.

I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
sterling work of my colleagues - all the judges of
the Tribunal - as well as the immense contribution
made by the Tribunal's staff in ensuring that cases are
finished on time. In particular, I would like Security
Council members to be aware of the critical role
that staff members have played towards meeting the
completion dates in the Stanisie and Simatovie, Butare,
Karadzfi'c' and Seselj cases during the reporting period.
I also want to thank staff members in the Stanisic' and
Zupljanin appeal, over which I preside, who have been
working literally around the clock to ensure that the
30 June 2016 target date is met. While this will not
be the last hardworking team of the Tribunal, I wish
to go on record, on behalf of my colleagues on the
Stanisie and Zaph'anin bench, in praising the team's
tireless efforts and personal sacrifices in the name of
international justice. We have been very fortunate to
work with such dedicated and loyal staff. For everyone
working at the Tribunal, our work represents more than
just a paid service; it is the fulfilment of an ideal and a
contribution to justice and the promotion of peace and
security in the former Yugoslavia.

As President of the Tribunal, I am determined
to strengthen and consolidate the Tribunal's image,
particularly throughout the former Yugoslavia. In order
to ensure that the Tribunal has a truly lasting impact, its
work must be complemented by outreach and capacity-
building efforts to increase local communities' access
to information about its achievements, and to promote
a greater understanding of the Tribunal's work and its
contribution to peace and justice in the region. While
primarily focusing on its core business, the Tribunal
has also been diligently working on these matters. It
is my intention to highlight and increase these efforts
during the Tribunal's remaining life.

The Tribunal is engaged in a historic endeavour
and must continue to be supported until the very end.
We have come a long way in cementing the rule of
international law and safeguarding the fundamental
principles of peace and justice. Despite the challenges
that the Tribunal is facing, we stand committed with
the Security Council to ensure the efficient and orderly
closure of this institution by the end of 2017.

Let me conclude by expressing, on behalf of
all the judges and staff members of the ICTY, our
sincere appreciation for the continuous support of the
Governments represented on the Council. I would also
like to thank the Secretariat for its invaluable advice,
and last, but certainly not least, for the support received,
especially from the Office of Legal Affairs.

Our joint efforts to bring to justice those who
committed the most atrocious crimes in the former
Yugoslavia send a powerful message to the world. Even
though more than two decades have passed, and even
though it has been a time-consuming and laborious
process, we must and will continue to fight against the
culture of impunity and for accountability and justice.

