Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Security Council this month, and
to assure you that we are proud of the distinguished role
that the sisterly State of Kuwait is playing in this forum.
We thank you also for convening this open debate on
the working methods of the Council.

We are in general agreement with the elements of
the concept note (S/2018/66, annex), which was carefully
prepared by the Kuwaiti presidency. We also value
Kuwait's chairmanship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, in
its capacity as the coordinator of the Group of Arab
States on Security Council reform.

As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, we align ourselves with the
statement made on behalf of the group.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is at the forefront
of those countries urgently calling for a reform of the
Security Council, including developing its working
methods. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports
the efforts of the Arab Group on the reform of the
Council, and we demand that the Arab countries be
granted permanent representation, with full functions
and powers, in any future reform of the Council. We
also demand proportionate Arab representation in the
non-permanent category.

We live in a world that is torn apart by war and
escalating violence. We are in dire need of a Council
that is able to shoulder its main responsibilities of
maintaining international peace and security and
defending international legitimacy. Reforming the
Security Council started in 1993. Many reports and
statements are available on the development of the
Council's working methods, including increasing
complementarity among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. Those efforts have led to concrete steps
towards increasing transparency, efficiency and wider
participation. However, to date, we have not been able to
reach practical and comprehensive solutions that would
enable the Council to shoulder its main responsibilities
of maintaining international peace and security and
rising to the occasion, in order to meet the aspirations
of the international community.

In fact, most Member States agree that part of the
work of the Council is ineffective, which undermines
its credibility and limits its ability to play an active
role in settling conflicts. That is evident in the impasse
among Council members on many issues, including the
question of Palestine and the crisis in Syria.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia appreciates the efforts
made to improve and reform the working methods of
the Security Council and to implement presidential note
S/2017/507, which codifies and explains its working
methods. In that regard, we would like to point to a
number of factors pertaining to this issue.

First, elected Security Council members must
fully participate in the work of the Council, including
the preparation and submission of draft resolutions;
secondly, a code of conduct must be adopetd that
requires all Council members to refrain from obstructing
draft resolutions aimed at ending genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes; thirdly, there must be
consultations with the troop- and police-contributing
countries; fourthly, on the work of the sanctions
committees, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia values the
establishment of an Ombudsman post for the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. We call for that vacancy to be filled as soon
as possible.

I wish to assure the Council that the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia will continue to call for broad and
comprehensive reform of the Council, and we call on
the membership to creatively interact with proposed
ideas and contribute to finding mechanisms that would
enable the Council to shoulder its responsibility in
maintaining peace and security.

