Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like, Sir, to recognize
your presidency of the Security Council this month and
to welcome Ambassador Kelly Craft. We welcome her
presence here and look forward to her voice being heard
on behalf of the American people.

We look forward to hearing what the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan considers the security challenges
in the Middle East. We value our relationship with the
Kingdom. Our peace treaties with Jordan and Egypt
provide a framework for reconciliation and security for
the rest of the region. That peace is based on mutual
respect and recognition and an understanding that our
peoples face mutual challenges that demand cooperation.

Today I will share our perspective on the greatest
challenges that every nation in the region, including
Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Yemen and the
Islamic Republic of Iran face. For years, Israel has
too often been the lone voice in the international
community calling attention to the danger and threats
that the Iranian regime poses to its people, the region
and the world. Many try to paint Israel as the boy who
cried wolf. In truth, Israel is like the boy in the Dutch
story who plugs a hole in the dyke with his finger,
holding back the dangerous sea.

Today we have more partners and allies standing
with us at that dyke preventing the sea from engulfing
the town. That sea is the Iranian regime.

For more than 40 years, Iran has exported bloodshed
and chaos. Let us consider what has transpired over
the past few weeks alone. Only this weekend, a strike
against the oil processing facilities in Abqaiq and
Khurais in Saudi Arabia sent oil prices skyrocketing
and threatened to destabilize the international energy
market. Iran is trying to hide behind the Houthi militia,
which it is funding and arming. But make no mistake
that such as attack has Iran's fingerprints all over it.

Last month Iran attacked international shipping
vessels in the Strait of Hormuz and shot down a
United States drone in international airspace. After we
discovered its secret nuclear warehouse in Turquzabad,
which we exposed to the world last year, the regime
covered up the site, trying to hide its violations. That
was not the first time that Israel has caught the Iranians
lying regarding their nuclear programme. Last week the
International Atomic Energy Agency reported that it
had found traces of uranium at the site, proving beyond
a shadow of a doubt Iran's violations.

While Foreign Minister Zarif smiles and pretends
to extend his hand in friendship, it is the Quds Force
commander, Qasem Soleimani, who executes Iran's real
destabilization strategy, sowing chaos and destruction at
the instruction of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei.
If we were to consider only these most recent examples,
it is clear that Iran is building its own case for why it is
deserving of international sanction and condemnation.
We have 40 years' worth of examples.

I recount this recent behaviour to demonstrate that
Iran poses the greatest danger to regional stability and
security. Iran must be stopped - not with smiles and
handshakes, but with economic, political, diplomatic and
any other pressure, as necessary. I call on the members
of the Council to act against the Iranian violations and
exert greater pressure on Iran. Faced with a regime that
has genocidal ambitions and the largest stockpile of
ballistic missiles in the region and spends billions of
dollars a year supporting terrorist organizations on our
border, Israel must take every threat seriously and act
accordingly. We must be able to defend ourselves.

Israel is a small country with narrow borders, yet
in negotiation with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat,
we returned the vast Sinai peninsula in exchange for
peace. We did this because this came with a guarantee
of security. This means defensible borders, something
that every nation in this Chamber and around the world
is entitled to. Currently our borders are threatened by
the same strategy of aggression and terror that Iran
applies to the region. On 24 August, the Israel Defense
Forces prevented a large-scale terror attack in which
the Quds Force had plotted to send explosive drones
into Israel for one purpose: to kill Israelis. They did not
intend to launch those drones from Iranian territory but
rather from Syria, just outside Damascus.

We know that Iran does not operate just in Syria. It
also operates in Lebanon, through its proxy Hizbullah,
an internationally designated terrorist organization. On
1 September, Hizbullah fired several anti-tank missiles
from southern Lebanon, targeting and hitting an Israeli
military outpost and vehicle in northern Israel. This
flagrant violation of Israel's sovereignty marks yet
another stage in Hizbullah's ongoing efforts to attack
Israel. Furthermore, as we discussed here in the Council
a few weeks ago, Iran has been converting rockets in
Hizbullah's arsenal into precision-guided missiles. We
cannot and will not allow it.

The Quds Force again oversaw this operation,
which established facilities across Lebanon, including
in Beirut. Israel will continue to act against these
threats. Israel will continue to do whatever is necessary
to protect its civilians and national security interests.
Any country that would allow attacks against Israel
from its territory should and will bear the consequences.

We are looking forward to hearing Jordan's position.
Nonetheless, Israel has its own position, one that
guarantees defensible borders for our country. Israel
cannot have defensible borders without control of the
Jordan Valley. In his final speech before the Knesset,
Israel's former Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, said:

"The security border of the State of Israel will
be located in the Jordan Valley in the broadest
meaning of that term."

Prime Minister Netanyahu repeated this exact
phrase last week. Defensible borders are not just
required for Israel's security but are a necessary
condition for regional stability. We would never accept
a situation in which Iran also conducts its terrorist
strategy from the outskirts of Ramallah and in the
Judean hills overlooking our Ben Gurion airport, Tel
Aviv and Israeli civilian and financial centres. Their
beliefthat Israel should compromise on its claims would
sacrifice our security and potentially our existence on
the altar of political expediency after a misreading of
the regional situation.

This position is consistent not only with the
resolutions of the Security Council but also with our
right to self-defence and self-determination, which
form the very basis of the United Nations Charter. That
is our firm position. We understand that Jordan and
others have their own stances; these differences create
an opportunity for dialogue.

As we have always said, we would like to move the
political process forward. We welcome the efforts of
the United States Administration to revive meaningful
dialogue. We are still ready to engage in direct bilateral
talks with the Palestinians. Will they come to the table?
Will Foreign Minister Al-Malki come to the table to
negotiate with us directly, bilaterally? We are waiting for
that day. Would Mr. Abbas or Prime Minister Shtayyeh
sit with Israel? It is only half an hour between Ramallah
and Jerusalem. We can come to them, or they can come
to us. Or will the Palestinian leadership continue down
its own unilateral path to avoid making the bitter
concessions necessary to bilateral negotiations?

The Arab States, the United Nations and other
members of the international community ask themselves
what they can do to break the stalemate and promote
peace. The answer is simple: stop enabling Palestinian
rejectionism, pull the Palestinians back from their
maximalist demands and urge the leadership to come to
the negotiating table without preconditions. Today, like
every day for the past 71 years, Israel remains willing
to discuss the political process. We are here, ready,
waiting for a partner to decide that it is time to look
forward, not backwards, and build a brighter future for
our people.

