Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, let me congratulate
you and your delegation, Sir, on the assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for December. My
delegation assures you of our full support as you steer
the activities of the Council to a successful conclusion.
We are also thankful to our good friend Ambassador
Singh Puri of India and his team for their excellent
leadership of the Council during November.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
on Afghanistan (S/20l2/907). I also wish to thank
Special Representative Kubis for honouring us with
his presence here today. We are grateful to him for his
insightful briefing and able leadership of the United
Nations activities in the country.

Eleven years ago, following the fall of the Taliban
regime, the Bonn Agreement was signed. It created a
concrete road map that paved the way for a new era
in Afghanistan's history. The Agreement was about an
integrated national movement, aimed at establishing the
foundations for peace, stability and democracy, with
the help of the international community. An interim
administration was established, led by President Hamid
Karzai. The inauguration ceremony, which took place
on 22 December 2001, had an atmosphere filled with
unprecedented enthusiasm. I was there and remember
very clearly how the representatives of the Afghan
people, coming from all walks oflife, had come together
to express their shared feelings about the difficult past
and their hope for a better future.

Eleven years ago, we were weak. Conflict and
consecutive foreign intervention had led us to become
a failed State and a broken society; in fact, we were
on the verge of collapse. It was impossible to change
that situation alone. That is why the international
community was placed at the centre of our efforts
for peace and stability. In that historic decade, the
international community and Afghanistan struggled
together, worked together and joined hands for the noble
objective of peace and a better future for the Afghan
people. It was one of the most significant international
engagements of our time, with more than 50 countries
providing military and civilian support. Our shared
achievements are monumental.

Early this morning I arrived from Kabul, a city that

I found to be vibrant and full of life, in contrast to a city

that appeared dead 11 years ago. The situation in the

country has substantially improved. It is a great source
of pride and honour that millions of Afghan girls and
boys are going to school, millions ofpeople have access
to health services and millions of people are emerging
from poverty and destitution. But the most important
success is that, 11 years later, the Government of
Afghanistan, with the help of the international
community, has started to take full responsibility for
nation-building and for normalizing the situation. It is
imperative that, during transition and beyond, we and
the international community continue to be together.

As we approach 2014, when the international
combat forces leave Afghanistan, the transition is
gaining momentum. In the next two years, a successful
security transition and, most important, an efficient
political preparation will enable us to embark upon the
decade of transformation, in which we will stabilize the
situation in Afghanistan. The steady implementation
of security transition is but one example of the many
gains made thus far. With the first three stages of
the five-stage transition process nearly complete, the
overwhelming majority of Afghanistan's population
now resides in areas where Afghan security forces
have lead security responsibility. I am pleased to say
that security has improved in areas where lead security
responsibility has been transitioned to Afghan forces.
The Afghan National Army and Police are operating
with greater confidence and capability. The launch of
stage four of the security transition will be officially
announced in the coming days.

As the transition proceeds, we see it as imperative
that the sustainability of Afghanistan's security forces
remain a priority. The Chicago NATO Summit, last
May, was a milestone in that regard. We appreciate the
commitments pledged by NATO and other partners for
long-term support to our army and police. We also look
forward to the development of a new NATO mission
in 2014, which will focus on training, advising and
assisting Afghan national security forces.

Transition is not about security alone. To normalize
and stabilize the situation in the country, we need to put
in place a comprehensive political framework that will
provide the country and the international community
with a new agenda at the end of the military phase and
at the beginning of a new, transformative period. Such a
framework will comprise at least three main elements.

The first element is national consensus and national
reconciliation. The Afghan people and political forces
are preparing for a new beginning in the country. The
absolute majority of Afghans see their future as linked
with the continuation of the democratic system that
we have established over the past 10 years. There is a
concern shared by all Afghan people: not to lose what we
have achieved and not to go backwards, but to continue
moving forward. Once again, as happened in Bonn
11 years ago, we see the prospect of an emerging unity
of understanding between different political forces
that can lead to unity of purpose and to a constructive
national dialogue aimed at saving the future.

At the centre of that dialogue is our grand
strategy of national reconciliation. The peace process
gained momentum following the visit of the High
Peace Council, led by His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin
Rabbani, to Islamabad last month. The peace process
road map, which was presented to the Government of
Pakistan during the visit, provides a concise framework
for effective action that focuses on the release of
some Taliban detainees in Pakistan's custody, the
establishment of direct contacts with influential
Taliban leaders, the provision of safe passage for
Taliban negotiators, and the sustaining of peace talks
with the armed opposition groups, which include, but
are not limited to, the Taliban.

Just two weeks ago, His Excellency Foreign
Minister Rassoul paid a visit to Islamabad, where he
held extensive discussions on bilateral cooperation and
ways to achieve the goals set out in the peace process
road map.

As the Afghan-led reconciliation process forges
ahead, we will continue to rely on the support of the
international community as a whole and the United
Nations in particular. We look to the Council to help us
expedite our efforts by meeting our delisting and travel-
ban exemption requests for concerned individuals.
We recognize and welcome with appreciation the fact
that the successor resolution to resolution 1988 (2011)
adequately incorporates the ideas and recommendations
of the Afghan Government to help advance our peace
and reconciliation efforts. Special thanks go to our
colleagues at the United States Mission for their
efforts in drafting the resolution and to the Council as
a whole for the constructive spirit of compromise and
cooperation during negotiations.

The second element involves elections. In April
2014, Afghanistan will choose its new leadership,
just a few months before NATO combat forces leave
the country. With the elections and the end of the
military phase of international support, a new chapter
in Afghanistan is unfolding, one characterized by
sovereignty, self-reliance and the normalization of the
situation. The preparations under way are Afghan-led
and Afghan-managed. The international community is
assisting us in these important elections. The Afghan
Independent Election Commission, with the support
of the Government of Afghanistan, has responsibly
begun preparations for the elections by announcing
the elections calendar and by focusing on all aspects
of the preparation process - political, technical and
financial - well in advance.

Our diligent planning may help to bring more
certainty to the Afghan people about the political
transition. The draft electoral law is now under
consideration by parliament. As noted by the Secretary-
General in his report, elections will be the cornerstone
of the political transition. Elections have the potential
to become a new venue for national consensus and
unity, a reflection of our shared vision of a stable and
peaceful country. It will be an opportunity to put to the
test our unfaltering efforts for human rights, including
the rights of women.

The third element is international and regional
cooperation. The key aspects of the outcomes of the
Chicago and Tokyo conferences were about not only
security but also political guarantees for the future. The
international community and Afghans came together to
build partnerships and to ensure success in achieving
our shared goals. The International Security Assistance
Force and General Assembly resolutions on Afghanistan
reiterated the global consensus on supporting the
transition and assisting Afghanistan in the long haul.
We hope that this affirmation of international support
will remain.

As part of our long-term partnership with the
international community, we have entered into a number
of bilateral and strategic partnership agreements. We
are discussing with the United States the details of
our security cooperation, in line with our strategic
partnership. Similar discussions are ongoing with
our NATO partners on the scope and shape of a new
training, advisory and assistance mission. Early next
month, President Karzai will visit the United States, at
the invitation of President Obama. We look forward to
that visit, which will go a long way towards addressing
key issues in the context of our long-term partnership.

At the same time, we see visible progress in our
relations with our neighbors and in expanding the scope
of and strengthening regional cooperation. Relations
with Pakistan have taken a new form characterized by
confidence-building. In recent months, contacts at high
levels have helped us concentrate on concrete areas of
cooperation, including counterterrorism efforts and the
strengthening of the peace process.

We are also placing special focus on relations with
other partners in the region. Regional cooperation is
a crucial element of Afghanistan's future peace and
security, and it is taking a new shape as the Istanbul
Process swiftly moves forward. The Heart of Asia
Ministerial Conference, held in Kabul in June, marked
the beginning of the implementation phase of the
process. The conference emphasized the three key
issues of political consultation, confidence-building
and the role of regional organizations in making
progress towards a peaceful and prosperous region
that is characterized by increased confidence and joint
cooperation. Seven confidence-building measures
were identified covering a wide array of fields, and a
number of action plans have been developed for the
implementation of confidence-building measures. We
look forward to the next Ministerial Meeting of the
Istanbul Process, to be held in Astana, Kazakhstan, this
coming April.

Afghans see the transition as an opportunity for
an end to war and a means to ensure that stability and
prosperity are realized. The transition is also about
continuing our partnership with the international
community and fulfilling our commitment to a safer,
more secure and prosperous future for the Afghan
people. The Bonn and Tokyo conferences were
milestones in that regard, mapping out and defining
the nature of the long-term partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community for
the way forward. On the basis of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, we will work to address the
remaining challenges through a more results-oriented
cooperation and with a special focus on ensuring that
mutual expectations are met.

Let me conclude by saying that we have come a
long way in our joint endeavour. Eleven years later,
Afghanistan is on its path to a new era, reasserting
its status as a fully stable, prosperous and self-reliant
country, able to meet the needs of Afghan citizens in
all sectors. Afghanistan's full realization of ownership
and leadership is a shared goal of Afghanistan and its
international partners, one which we must work towards
jointly during this decade of transformation.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank my good
friend Ambassador Wittig and his team at the German
Mission for the able manner in which he has led the
Council's work on Afghanistan over the past two
years. It was my responsibility to say that, as we are
nearing the end of the month, when the non-permanent
membership of Germany will also end.

