Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting at such
a late hour. I also thank the members of the Council for
attending this emergency meeting, called at my request.
First, I wish to read out a statement issued by the
Chinese Government:

"At midnight on 7 May, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), led by the United
States of America, flagrantly attacked the Embassy
of the People's Republic of China in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, launching three missiles at
it from different angles. The attack resulted in
serious damage to the Embassy premises. As of
now, two people have died, two are missing and
more than 20 injured.

"The flagrant bombing of Yugoslavia by
NATO, led by the United States of America, over
the past 40 days has already claimed an enormous
number of casualties among innocent civilians. Now,
NATO has gone so far as to bomb the Chinese
Embassy. This action represents a gross violation of
China's sovereignty and a flagrant flouting of the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and the
basic norms of international relations, a rare
occurrence in the history of diplomacy. The Chinese
Government and people express their utmost
indignation and severe condemnation of this barbaric
action and raise the strongest protest against it.

"NATO, led by the United States, must assume
full responsibility for this action. The Chinese
Government reserves the right to take further
measures."

The working and residence buildings of the Chinese
Embassy in Yugoslavia - the entire Embassy from the
fifth floor to the basement - have been destroyed by the
bombing. Everyone in the Embassy, apart from those who
have been sent to the hospital for treatment and some
others, has been withdrawn to hotels.

We express our utmost indignation and strong
condemnation of this incident. This barbaric action of
NATO is a flagrant violation of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents. Even in times of war, it is internationally
recognized that diplomatic institutions are inviolate and
diplomats protected. Any threat to the safety of diplomatic

 

personnel is also a serious threat to the maintenance of
necessary and normal international relations. This
indiscriminate act constitutes a serious breach of the
Convention and a crime of war that should be punished.
We strongly demand that NATO carry out an investigation
of this serious incident and account for it. NATO must
assume all responsibility for this.

We reserve our right to take further action. The
frenzied bombardment carried out over the last 45 days by
NATO, under the leadership of the United States, has
already resulted in enormous casualties involving innocent
civilians, and now it has gone as far as to violate a
diplomatic mission. This is really shocking.

Once again we strongly demand that NATO
immediately and unconditionally stop its air strikes against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

