The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of July 2009, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Baki Ilkin for his
service, prior to his retirement as Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations, as
President of the Security Council for the month of June
2009. I am sure that I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Ilkin for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

Letter dated 19 June 2009 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2009/333)

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/339, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria. Members also
have before them document S/2009/333, which
contains a letter dated 19 June 2009 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1877 (2009).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
09-39324

