The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

Russia has been consistent in opposing
consideration of the issue of Myanmar in the Security
Council. While we do not deny that Myanmar has been
facing certain problems, particularly in the socio-
economic and humanitarian areas, we believe that the
situation in that country does not pose any threat to
international or regional peace. That View is shared by
a large number of States, including, most importantly,
those neighbouring Myanmar.

The problems in Myanmar that are mentioned in
the draft resolution before the Security Council are
being considered within the framework of other bodies
of the United Nations system, particularly by the
General Assembly and its Third Committee, the Human
Rights Council, the International Organization for
Migration, the World Health Organization and other
relevant organs. Duplication of their efforts by the
Security Council would be counterproductive and
would not facilitate the division of labour between the
main bodies of the world Organization which is
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations or the
development of their constructive cooperation. We
deem unacceptable any attempt to use the Security
Council to discuss issues outside its purview.

For all those reasons, the Russian delegation will
vote against the draft resolution that is before the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2007/ 14, as orally revised.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
6

In favour:
Belgium, France, Ghana, Italy, Panama, Peru,
Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

Against:
China, Russian Federation, South Africa

Abstaining:
Congo, Indonesia, Qatar

The President (spoke in Russian): The result of
the voting is as follows: 9 votes in favour, 3 against
and 3 abstaining. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative votes of permanent
members of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements following the voting.


