Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to join other speakers who have spoken
before me and to commend and thank the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
convening today's important debate.

The Charter of the United Nations has been the
cornerstone of the global system since the end of the
Second World War. That is why Egypt believes that
the commitment to fully implement the provisions of
the Charter, without any selectivity, is not a luxury;
rather, it is one of the main guarantees of stability and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Any attempt to marginalize the United Nations and to
jeopardize its institutions by giving rise to unilateral
initiatives would be a waste of time and a lack of
respect to the Charter and the values that led to the
creation of the Organization. That also undermines the
international system that was agreed upon, rather than
helping to develop and reform it.

On several occasions, notably during the latest
conflicts that have erupted throughout the world,
especially in the Middle East, history has taught us that
military solutions to crises are ineffective; they have
an immense human cost. The world is today witnessing
a large number of humanitarian crises as a result of
failure to contain conflicts. On the contrary, some
parties have used those conflicts to achieve political
interests or promote narrow ideologies which do not
take into consideration the suffering of civilians. In
that regard, Egypt underscores the pivotal role of the
United Nations in promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes and applying preventive security policies,
which are considered to be the most effective and
safe means - and the least costly in both human and
material terms - to address threats to international
peace and security.

The Security Council, in line with the mandate
given to it under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations, mustmake all efforts to use, support and activate
such peaceful means as negotiation, investigation,
mediation and judicial settlement, or resort to regional
bodies, organizations and other peaceful means in order
to address such issues. This responsibility compels the
Security Council to take decisions in an integrative
context in order to support international, regional and
national efforts related to the settlement of conflicts.
The Council must avoid taking any measures that could
undermine such efforts and wait before taking any
coercive measures that might impede the solution. It
should be keen to ensure the participation of relevant
parties, including regional stakeholders. The Council
should look into the possibility of mandating mediation
to acceptable parties in order to settle the crisis early
on, while applying comprehensive approaches that take
the specific nature and circumstances of each conflict
into consideration. This would lead to the adoption of
innovative and sustainable solutions that are acceptable
to the relevant parties, with the participation of all
sectors of society, without exception.

On the other hand, strengthening partnership with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the League ofArab States, and within
an institutional framework complementary to that of
the United Nations, as well as bolstering the efforts of
those organizations, is an ensured investment in the
establishment of regional and international stability.
We must therefore guarantee adequate capacity-
building for these various organizations, which would
be a sound investment on the path to achieving regional
and international stability.

In conclusion, Egypt continuously supports the
efforts of the United Nations in the field of promoting
comprehensive strategies to address conflicts by using
different mechanisms and tools tailored to the specific
nature of each conflict. We must be flexible in order to
take into account changes on the ground and, in turn, to
make optimal use of these tools, such as prevention and
mediation. We must also bear in mind the pivotal role
played by peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
in order to achieve the ultimate goal of establishing
sustainable peace in conflict areas.

