Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I did not intend to speak here today, as it
seems to me that resolution 2336 (2016), which we have
just adopted, speaks for itself. But as all members ofthe
Security Council have spoken it would probably be odd,
to say the least, if one of the sponsors of the resolution
and a member of the Council simply stayed silent. This
would probably be seen as perhaps not endorsing or
approving of what has been said by my colleagues. Far
be it from this.

As I take the floor, the natural first step is to
thank all of the members of the Council for voting in
favour of the resolution we elaborated together with
the Turkish delegation. We would like to individually
thank the delegation of Turkey for its very substantive
contribution to the work on the resolution.

All of us know that this has been a very difficult
year - a year which comes to an end in our capital in
only two and a half hours. It was very difficult from the
point of view of the work of the Security Council on a
Syrian settlement, but the fact that we are concluding
this year by unanimously adopting two such resolutions
means that if all of us together look together at certain
objectives rather than attempt to gain self-interested
benefit, then we are able to make important decisions.

During this year, as all ofus will recall, a number of
very serious efforts were undertaken to achieve a radical
improvement in the settlement of the Syrian crisis. All
of us remember the numerous meetings of our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Sergei Lavrov, and the United
States Secretary of State, John Kerry, always leading to
serious agreements that, for reasons that I am not going
to go into now, unfortunately remained unfulfilled.
At the end of this year, the Russian Federation and
Turkey, alongside the Syrian Government, in contact
with opposition groups, took it upon themselves to
reach a number of very important agreements that were
enshrined in the documents published on 29 December
and which were then circulated as an official document
of the Security Council.

This is a very important initiative. The resolution
adopted by us today speaks to the need to comply
with a cessation of hostilities regime in Syria and to
the very important meeting in Astana, the capital of
Kazakhstan, which, in Astana, in just two and a half
hours, will become a member of the Security Council.
At that meeting, delegations of the opposition and the
Government will for the first time meet face to face,
all of this in the context of efforts that have been
undertaken under the Security Council's mandate
pursuant to resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016)
and other very well-known documents. All of this is
enshrined in the resolution adopted here today. It is
very important indeed that the Security Council today
backed these efforts made by Russia and Turkey.

I do not wish to level criticisms today, but I would
like to delicately convey to my colleagues that this is
a very complicated process. Everything we achieve
is the result of enormous effort, so let us be clear. I
urge members to help us, and if they cannot or do not
want to help then I urge them not to complicate things,
cast doubt on the agreements reached or attempt to
reinterpret them in some way. I would ask them not
to simply repeat outdated cliches ad infinitum. Some
representatives have been repeating the same cliches for
six years now, despite the fact that it achieves nothing.
That is not helpful. We must work very seriously to
ensure that, in 2017, we are able to achieve a political
settlement to the crisis in Syria. We are convinced
that if the international community is guided by the
objective of upholding the interests of the Syrian people
and restoring stability in the region as a whole, then we
can achieve success.

My last comment is an expression of gratitude to the
Council members who are leaving us today, including
the delegation of Spain, which during this long difficult
month of 31 days has carried out duties that are coming
to an end almost at midnight on the very last day.

