Mr. Gouveia (Mozambique): I would like to join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and
for the excellent manner in which you are conducting the
affairs of the Council. Allow me to pay a special tribute to
your predecessor, Mr. Hasmy Agam of Malaysia, for the
excellent work he did during the month of July. My
delegation would like also to associate itself with the
statement made by the representative of Algeria on behalf
of the Organization of African Unity.

We strongly commend your initiative, Mr. President,
of introducing today's topic into the agenda of the Council
and salute the members of the Security Council for
agreeing to give this issue the priority it deserves.

The importance that the Government of Mozambique
attaches to the issue of children and armed conflict is based
upon the long experience of years of war of destabilization.
This dark page of my country's history resulted in the loss
of life of many Mozambicans, the destruction of economic
and social infrastructure, the disruption of the social fabric
and the creation of groups of poorest among the poor,
consisting of displaced persons and refugees, most of whom
were women, children and the elderly.

The Rome Peace Agreement resulted from the genuine
willingness of the Mozambican people to put an end to the
cycle of war and violence and paved the way for launching
collective efforts towards ensuring the restoration of durable
peace in the country. The decision by the Government of
Mozambique to bury the hatred deeply sown in people's
hearts and to heal the wounds of war by initiating an era of
continuous dialogue in an environment of tolerance, unity
in diversity, respect for individual freedom and the rule of
law resulted in lasting peace and sustainable development
that ensured the development of policies for the welfare of
the child.

My Government is proud to have hosted the African
Conference on the use of children as soldiers, held last
April in Maputo. In that meeting, over 250 representatives
of government, civil society and international organizations
were present and adopted the Maputo Declaration, which,
inter alia, strongly condemned the use of child soldiers
under 18 years of age and called upon all African States to
promote an environment that favours the safe and healthy
development of children and to take all necessary measures
to ensure that no child under 18 years of age takes part in
armed conflicts. At the Maputo Conference, international
society clearly voiced its outcry over the continued use of
child soldiers in armed conflict and urged the
international community to seriously consider outlawing
such use of child soldiers under 18 years of age.

In the presidential statement issued following the 29
June 1998 Security Council debate regarding children and
armed conflict, the Council pledged to support efforts
aimed at obtaining commitments to put to an end the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts in
violation of international law and to give special
consideration to the disarmament and demobilization of
child soldiers and to the reintegration into society of
children maimed or otherwise traumatized as a result of
armed conflict.

The time has come to foster our political will to
establish national and international legislation aimed at
stopping and preventing the use of child soldiers in armed
conflicts. In this connection, I would like to offer our
humble suggestion that all nations of the world launch a
national reflection on the use of child soldiers in armed
conflicts. These debates should include representatives of
governmental institutions, civil society and non-
governmental organizations with the objective of shaping
a national consensus and legislation on the use of child
soldiers in armed conflicts.

The international community as a whole should play
a pivotal role in promoting the ideals of child welfare and
outlawing the use of child soldiers in armed conflicts. We
believe that the United Nations can be the most
appropriate forum for the international discussion on the
issue of children in armed conflict. Thus, we commend
the excellent work undertaken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. In commending its
work, we also appeal to the United Nations to continue its
leading role in international efforts to stop and prevent the
use of child soldiers in armed conflicts.

Finally, allow me to emphasize that the current
national and international efforts aimed at stopping and
preventing the use of child soldiers in armed conflicts can
be successful only with international assistance and
cooperation. Therefore, we would like to appeal to the

 

international community to spare no effort in providing all
kinds of assistance to those countries in need.

