Mr. Haque (Pakistan): The right to
self-determination is a sacrosanct right recognized in
international law and by the United Nations. As such, the
people and the Government of Pakistan consider the
successful conclusion of the popular consultation process
in East Timor as an epoch-making event. The referendum
was made possible by the decision of the Government of
Indonesia to allow the people of East Timor the right to
freely express their Views about their future. We express
our appreciation to the Government of Indonesia for its
courageous decision.

 

We also laud the Security Council; the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan; and his Special Representative,
Ambassador J amsheed Marker, for their role in making this
historic event possible and for ensuring that the referendum
was for the most part free from coercion, rigging or
Violence. The consultation process under the auspices of the
United Nations has set an admirable precedent and adds to
the prestige of the Security Council, the United Nations and
that of Indonesia. It underscores the imperative of
honouring United Nations resolutions by all Member States.
There are other long-standing issues, regarding the
right of people to self-determination and to determine their
own future, which remain pending before the United
Nations. One of these issues is that of Jammu and Kashmir,
where the Security Council has adopted resolutions
pledging the right of self-determination to the people of
Jammu and Kashmir. The Security Council must, we
believe, exert itself for the implementation of those
resolutions as well.

The people of East Timor have given their verdict.
Both Indonesia and the international community must
respect the decision of the people. The Government of
Indonesia has accepted the result of the popular consultation
process, held under United Nations auspices, and has
committed itself to fulfil its responsibilities in the post-
consultation phase. We encourage the Government of
Indonesia to honour its commitments.

Pakistan is deeply concerned over the deterioration of
law and order in East Timor after the completion of the
consultation process. The reports of violence in Dili and in
other parts of East Timor are extremely disturbing. We
deeply regret the loss of human life as a result of the
breakdown of law and order in East Timor. We note that
the Government of Indonesia has committed itself to ensure
the safety and security of the people. We urge Indonesia to
take the necessary steps towards the immediate restoration
of law and order in East Timor and the security of the
people of the territory as well as of United Nations
personnel. We would also urge Indonesia to maintain full
cooperation with the United Nations. We are confident that,
should United Nations assistance be required, Indonesia will
have no hesitation in accepting it.

While we expect an immediate and visible
improvement in the situation on the ground as a result of
the measures taken by the Government of Indonesia, the
Security Council must remain constantly seized of the
matter. It must play its role as defined in the Charter. In
doing so, the Council must objectively assess the situation
based on authentic information. We are confident that the
assessment of the situation on the ground by the Security
Council team which is visiting the area at present will be
extremely helpful in a comprehensive review by the
Security Council. We therefore await the return of the
team to New York and its report to the Council.

The process of popular consultation in East Timor
under United Nations auspices is a historic event. It can
serve as an example for resolving similar problems in
other parts of the world through ascertaining the wishes
of the people. The international community cannot and
must not allow this process to fail. States Members of the
United Nations must honour their obligations under the
Charter and comply with the resolutions of the Security
Council. It is only through the fair and just application of
the principles of the Charter and the implementation of
the resolutions of the Security Council on all such
situations that we can enhance the credibility and
effectiveness of the United Nations and of this body.

