Mr. Vale de Almeida: I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor. I am honoured again to address
the Security Council today on behalf of the European
Union (EU) High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, in her capacity as the Coordinator
of the Joint Commission established by the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

First, I would like to thank Secretary-General, as
well as our colleague the Ambassador of Italy, who
is serving as the Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for the excellent cooperation. Let
me also express our gratitude to our colleagues in the
Security Council Affairs Division for their unwavering
support, in particular regarding the running of the
procurement channel. I would also like to note our
appreciation for their work in the preparation of the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515), as well as the
Under-Secretary-General for his intervention in the
Council today.

Almost two years ago, on 20 July 2015, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2231 (2015), which endorsed and operationalized the
JCPOA. This unanimous endorsement has ensured
that the JCPOA, which was born of the efforts of the
E3+3 and Iran, coordinated by the European Union
High Representative, now belongs to the whole United
Nations membership and the wider international
community. It is worth recalling that the Iranian nuclear
programme was one the most contentious issues on the
international agenda, and yet it was possible - through
diplomacy and a multilateral approach - to come to
a negotiated solution. In a moment where the world
is again faced with the threat of unchecked nuclear
capabilities, the JCPOA is a pillar of the international
non-proliferation agenda. It needs to be preserved and
fully implemented.

One of the keys to the success of the deal is that
it exclusively focuses on one particular issue - Iran's
nuclear programme This is not to say that other issues
are less relevant. They are all an integral part of
resolution 2231 (2015), and we expect full compliance.
However, we would not be in a better position to address
all the other non-nuclear matters Without the JCPOA
in place. We fully agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment that it is in the interests of the international
community, writ large, that this achievement of
multilateral diplomacy endure transitions and
implementation challenges, thereby cementing our
collective commitment to diplomacy and dialogue.

Almost two years after its conclusion, and one
and a half years after implementation day, we can say
that the JCPOA is being properly implemented and is
delivering on its objectives. The initial results are clear
and speak for themselves: Iran's nuclear programme
has been rolled back and placed under tight inspections;
and the International Atomic Energy Agency has
repeatedly confirmed - in six reports ~ that Iran
is abiding by its commitments. At the same time,
and as a consequence of the lifting of nuclear-related
sanctions, we are witnessing improvements in Iran's
macroeconomic performance. That is a result of strong
growth in trade and foreign direct investment. Oil
production has returned to pre-sanctions days. Tourism
has been revived, and key infrastructure and investment
deals have been agreed, including, for instance, with
Airbus and Boeing. Those are only some of the positive
indicators pointing to a growing revival of trade and
business with Iran.

The multilateral nature of the JCPOA and its
important role as a cornerstone of the international
non-proliferation architecture were recalled by the
Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union, most
recently in November, and also on many occasions by
the EU High Representative - for example, when we
celebrated the first anniversary of implementation day
on 16 January, in her contacts with many world leaders
and in her address to the Security Council this spring
(see S/PV.7935).

However, JCPOA implementation is an ongoing
task, and we expect full and effective implementation
by all sides throughout the lifetime of the agreement.
Taking a look at the JCPOA, in particular its five
annexes, we realize the complexity and the wide scope
of the agreement, as well as the challenges ahead for us
in the coming years. The quality of the deal will also
be tested by its implementation, and, as coordinators
of the process, we will not settle for anything less than
strict adherence to what was agreed by all sides.

The EU High Representative, as the Coordinator
of the Joint Commission, which is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of the deal, remains fully
committed to the JCPOA. Since implementation day,
we have already chaired five JCPOA Joint Commission
meetings, which have monitored implementation and
provided guidance on a number of implementation
issues. The rigorous implementation of commitments
by all sides continues to be the best way to build trust,
strengthen the JCPOA and overcome the hurdles that
are part of all comprehensive and far-reaching deals.
In order to ensure transparency, the Joint Commission
has published a number of important interpretative
guidance documents.

A lot of the debate about the merits of the deal has
been focused on Iran's nuclear obligations, which are
laid out in annex I of the JCPOA, and on the lifting of
sanctions, which is the subject of annex II. However, let
me today briefly touch upon annex III of the JCPOA,
which deals with civil nuclear cooperation.

Annex III is key in the overall balance of the
agreement and essential for our overall objective of
ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme. The EU is already engaging with
Iran on a number of concrete projects, which are mostly
focused on nuclear safety - something we are all
interested in. That cooperation is outlined in the joint
EU-Iran statement on civil nuclear cooperation, which
was adopted in April last year. For example, it means that
we are inviting Iranian nuclear experts and scientists
to participate in civil nuclear-research activities and
in conferences of nuclear-safety regulators. A few
months ago, we held a high-level seminar on civil
nuclear cooperation and governance, which was well
attended by Iranian officials and parliamentarians. It
led to the important joint conclusion that civil nuclear
cooperation and the adherence to international norms
on nuclear governance have to go hand in hand.

I will now focus on the work of the Procurement
Working Group, responsible for reviewing proposals
by States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that
are for nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end-uses. Since
implementation day, the Procurement Working Group,
which is made up of representatives of the E3+3 and
Iran and coordinated by a delegated coordinator of the
EU High Representative, has been in full operation.
Setting up a new authorization mechanism, which
entered into force after a long prohibition period, was
not an easy task. The first proposals received through
the procurement channel have been reviewed and
approved. It is worth noting that not only is the number
of proposals steadily increasing, but so is the number
of countries submitting proposals to the procurement
channel. That is a demonstration that the established
procurement mechanism works.

Transparency was one of our guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone of the
JCPOA. According to para 6.10 of annex IV of the
agreement, the Joint Commission shall report to the
Security Council every six months on the status of
the Procurement Working Group's decisions and on
any implementation issues. In that context, on 12 June
2017, the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group submitted to the Facilitator, on behalf of the
Joint Commission, its third biannual report. The report
aims at providing the Facilitator and Security Council
members with an overview of the work undertaken by
the Procurement Working Group from 23 December
2016 to 12 June 2017. The report has been circulated as
a document of the Security Council (S/20l7/495).

During this period, the Procurement Working
Group continued to work intensively to further develop
the Group's operational modalities. It also made
great efforts to be as transparent as possible, without
compromising confidentiality, by reaching out to
States Members of the United Nations and promoting
a better understanding of its aims, objectives and
review process.

I would like to conclude by reiterating once more
the European Union's resolute willingness to preserve
and protect the JCPOA and to work for its successful
implementation throughout its lifetime. The world
would not be a safer place without the JCPOA. We
therefore call on all other parties to remain committed
to the full implementation of the JCPOA in good faith,
as well as ofresolution 2231 (2015) in all its dimensions.
This is essential to continuing to build trust, strengthen
multilateral diplomacy, reinforce non-proliferation and
promote regional peace and stability.

