Mr. Shadiev (Uzbekistan): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my
capacity as Chair of the OIC Group.

This meeting takes place in a climate overburdened
by the increasingly unstable and volatile situation in the
Middle East, with the unresolved and festering question
of Palestine remaining at the heart of unrest in the
region. The OIC is very concerned about the contempt by
Israel, the occupying Power, for the Security Council's
authoritative decisions and demands, in contravention
of international law and in total obstruction of a
political horizon for a peaceful solution.

The escalation ofillegal Israeli settlement activities
in the last few months through the establishment of
a new colonialist settlement, along with the adoption
of the Israeli regularization law, an illegal scheme
aimed at entrenching so-called settlement outposts,
are of grave concern and must be condemned. The OIC
reaffirms that the continuation of Israeli settlement
policy would undermine the territorial integrity,
viability and contiguity of a future Palestinian State, let
alone the fact that settlement activities are illegal acts
constituting flagrant violations of international law
and United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), which unequivocally demanded an end
to all such activities. The OIC therefore calls upon
the Security Council to ensure the full compliance of
Israel, the occupying Power, with its legal obligations
under international law.

The Council must act to uphold its responsibilities
to halt Israeli settlement acts, which have been
manifestly and deliberately escalated in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around East
Jerusalem. We further appeal for the international
community's sustained engagement, as also called for
by resolution 2334 (2016), and its full support at this
critical period for sponsorship for a timed multilateral
political process that would lead to the enforcement
of United Nations resolutions aimed at finally ending
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian land, in
effect since 1967, and achieving the internationally
endorsed two-State solution, to which the OIC remains
unflinchingly committed.

The OIC also continues to view with profound
concern Israel's frequent provocative violations and
assaults against holy places, especially Al-Aqsa
mosque, and its policies to change the Arab character,
status, landmarks and demographic composition
of occupied East Jerusalem, including through the
building of settlements in the city, excavating beneath
the Al-Aqsa mosque, desecrating Islamic and Christian
sites, including by extremist Israeli settlers and
religious fanatics, and demolishing homes and evicting
Palestinian residents, with a view to isolating occupied
East Jerusalem from its Palestinian environs.

All such actions continue to raise tensions and
sensitivities and are alarmingly aggravating the fragile
situation on the ground, with the potential to spark grave
consequences. The Security Council must demand that
all such illegal acts cease and that Israel, the occupying
Power, abide by its obligations under international law
and United Nations resolutions regarding Jerusalem.
In this regard, the OIC reiterates its firm commitment
to the rights of the Palestinian people in occupied
East Jerusalem, which forms an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.

The OIC remains firm in its conviction that the
Security Council must not be absolved of its role in this
regard and should act to ensure the realization by the
Palestinian people of their right to self-determination,
sovereignty and independence in their state of Palestine
in the territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, as well as a just solution for the plight
of the Palestine refugees in line with United Nations
resolutions and international law.

I must also, at this meeting, reiterate the concerns
of the OIC regarding the grave humanitarian suffering

being endured by the Palestinian people throughout
occupied Palestine, including in the Gaza Strip, where
the Palestinian civilian population continues to suffer
from the inhumane, illegal Israeli blockade, now in its
tenth year. We reiterate the call for an end to this massive
form of collective punishment of the Palestinian people
and for urgent efforts to reconstruct, rehabilitate and
revive Gaza, which also remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.

Today, we must also reiterate the call for attention
to the plight of Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli
detention centres. We call for respect of their rights,
in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention
and international human rights law, and for an end
to their abuse and captivity by the occupying Power.
The hunger strike recently undertaken by thousands of
prisoners is a cry for attention to their critical plight and
for action to resolve it, and we appeal for international
compassion and responsibility in this regard.

The OIC stands ready to address and to cooperate
for the resolution of the many other critical issues in
the Middle East, including the grave situations in the
region, at the appropriate meetings in the Security
Council dedicated to the review of those specific
situations, with the aim of ending the human suffering
and crises in those countries and of contributing to
the establishment of peace and stability in the Middle
East region.

The OIC firmly believes in addressing the root
causes of conflicts, including foreign occupation, the
lack of opportunities, politically motivated agendas and
political alienation and aggression, in order to create
space for improving international peace and security.
There is no doubt that the conflicts in the Middle East,
including the tragedy of the Palestinian question and
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with the occupation
now in its fiftieth year and what seems to be chronic
divisions within the Security Council, have allowed
menaces, such as violent extremism and terrorism, to
flourish in the region and reach the proportions we
must contemplate today, as we collectively grapple with
the elusive search for viable solutions. Therefore, the
multifaceted dimension and root causes of the region's
conflicts must be addressed without exception and in
the context of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, and with adherence to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the guarantors for peace and security in the
Middle East and globally.

