Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Egyptian presidency for its vision in drawing attention
to the need to counter the narrative and combat the
ideologies that give rise to terrorism. Combating such
deeply rooted belief systems and perceptions is a most
difficult task, for they have taken a strong hold in many
societies.

As a long term approach, several measures should be
considered, such as exposing false notions, improving
public diplomacy and partnering with deradicalized
persons. New, revised and inspiring messages have
to be put forward to the younger generation, calling
for cooperation with parliamentarians, religious
leaders, educators, the private sector, civil society
and the media. Much work has to be done in families,
schools, communities and prisons. We encourage close
interministerial coordination within each Member
State's Government, as well as collaboration within the
United Nations system, United Nations country teams,
together with regional and international organizations.

Kazakhstan has been at the forefront in striving to
bridge the ever-growing clash of civilizations, religions
and cultures. It was because of our efforts and those
of our partners that the General Assembly designated
2010 as the International Year for the Rapprochement
of Cultures and 2013-2022 as the Decade of
Rapprochement of Cultures, together with UNESCO. A
declaration by the Presidents of Kazakhstan and Turkey
on Islamic rapprochement at the recent OIC Summit in
Istanbul is another such example.

World leaders will need to be engaged in a drive to
identify how to promote peace and heal divisiveness.
These ideas, values and principles constitute the core of
the manifesto "The World. The Twenty-Firstt Century",
authored by my President, Nursultan Nazarbayev,
which is a new security paradigm on war and peace.
He proposes therein to establish under United Nations
auspices a global coalition of States for peace, stability,
trust and security to end current conflicts, which are
fertile environments for radicalism. Last September,
my President also suggested establishing a United
Nations -led counter-terrorism network with a unified
mechanism, comprising various entities, to end all
forms of terrorism and bring perpetrators and their
supporters to justice.

According to our President, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy should be made
legally binding. We believe that the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674) must be fully supported by all Member
States. Kazakhstan has ratified all global instruments
on countering violent extremism. Currently, we are
engaged in the joint action plan to implement the Global
Strategy in Central Asia, and have hosted two meetings
in Almaty on the regional plan, as well as two training
workshops of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

With a view to promoting dialogue, my country
convenes triennially the Congress of the Leaders of
World and Traditional Religions, bringing together
religious and political leaders to promote peace. At
the national level, we hold inclusive and democratic
interactions among citizens and youth groups in
every locality through the Assembly of the People of
Kazakhstan. On 6 May, His Excellency Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft, President of the General Assembly, at the
initiative of Kazakhstan and Jordan, convened a high-
level conversation on religions for peace, with very
significant recommendations for the way forward.
Above all, we have formulated Kazakhstan Strategy
2050, which is very people- centred and whereby the
needs of all sectors of our society are met on the basis
of justice and equality, thereby laying the foundations
of durable social peace and solidarity.

Let us not forget that development and peace are two
sides of the same coin, and the President of Kazakhstan
has suggested that the international community adopt
a plan for a global strategy 2045 during the United
Nations centennial year, with a view to establishing
equality among nations and thereby ending all
conflicts. Narratives and ideologies know no borders,
so Kazakhstan will work steadfastly on multilateral
activities to spread the culture of peace and tolerance.

