Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to thank the countries that courageously opted to
oppose, or not to vote for, this draft resolution. We are
pleased that it was not adopted, as it should never even
have been considered. It escapes me how certain
countries around this table that have described the draft
resolution as even-handed or balanced could have done
so, when it specifically demands certain things from
Israel and fails to even hint at the demands from the
Palestinians or the horror that they have caused. How
anyone could even try to describe this as a balanced
draft resolution totally escapes us. A draft resolution
that seeks to condemn mechanisms for fighting
terrorism, instead of the terrorism itself, distorts the
seriousness of the issues at hand. A draft resolution
that indicts the victims of terror, rather than their
murderers, is wrong and shameful.

Ignoring its obligations, including those under the
very first phases of the road map, the Palestinian
leadership has allowed terrorists to act with impunity
from within its territory. They commit their atrocities
from within Palestinian civilian areas and aim their
aggression towards Israeli civilian populations, leading
to tremendous harm to both groups. Accordingly, Israel
will respect its obligation to defend its citizens while
also respecting its obligations to international
humanitarian law. Israel has the right and the duty to
defend itself and its citizens from the rain of missiles
falling over its communities so long as the Palestinian
leadership does nothing to stifle that and other forms of
terrorism against the Israeli people.

The fact is, it is the evil Palestinian leadership
that has brought this horror and destruction upon its
own people by holding it hostage to its evil grip of
terror. We have heard a lot today about the occupied
territories; we have not heard a word of admission that,
were it not for their tragic leadership and their choice
of terror rather than a settlement when one was offered,
the Palestinian people would long ago have had its own
State.

This draft resolution would have done nothing to
bring about an end of suffering for either Israelis or
Palestinians. Rather, it would have worked against the
vital interests of both groups. By focusing solely on
Israeli actions to stop terrorism and failing to properly
express and expressly condemn the terrorism that is the
cause of those actions, it would have emboldened the
terrorists to continue to hurt both communities and to
continue to obstruct the path to peace.

The struggle towards peace must be advanced.
One-sided draft resolutions such as this one do not
contribute towards the goal of a peaceful Middle East.
They only contribute to allowing terror to continue and
to keeping peace forever out of our grasp.

The Security Council has an obligation to the
victims of terrorism and to the struggle for peace.
Palestinian terrorist organizations and the regimes that
support them are the true enemies of peace and of the
Palestinian and the Israeli peoples. They should be the
focus of the Council's attention, because they are the
ones that are obstructing peace. Only by confronting
them directly can we regain our footing on the road
map once again.

