Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
warmly welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
at this important meeting.

The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of
this resolution and the constructive negotiations which
preceded it. The whole United Nations system will
hope that the vote which we have just taken marks a
return to sustained consensus on one of the most
difficult foreign policy issues we have faced. The
United Kingdom will work to maintain that collective
approach.

We shall be discussing in detail later this morning
the response to the humanitarian situation in Iraq. The
United Kingdom has operated in Iraq from the
beginning strictly in accordance with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the Hague Regulations.

I should like to highlight three elements of this
important resolution. First, it sets out a vital and
independent post-conflict role, covering a wide range
of important areas, for the United Nations. I hope that
the Secretary-General will very rapidly appoint and
deploy a strong Special Representative to drive forward
the United Nations activities. The United Kingdom
looks forward to working alongside that appointment,
not least to ensure the early establishment of an
internationally recognized representative Government
by the people of Iraq.

Secondly, it lifts the burden of the most
comprehensive sanctions regime ever imposed by the
United Nations. With economic sanctions terminated,
the efforts of the people of Iraq to rebuild their
economy will be significantly strengthened. The new
Development Fund for Iraq will ensure that oil
revenues are used in a transparent manner to meet the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, assist economic
reconstruction, allow for continued disarmament and
promote other purposes benefiting the people of Iraq.
An International Advisory and Monitoring Board,
coupled with independent auditing, will help guarantee
that Iraq's resources are once again used exclusively to
benefit its people.

Thirdly, the resolution gives a sound basis for the
international community to come together, in the
interests of the Iraqi people, consistent with
international law. We look forward to increased
international and United Nations involvement helping
the people of Iraq to reform their institutions, rebuild
their country and enjoy conditions of stability and
security in a stable regional environment.

Throughout our negotiations on this resolution, I
said that it was not an omnibus - that it did not seek
to resolve every issue. Among the issues we will need
to take up in due course are the functions of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency as they relate to the complete disarmament of
Iraq under previous resolutions. The United Kingdom
continues to see a role for both bodies in the eventual
confirmation of disarmament and perhaps, if the
Council agrees, in longer-term monitoring and
verification. The Council will also need to consider the
future of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission, the maintenance of the arms embargo,
progress on repatriating Kuwaiti and third-State
nationals and the Kuwaiti archives, and other issues
flowing from or relevant to this resolution. I can assure
colleagues that the United Kingdom is committed to
reporting regularly on its efforts and would expect to
do so on a quarterly basis. We also are committed to a
serious review of the resolution within 12 months,
considering further steps that might be necessary.

The adoption of this resolution lays the
foundation for an operational partnership between the
United Nations and other players in Iraq, including,
most importantly, the Iraqis themselves. The
experience and expertise of the United Nations in
returning a troubled country to the hands of its own
people is an instrument which the United Kingdom
admires and respects. It must be fully used in Iraq.

