The President (spoke in Chinese): At the outset
of this meeting I should like, on behalf of the Security
Council, to express sorrow at the death of His
Excellency Mr. Humayun Rasheed Choudhury, Speaker
of the National Assembly of the People's Republic of
Bangladesh. As one of the most experienced and
distinguished professional diplomats of the developing
world, Mr. Choudhury served as President of the
General Assembly at its forty-first session, in 1986,
and made special efforts to promote the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. On this
sad occasion, I should like to convey to the
Government and the people of Bangladesh, and to the
bereaved family, the Council's profound condolences.

I now invite the members of the Security Council
to rise and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the
memory of His Excellency Mr. Humayun Rasheed
Choudhury.

The members ofthe Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Central African Republic

Third report of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office
in the Central African Republic (BONUCA)
(8/2001/660)

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
third report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA), document 8/2001/660.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has examined the
report of the Secretary-General of 2 July 2001 on
the situation in the Central African Republic and
on the activities of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) (S/2001/660).

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, General Amadou Toumani
Toure', for the mission he conducted in Bangui
from 9 June to 1 July 2001. It notes with
satisfaction that the mission has contributed to
easing tensions in the Central African Republic.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of the new Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Central African
Republic. It looks forward to his assuming the
active leadership of BONUCA at an early date.

"The Security Council reiterates its
condemnation of the recent attempted coup in the
Central African Republic. It recognizes the
importance of the Central African Republic to
subregional stability. It expresses its deep concern
at the precarious situation in the country and the
persisting acts of violence, in particular against
certain ethnic groups. The Council notes that such
a climate is not conducive to encouraging the
continuation of the return home of the thousands
of Central Africans that were displaced or took
refuge in neighbouring countries as a result of the
events at the end of May. It calls upon the
Government of the Central African Republic to
take urgent steps to bring an end to all acts of
violence.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the killing of the security coordinator for the
United Nations system in the Central African
Republic. It takes note of the condemnation of
this act by the Central African authorities and of
their intention to carry out an investigation and
urges them to bring those responsible to justice.

"The Security Council calls for respect for
human rights, national reconciliation and political
dialogue in the spirit of the 1998 National
Reconciliation Pact (S/1998/219, appendix).

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit to it by 30
September 2001 recommendations on how the
United Nations might further contribute to the
recovery of the Central African Republic, paying
particular attention to the following questions:

"(a) Strengthening BONUCA, in particular
in areas such as human rights monitoring,
assistance to the judicial system and capacity-
building, and enhancing the effectiveness of its
early-warning capacity;

"(b) Exploring with the Government of the
Central African Republic, in cooperation with the
relevant institutions, the provision of expertise in
the area of public administration and finances, in
particular by making available experts in such
matters;

"(c) The continued and improved
restructuring of the Central African armed forces
and the implementation of an effective arms-
collection programme.

"The Security Council expresses its
willingness to study, in cooperation with the
relevant institutions, particularly the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, the
recommendations of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council stresses that an
enhanced international effort will be necessary to
help in the recovery of the Central African
Republic. It urges all States that made pledges at
the special donor meeting in New York in May
2000 to fulfil them. It calls on the Bretton Woods
institutions to take into account the specific
nature of the situation in order to conclude
programmes with the Central African authorities
at an early date. The Council stresses the crucial
importance of poverty eradication, debt payment
and payment of arrears of salary for civil
servants, which requires in the long term
heightened efforts on the part of the Government
of the Central African Republic in the
management of public finances and
administration.

"The Security Council again recalls that
responsibility for national reconciliation, stability
and the reconstruction of the country lies
primarily with the political leaders and the people
of the Central African Republic. It emphasizes in
this regard that the full effectiveness of the
assistance of the international community
depends on the implementation in parallel of
appropriate structural reforms."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50p.m.

