Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): I thank you,
Madam President, for being here and for presiding over
today's meeting, the first ever Security Council meeting
dedicated to policing, one ofthe most important tools in
our collective arsenal to prevent violence and conflict.
Your presence here is a testament to Australia's deep
and enduring commitment to improving United Nations
policing in the context of peacekeeping operations.

I had the privilege recently of engaging with
Commissioner Hinds, the Australian head of the United
Nations police in Liberia. He was extremely impressive
in a very difficult operating environment. Of course,
every one of the missions represented here presents a
difficult operating environment of various kinds. So, I
thank those gentlemen for their great leadership.

We meet at a time of growing demand for United
Nations peacekeeping missions. In April, the Security
Council authorized the deployment of 1,800 United
Nations police for a single peacekeeping mission in
the Central African Republic. That is more than all the
United Nations police deployed in every peacekeeping
mission in 1994, when there were only 1,677 all told.
In 2012 there were 56 authorized formed police units;
today there are 72, so we are seeing that kind of
difference in just a two-year period.

The increasing demand for United Nations police
reflects our evolving understanding of their role.
We recognize that they are central to ensuring the
overarching objective of peacekeeping missions, which
is not merely to stop conflicts but to build a sustainable
peace in their place. Given that, what we ask of United
Nations police has evolved too, from passive monitoring
of local police performance to taking on many law-
enforcement duties and the training of host-country
forces. That is logical. If one of the main reasons we
need peacekeeping missions in the first place is the
fragility or utter lack of public security, it follows that
for countries to be able to protect their own people, and
for missions to be able to eventually wind down, we
have to strengthen host-country law enforcement. Our
ability to build more accountable, professional police in
host countries is the sine qua non of broader efforts to
re-establish - or in some instances to establish for the
first time - the rule of law.

That is why the United States is investing in
strengthening United Nations police forces. This year
alone we have provided training for 15 formed police
units that have been deployed to five different United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and equipment to
ensure the swift deployment of United Nations police
units from Benin, Burkina Faso, Senegal and Togo. It
is why we commend the recent commitments of police
personnel by Bangladesh, China, Finland, Mongolia,
Nepal and Rwanda, announced at the peacekeeping
summit co-chaired by Vice-President Biden in
September. Those contributions are critical to filling
the current gap between capacity and need.

United Nations police are showing they can
handle complex duties such as protecting civilians
and maintaining law and order. In South Sudan it is
the responsibility of just three United Nations formed
police units, made up of 350 police from Bangladesh
and Nepal, together with 500 United Nations individual
police officers, to provide internal security in nine
camps that are sheltering approximately 100,000
internally displaced persons. People who support the
Government and people who oppose it live in close
proximity in those camps - as do people from ethnic
groups that have been pitted against one another in
South Sudan's brutal civil war - making the job of
policing the camps an extremely challenging one. The
United Nations gets and deserves a great deal of credit
for opening its gates in South Sudan to people fleeing
violence, but it is also worth singling out the United
Nations police, who are responsible for preventing
violence once people are inside those gates. In the
Central African Republic's capital of Bangui, five
formed police units and 100 individual police officers,
together with a pair of military battalions, are fully
responsible for public security in the city from 4 pm.
to 8 am. every single day.

Given the rising demand for and demands on United
Nations police, it is remarkable that this is our first ever
Security Council meeting dedicated to the issue, and
the first time that Council members are being briefed
by police contingents. That is indicative of a broader
lack of communication from the field to the Council.
The Council will benefit tremendously from having
more insight into the challenges and problems in the
field. We must establish fluid lines of communication
that enable missions to swiftly share information from
the field. That should not mean only through Security
Council meetings such as this one; we should have
multiple means of getting regular feedback on what
is working and what is not. That will make operations
more accountable and more effective, and we will be
more helpful in supporting police contingents in their
hour of need.

Rising demands and responsibilities are also why
we must do a better job of tracking performance. To
that end, we welcome the development of the Strategic
Guidance Framework, particularly the focus on human
rights, the protection of civilians and transparency.
The United States Government participated in the
regional consultation on the Framework in Norway,
and we found that session appropriately critical and
constructive. That approach - learning in real time
from successes and failures in the field, and bringing
Member States into the discussion - is the right way
to address the increasingly complex challenges that
United Nations police face. For the Framework to be
effective in the real world, it must be made actionable
for police leadership on the ground, and we must keep
adapting and improving it, based on the feedback of
those who know best.

In that spirit, we see our questions today for the
Police Commissioners as an initial exchange in what we
would like to be a much more regular back-and-forth. In
conclusion, I have two questions.

First, the protection of civilians is central to the
mandates of modern peacekeeping operations. It is also
a fundamental responsibility of law enforcement. Yet
as we have often highlighted in the Council, in practice
missions routinely fail to live up to that mandate. For all
those here who are active in areas where the issue has
arisen - at some point in the life ofa mission - ofhow
police in particular can help implement the mandate to
protect civilians, I would like to ask what obstacles they
have encountered in fulfilling that responsibility. Do
the police under their command have clear guidance
on what the protection of civilians entails, and how
it should be carried out? What steps can Police
Commissioners take, or have already taken, in the
field to ensure that police from very different policing
cultures, and from different contributing countries,
have similar interpretations of what the protection of
civilians means? That is of course also an issue on the
troop contributors' side, but it bears exposition and
explanation on the policing side too.

Secondly, and lastly, in understanding the critical
role that police can play in building up the capacity
of host countries' law-enforcement bodies, one of
our collective challenges is balancing the need for
providing law and order in certain circumstances
where there is a policing vacuum, while at the same
time rapidly and intensively training local police so that
they can re-assume their responsibilities. The presence
of international police cannot become an excuse for
local police not to step up, and that is a risk. I would be
very grateful if each of the Police Commissioners could
speak to that question of balancing the importance
of actually providing law and order when civilians
are in need of security against the importance of not
becoming a crutch for host countries. That is a very
challenging issue, and we welcome any insight that can
be offered as to what the Council could do to remove
obstacles the police have in strengthening host-country
law enforcement on the ground.

