Mr. Rodas Melgar (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We thank your Government, Sir, for having
organized this timely debate, as well as for the concept
paper circulated among us (S/2012/13, annex). We
highly appreciate your personal presence at this
gathering, which undoubtedly adds to its relevance. We
also value the presence of the senior officials of the
five subregional institutions who have joined us, and
we thank the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union for his briefing on United Nations-
African Union cooperation in peace and security. We
also sincerely appreciate the Secretary-General's
complete and illuminating report on the same topic
(S/2011/805).

This is a very special occasion for me - I would
even say an emotional one - since this is our first
participation in a debate of the Security Council since
we took our place as an elected member last week, and
because it takes place two days before the present
Administration of my country relinquishes power to
the new Government elected by popular vote in
November. In other words, this week is of special
relevance for our history of democratic consolidation at
the national level, and also for our presence, for the
first time, in this body of the United Nations. I
therefore welcome the opportunity to be present on this
occasion.

It might be argued that Guatemala has little to
offer in a debate on the strategic partnership between
the Security Council and the African Union, since we
do not belong to the latter, but that is not the case. On
the contrary, today's debate is very pertinent for us,
since regional cooperation is one of the pillars of our
foreign policy. For 60 years now, our subregion,
Central America, has been a pioneer in promoting a
broad and deep integration process, which partially
explains the high value we place on regionalism in all
its manifestations. The support we offered to the recent
creation of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States is, of itself, one more example of that
vocation.

The expression of that policy in the context of the
United Nations is found in the area of peace and
security under Chapter VIII of the Charter, which
covers the compatibility between the work of the
Security Council and regional organizations. Indeed,
we have witnessed the growing link between the
Council and regional entities in the resolutions adopted
by this organ recently, in which the African Union
certainly plays a prominent role, together with other
regional economic communities, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States.

The link between the Security Council and
regional entities is not limited to the preventive actions
and mediation contemplated in Article 52 of the
Charter or to the coercive measures contemplated in
Article 53; indeed, as the report of the Secretary-
General reminds us, those entities increasingly
participate in peacekeeping operations and, by
extension, in peacebuilding activities. In both
endeavours, we feel part of a community of interests
with our colleagues of the African continent, in our
double capacity as a troop-contributing country and as
a country that experienced a post-conflict situation
with very unique experiences of peacebuilding on the
heels of the signing of our own peace accords in late
1996.

Judging from the concept paper circulated by the
presidency (S/2012/13, annex) and the report of the
Secretary-General, much has been achieved in
partnering the Security Council with the African
Union - the latter, through the African Peace and
Security Architecture - since the Security Council
adopted resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1809 (2008). At
the same time, we take the point made in the concept
paper that there remains much to be done, above all in
the area of mediation and conflict prevention.

To the degree that concrete proposals emerge to
strengthen the link between both institutions, my
delegation will consider them with a positive
inclination. We are also well aware - and the
Secretary-General's report makes the point - that
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union has at times faced divergent positions
on particular issues. The same can be said for different
points of view regarding complementarities and
burden-sharing. However, we feel that the existing
consensus-building mechanisms between the parties
should help to resolve those issues.

In more general terms, we believe that the
partnership between the Security Council and regional
institutions in the area of peace and security contains
the conceptual underpinnings of a productive
relationship based on the clear comparative advantages
derived from the Council's mandate to maintain
international peace and security and the greater
knowledge and identification that regional institutions
tend to have regarding their own member countries.

That is why we applaud the growing tendency of
the Council - tacit, in some cases, and explicit in
others - to follow the guidance offered by the
regional entities, in contrast to the possible temptation
to try and dictate the path to follow from this Chamber
without consultations. Perhaps the best examples of the
results of this cooperation are the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the
African Union Mission in Somalia.

We also note that progress in the area of
cooperation has taken place both at the level of the
Secretariats of the United Nations and the African
Union and within the intergovernmental machinery. We
find that the yearly meetings of the Security Council
with the African Union Peace and Security Council are
of particular interest. We also applaud the
establishment in 2010 of the United Nations Office to
the African Union, which will bring greater
consistency to the relationship between the two
entities.

Naturally, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional institutions goes well beyond the
mandates of the Security Council. As is well known,
there are several agreements between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of
development cooperation, all under the umbrella of the
framework agreement signed in 2006 between them,
which contain a 10-year capacity-building programme
which is not limited to the peace and security cluster.
We naturally support cooperation in the area of
development, in the spirit of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development. That, too, can be perceived as a
conflict-prevention activity, under the broader aegis of
the General Assembly.

In summary, Guatemala, in its multilateral
vocation, has always been partial to combining the
presence of the United Nations with that of regional
and subregional institutions. That is valid for
development cooperation, the maintenance of
international peace and security, humanitarian
assistance and the promotion of human rights. It is
valid for our own continent - Latin America and the
Caribbean - and there is no reason to doubt that it is
equally so for Africa, where the African Union and a
host of subregional institutions have a solid and proven
track record of achievements. In the latter instance,
South Africa has played a leading role that merits our
recognition.

