Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under Secretary-General O'Brien for his briefing. As
we have heard from Under Secretary-General O'Brien
and other colleagues, last week the world's attention
was indeed transfixed by the shocked, blank stare of
5-year-old Omran Daqneesh, who looked out from the
back of an ambulance after having been pulled from
the rubble of his family's destroyed apartment building
in eastern Aleppo. Perhaps, most striking, however,
was Omran's silence. Even as the dust, debris and dried
blood covered the young boy's face, he did not cry out,
scream out for help and did not even call for his parents.
All that Omran could do was look straight ahead and
wipe the dirt from his hands on the ambulance seat.

Let us just pause and consider for a moment how
much trauma little Omran must have experienced to
react to the collapse of his home without even making a
single sound. But let us also consider what will happen
next for Omran and a generation of Syrian children
like him, who have known nothing but war. Omran
may now be discharged from one of the few remaining
hospitals in eastern Aleppo, but he still faces the horror
of Russian and Syrian air strikes that pummel his
neighbourhood daily. As we learned over the weekend,
Omran's older brother Ali died from the injuries that he
received in the air strike, the result of the Al-Assad's
regime wilful attacks to cut off eastern Aleppo.
Across Syria, the Al-Assad regime is drawing
upon Russian assistance to escalate the conflict. Fronts
that have been relatively quiet in recent months are
once again being bombed by the regime. In Daraa
governorate, for example, air strikes destroyed the
town of Jasem's only hospital, and strikes against Busra
al-Sham displaced thousands of people. In Idlib and
Aleppo, Human Rights Watch has reported at least 18
attacks with incendiary weapons between 5 June and
10 August, which one resident of Idlib described as
"blocks of flame falling from the sky". In the besieged
community of Darayya, where it has been 74 days since
the town's 4,000 residents have received a delivery
of food or medicine from the United Nations, there
are reports of civilians with burns that are consistent
with napalm exposure, and we recall that yesterday
marked the three-year anniversary of the gruesome
chemical-weapons attack in Ghouta for which the United
States remains determined to pursue accountability.

The Al-Assad regime has shown no hesitation
whatsoever to employ the most gruesome tactics in
pursuit of military gains, from launching starve-and-
surrender sieges to shoving crudely made barrel
bombs from helicopters. This is the regime that Russia
is supporting with its own air strikes and military
advisers. The fighting is getting worse and so are the
humanitarian consequences. The Al-Assad regime
has failed month after month to provide for unfettered
humanitarian access. This month, no United Nations
conveys have departed, largely because of the Al-Assad
regime's absurd bureaucratic obstructions. The regime
has allowed no assistance for the people of eastern
Aleppo this month. That affects up to 275,000 Syrians
under siege. It has been nearly four months since
Madaya, Zabadani, Al-Fouah and Kefraya received
aid. More than two months have passed since aid has
reached the besieged community of Al-Waer.

While the United States condemns all parties to
the conflict who use siege tactics, we must be clear
that the Al-Assad regime and international backers
are responsible for 78 per cent Syrians living under
siege, the overwhelming majority. Aleppo is facing the
threat of a double siege, with the regime bombarding
the east and the opposition forces attacking the west.
Some 1.8 million people, living in both sides ofAleppo,
could be trapped and cut off from assistance unless all
parties take immediate steps to allow for unfettered
humanitarian access and unfettered humanitarian
deliveries.

Last week, Russia announced its support for the
United Nations proposal to organize 48-hour weekly
pauses in Aleppo, the bare minimum amount of time
the United Nations needs to deliver aid. The United
States supports such pauses, which could give Aleppo's
residents a reprieve from daily bombardments and
allow aid to get in. It is imperative that all armed groups
in Aleppo respect the pauses and work with the United
Nations to provide access to both sides of the city. We
need to see Russia follow its unilateral declaration with
genuine steps to support regular and sustained access to
Aleppo. The pauses are not the solution to the problem
of humanitarian deliveries. That requires a more
comprehensive arrangement that revives the cessation
of hostilities and ensures unimpeded humanitarian
access nationwide. In the meantime, the people of
Aleppo need the help of the United Nations right now.

Another key factor that compounds Syria's
humanitarian suffering is the Al-Assad regime's
repeated destruction of hospitals and medical facilities.
We have heard of six health-care centres, hospitals
and laboratories hit by air strikes in the past five days.
In Dara'a, one of the first buildings struck after the
regime's escalation of air strikes in late July was the
Al-Radwan field hospital, which served more than
400,000 people, many of whom had fled violence in
other parts of Syria. Air strikes had already destroyed
the hospital twice, and the resilient people of Dara'a
invested what little they had to rebuild the hospital both
times. Local leaders must again make a gut-wrenching
choice - try to rebuild the hospital a third time, only to
see those resources potentially squandered by a future
air strike, or give up and leave the people of Dara'a
without critical medical care.

The shortage of medical care in eastern Aleppo
is prompting calls for medical evacuation, which the
Al-Assad regime persistently ignores. In July, five of
eastern Aleppo's nine hospitals were struck, and only
35 doctors are left working. Those heroic doctors simply
do not have the tools, the equipment or the medicine to
provide the care that so many Syrians injured by the
fighting desperately need.

On 8 August, Dr. Zaher Sahloul, of the Syrian
American Medical Society, told members of the
Security Council about 10-year-old Shahad, a little girl
critically injured when the Al-Assad regime dropped
a barrel bomb on her house. While Shahad's wounds
were serious, the doctor believed at the time that she
could be saved with proper treatment, including a
computerized tomography scan for diagnostics, which
was not available to anyone in eastern Aleppo. Just one
day after Dr. Sahloul talked with us about the urgent
need for Shahad to be evacuated, the little girl died. She
was just one among countless men, women and children
who might have been saved but for the Al-Assad
regime's siege tactics.

The steps that the parties need to take to fix this
situation are well known. The Al-Assad regime must
recognize that there is no military solution to the
conflict. Those who enable and support Al-Assad's
attacks, including Russia, must use their influence to
bring the bombardments to an end. While we continue
to negotiate for a resumption of the cessation of
hostilities, Al-Assad's sieges, barrel bombs, strikes
on medical facilities, obstruction of aid and use of
incendiary weapons will make that goal ever-harder to
attain. Negotiations require a show of good faith, but
the Al-Assad regime has instead chosen to expand the
fighting on the ground and deepen the suffering of the
Syrian people.

I would conclude with just one more thought. Last
Friday, 19 August, was World Humanitarian Day, a day
on which we honour those who have been killed trying
to help others and those who risk their lives every day to
relieve suffering. In Syria, hundreds of United Nations
staff, Red Crescent staff and volunteers, workers in
non-governmental organizations, doctors, nurses and
White Helmet first-responders, like the late Khaled
Omar Harrah, whose death Stephen O'Brien just noted,
have all paid the ultimate price for their selflessness
and bravery in the line of duty. At an event in the
General Assembly Hall last Friday evening to mark
World Humanitarian Day, Hala Kamil, a brave Syrian
mother, whose family of four children fled Aleppo and
who is featured in the Frontline: Children of Syria
documentary, spoke to a jam-packed Hall. Hala said,

"I do not agree with those out there who say
that there are two worlds, one for the political
decision-makers and one for those who bear the
consequences of their decisions. We who suffer
those consequences must have some bearing on the
actions or lack of action of the powerful."

We should be guided by Hala's voice and the
voices of the many Syrians who stand up every day
to demand peace and help those who are suffering. To
honour their sacrifices, we cannot continue to relay the
same list of horrors, the same list but with different
names, month after month, while Syria is descending
into an irreparable state. Instead, there must an end
to the sieges, an end to the barrel bombs and an end
to the strikes on civilians. Only then will Syrians like
Hala Kamil and her children, Sara, Farah, Helen and
Mohammed, be able to contemplate a different and
more humane future.

