The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I want to thank Mr. Shearer for his briefing. I
also thank Ambassador Seck for his leadership and
Ambassador Ciss for his briefing today.

The BBC recently ran a report with a headline that
asked the question: Why are there still famines? It is a
good question. The United Nations has declared that
we are facing the biggest humanitarian crisis since the
Second World War due to famines in Africa and Yemen.
Twenty million people are at risk of starvation in South
Sudan; 5.5 million face life-threatening hunger if
nothing changes soon. That is fully half the population
of that young and troubled country. How can so many
people be facing starvation, given the technological and
humanitarian capabilities we have today?

Last month in the Council (see S/PV.7906),
Ambassador Sison gave the best answer there is to
famine in South Sudan. The famine is not the result
of drought; it is the result of leaders more interested
in political power and personal gain than in stopping
violence and allowing humanitarian access. The famine
in South Sudan is man-made. It is the result of ongoing
conflict in that country. It is the result of an apparent
campaign against the civilian population. It is the result
of killing humanitarian workers - 16 this year alone.
It is the result of denying starving people access to the
food and medicine that will save their lives. That is the
reason there is famine in South Sudan.

I commend the United Nations for continuing to
shelter over 200,000 South Sudanese civilians at sites
across the country. It is thanks to that effort and the
dedication of aid workers that there is at least some
relief for the people of South Sudan. The United Nations
has also made some progress with our peacekeeping
mission there. In response to failures by the mission
last year, we are doing a betterjob protecting civilians.
The mission has succeeded in establishing weapons-
free zones around civilian protection sites in Juba,
contributing to a significant drop in reported crime and
violence, including sexual violence against women.
In contrast, the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan have little to no progress to report. Last month,
we issued presidential statement S/PRST/20l7/4, calling
on all parties to take several urgent steps. As we meet
here today, none of these steps has been taken - not
one. We called on the warring parties to immediately
adhere to a ceasefire. There is no ceasefire in South
Sudan today; instead, there are reports of serious
human rights violations and abuses, and of violations
of international humanitarian law, many at the hands of
Government forces. Thousands of civilians continue to
pour out of the country to escape the conflict. So many
people have fled the violence that Uganda is now home
to the world's largest refugee camp.

We called on South Sudan to allow our peacekeepers
to do theirjob - ajob that includes protecting civilians,
monitoring and investigating human rights, and creating
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian aid. We
called on the warring parties to allow humanitarian
organizations to do their job. Neither of these things
has happened. The Government continues to obstruct
the peacekeeping mission from reaching those most in
need. Aid workers continue to be killed trying to help
the victims that the fighting has created. In fact, South
Sudan is the most dangerous country in the world for
aid workers today. More people have died trying to help
in South Sudan than in any other country. It is not even
close. In addition, the Government has still not taken any
meaningful action to punish the soldiers responsible for
the July 2016 attack on aid workers at the Terrain Hotel
in Juba. Finally, we called on the parties to the conflict
to support the efforts ofthe United Nations, the African
Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to reach a political settlement. That, too,
has not happened.

It is obvious that our presidential statement now
joins the long list of other statements and resolutions
of the Council that have been ignored by the warring
factions in South Sudan. We have shown patience, and
our patience has been rewarded with continued fighting
and the deepening suffering of the South Sudanese
people. We have shown faith that certain steps, if taken
by the South Sudanese Government, would help end
the fighting and lessen the humanitarian crisis, but the
opposite has happened.

How long can we continue to make statements that
are ignored or issue calls to action that fall on deaf ears?
How many more selfless, dedicated aid workers can we
watch being murdered with impunity? It is clear that the

warring parties do not have the political will to end this
conflict on their own, and so it falls to us to consider
our next steps carefully and without any illusions.

Once more, we call on all parties to stop the
violence, allow aid groups to address the humanitarian
crisis, and return to the negotiating table. We urge all
parties to seriously engage with the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the United Nations to achieve a ceasefire and
immediate humanitarian access. We ask our regional
and international partners to respond with appropriate
urgency to the situation in South Sudan, and we call
on the AU and United Nations envoys to put forward
an operational plan of active engagement for peace in
South Sudan. I call on the Council to move forward
with the tools available to it, such as further sanctions
and an arms embargo, or the violence and the atrocities
will continue. We must not wait for more death, more
displacement and more destruction before we have the
courage to act.

This is unacceptable. We must see a sign that
progress is possible. The first sign we must see is the
South Sudanese Government abiding by President
Kiir's promise to fellow Heads of State one month ago
today to announce a unilateral ceasefire. We must see
that ceasefire implemented, with orders for the troops
of the Sudan People's Liberation Army to immediately
return to their barracks. We must see a dramatic
change in the treatment of humanitarian workers in
South Sudan since the outbreak of the civil war in
December 2013. We have all noted that 83 humanitarian
workers have been killed. On 10 April, Peter Alex, a
World Food Programme aid worker, was detained.
The Government should heed calls for his release.
Moreover, the Government must cease obstructions to
humanitarian assistance.

We cannot and should not continue on the path we
are on without some reassurance that South Sudan's
leaders are willing to commit to the hard work ofpeace.
It is time for South Sudan's leaders to show that they
are willing to put their people ahead of personal and
political self-interest, and it is time for the Council to
acknowledge that its requests have been disregarded
and ignored.

I have sat here and listened to the many statements
that have been given and the thanks offered to
Mr. Shearer. It was nice and they were genuine, but we
gave him no help whatsoever to do his job because we

are allowing President Kiir to continue to do what he
is doing. We are continuing to talk about how sorry we
are for the people of South Sudan. We are continuing to
talk about how we wish there was national dialogue, but
yet there is no dialogue to be had. We talk about how we
wish we could get humanitarian workers in there, but
we are not doing anything to force the Government. We
talk about how much more needs to be done in South
Sudan, yet no one is stepping up and saying "Let us
do it".

If we truly appreciate the work that Mr. Shearer is

doing and if we truly care for the people of South Sudan,
then we must tell the South Sudanese Government that
we are not going to put up with this anymore. If we care
about the leadership of the Security Council, we should
not allow a presidential statement to be totally ignored.
The entity that is benefiting from the division of the
Council is the South Sudanese Government, so if we
want it to continue to harass the people of South Sudan,
and if we want to continue to see starvation in South
Sudan, doing nothing is exactly what we need to keep
doing. But if we are going to stop it and if we are really
going to truly say we want to help the people of South
Sudan, that is not about dialogue. That is not about
hope. That is not about wishes. That is about action,
and I call on the Security Council to act.

I now resume my functions is President of the
Security Council.

There are no more speakers on the list.

The meeting rose at noon.
