Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I also thank the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy for participating in today's meeting and for her
very important and clear-cut position statement.

I would like to reiterate Ukraine's full support
for the further development of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Such cooperation is
essential for delivering on the Council's mandate to
maintain international peace and security. The role
of the European Union (EU) in such cooperation is a
special one. The European Union is a major political
and economic player in the international arena and a
contributor to the resolution of a number of conflicts
and crises, far beyond its geographic neighbourhood,
with Colombia as just one recent example. The EU is an
active partner of the United Nations in peacekeeping,
humanitarian assistance, non-proliferation, combating
terrorism and many other issues.

The European Union Global Strategy for Foreign
and Security Policy, presented last year, reflects
the main areas and priorities of EU-United Nations
cooperation. Ukraine fully shares the overall vision
of the Strategy, in particular responsibility, unity and
an integrated approach to conflicts and crises. The
strong engagement of the EU in conflict resolution
processes and its participation in international political
dialogue would definitely enhance the voice of partners
struggling for peace, democratic values and their
sovereign choice. We believe that a rules-based global
order with multilateralism as its key principle and the
United Nations at its core is a vital element in ensuring
sustainable peace in the world.
Ukraine also supports the initiatives mentioned in
the Strategy on United Nations peacebuilding efforts,
the implementation of the commitments on sustainable
development and climate change, support of the
Human Rights Council and others. We also support the
Strategy's call upon members of the Security Council
not to vote against credible draft resolutions on timely
and decisive action to prevent or end mass atrocities. In
the light of events in Syria and Russian shameful vetoes
on relevant resolutions, that call is as relevant as ever.

The High Representative outlined a number of
challenges and threats that affect the world and where
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU is
effectively maintained. We praise the EU contribution
to conflict resolution in the Middle East and Africa, as
well as its work to combat terrorism, violent extremism,
climate change and so on. I would like to emphasize in
particular the existing conflicts in Europe and the role
of the EU in their management and resolution.

During our presidency in February, Ukraine
organized an open debate (see S/PV.7886) on that issue,
and we are grateful to the European Union for its active
participation and valuable input to the discussion.
During that meeting, the majority of Council members
expressed a common vision of the important role of the
EU as an arrangement under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, in addressing current and emerging
security challenges in Europe. In my view, that role is
vital for the following reasons, inter alia.

First, the contribution of the EU is essential in
building the resilience of countries in the Eastern and
Southern neighbourhoods by encouraging them in
a reform process that brings long-term benefits and
fosters stability in the region. The reviewed Euro-
Mediterranean partnership and updated EU Global
Security Strategy set up good frameworks for building
upon our cooperation on security matters.

Secondly, the EU is directly or indirectly involved in
conflict resolution in Europe, including around Ukraine,
the Western Balkans, Moldova, Georgia and so on. It
defends the European security order, which is firmly
based on the principles of sovereignty, independence
and the territorial integrity of States, the inviolability
of borders, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
free choice of countries in deciding their own future.
Such EU efforts prove their effectiveness in the former
Yugoslavia, where despite all ofthe suffering, numerous
casualties and terrible atrocities, all conflicts are now
by and large resolved. In the post-Soviet region to the
contrary, none of the conflicts - I repeat, none - has
been settled. Moreover, new conflicts erupt and new
threats to regional peace appear. Why is that?

The answer is rather simple. In the case of the
former Yugoslavia, success was reached due to the
resolute stance of the international community and its
coordinated efforts, including the United Nations and the
EU. Furthermore, although not without delay, spoilers
and instigators of the conflicts were removed from
decision-making. In the territory of the former Soviet
Union, the situation is different, if not opposite. Since
the early 1990s, the Russian Federation has embraced the
concept of an instability belt. It has effectively created
controlled instability in many countries along Russia's
border to keep them in Moscow's orbit, and, like in the
case of Ukraine, to halt any integration with the EU.
We are greatly thankful for the strong position of the
European Union on the Russian aggression in Ukraine,
which the High Representative has just confirmed. I am
also thankful to other colleagues around the table who
spoke in support of my country.

We believe that the existing situation is not a
deadlock; protracted and active conflicts in Europe
can be effectively resolved and potential tensions can
be prevented from erupting. We also believe that the
European Union, together with the United Nations,
should not shy away from taking an even more proactive
approach in conflict management and resolution
in Europe.

In conclusion, EU-United Nations cooperation has
proved to be invaluable on numerous occasions, from
the fight against terrorism to the peaceful resolution
of conflicts in different parts of the world. Ukraine
looks forward to that continued partnership, which
will further effectively contribute to the promotion of
international peace and security.

