Ms. Jolie Pitt: It is an honour for me to brief the
Council today. I would like to thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and my
colleagues from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the World Food Programme.

Since the Syria conflict began in 2011, I have made
11 visits to Syrian refugees in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey and Malta. I wish that some of the Syrians I
have met could be here today. I think of the mother
I met recently in a camp in Iraq, who could tell the
Council what it is like to try to live after your young
daughter is ripped from your family by armed men and
taken as a sex slave. I think of Hala, one of six orphaned
children living in a tent in Lebanon. She could tell us
what it is like to share the responsibility for feeding
your family at the age of 11, because your mother died
in an air strike and your father is missing. And I think
of Mr. Ayman, a doctor from Aleppo, who watched
his wife and three-year-old daughter drown in the
Mediterranean when a smugglers' boat, packed with
hundreds of people, collapsed. He could tell us what it
is like to try to keep your loved ones safe in a war zone,
only to lose them in a desperate bid for safety after all
other options have failed.

Any one of the Syrians I have met would speak more
eloquently about the conflict than I ever could. Nearly
4 million Syrian refugees are victims of a conflict they
have no part in. Yet they are stigmatized, unwanted and
regarded as a burden. So I am here for them, because
this is their United Nations. Here, all countries and all
people are equal, from the smallest and most broken
Member States to the free and powerful. The purpose
of the United Nations is to prevent and end conflict, to
bring countries together, find diplomatic solutions and
save lives. We are failing to do that in Syria.

Responsibility for the conflict lies with the warring
parties inside Syria, but the crisis is made worse by
the division and indecision within the international
community that prevents the Security Council from
fulfilling its responsibilities. In 2011, the Syrian
refugees I met were full of hope. They asked me to tell
people what was happening to them, trusting that the
truth alone would guarantee international action. When
I returned, hope was turning into anger, the anger of
the man who held up his little baby, asking me, "Is this
a terrorist? Is my son a terrorist?" On my last visit, in
February, anger had subsided into resignation, misery
and the bitter question, "Why are we, the Syrian people,
not worth saving?"

To be a Syrian caught up in this conflict is to be
cut off from every law and principle designed to protect
innocent life. International humanitarian law prohibits
torture, starvation and the targeting of schools and
hospitals, but those crimes are happening in Syria every
day. The Security Council has powers to address those
threats to international peace and security, but those
powers go unused. The United Nations has adopted the
concept of the responsibility to protect, which says that
when a State cannot protect its people the international
community will not stand by. But in Syria we are
standing by.

The problem is not a lack of information. We know
in excruciating detail what is happening in Yarmouk,
Aleppo and Homs. The problem is a lack of political
will. We cannot look at Syria, and the evil that has
arisen from the ashes of indecision, and think that this
is not the lowest point in the world's inability to protect
and defend the innocent. I say this as someone who is
proud to have been part of the United Nations system for
13 years. I do not think enough people realize just how
many people are fed, sheltered, protected and educated
by the United Nations every day of the year. But all
of that good is undermined by the message being sent
in Syria, which is that laws can be flouted, chemical
weapons can be used, hospitals can be bombed, aid can
be withheld and civilians starved with impunity.

So, on behalf of Syria's refugees, I make three pleas
to the international community. The first is an appeal
for unity. It is time for the Security Council to work as
one to end the conflict and reach a settlement that also
brings justice and accountability for the Syrian people.
It is very encouraging to see ministerial representation
from Jordan, Spain and Malaysia here today. But I
think we would all like to see the Foreign Ministers
from all the Security Council member countries here,
working on a political solution for Syria as a matter of
urgency. In the past few months, we have seen intensive
diplomacy at work elsewhere in the region. Now let us
see what is possible for the people of Syria. And while
these debates are important, I also urge the Security
Council to visit Syrian refugees, to see at first hand
their suffering and the impact it is having on the region.
Those refugees cannot come to the Council, so I ask
that the Council go to them. Please.

Secondly, I echo what has been said about the
support from Syria's neighbours, which are making
an extraordinary contribution. It is sickening to see
thousands of refugees drowning on the doorstep of
the world's wealthiest continent. No one risks the
lives of their children in such a way except out of utter
desperation. If we cannot end the conflict, we have an
inescapable moral duty to help refugees and provide
legal avenues to safety.

Thirdly, the barbarism of those who inflict
systematic sexual violence demands a much greater
response from the international community. We must
send a signal that we are serious about accountability for
such crimes, and that is the only hope for establishing
any deterrence. So I call on Member States to begin
preparations now so that Syrian women are fully
represented in future peace negotiations, in accordance
with multiple Security Council resolutions.

And ifI may make a wider final point to conclude
my remarks, the crisis in Syria illustrates the fact that
our inability to find diplomatic solutions causes mass
displacement and traps millions of people in exile,
statelessness and displacement. Fifty-two million
people are forcibly displaced today - a sea of excluded
humanity. And while our priority must be ending the
Syria conflict, we must also broaden out the discussion
to this much wider problem. Our times will be defined
not by the crises themselves, but by the way we pull
together as an international community to address
them.

