Mr. Brites Pereira (Portugal): I would like to
start by thanking South Africa not only for giving us
the opportunity to discuss this important issue, but also
for President Jacob Zuma's presiding over the meeting.
We are particularly honoured by this fact.

Portugal believes that a strong relation between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) is
critical to peace and security on the African continent.
Portugal also strongly supports a greater role for the
African Union and African subregional organizations
in a context that embodies the principle of African
ownership when dealing with the major challenges of
the continent.

In that regard, I wish to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya and Commissioner Lamamra
for their very useful statements. We are also grateful
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/805),
which provides us with a very useful update on AU-
United Nations cooperation in the fields of peace and
security. It contains useful conclusions and lessons
learned, as well as recommendations on the way
forward. It shows us that we still have much to do
together to ensure that the existing mechanisms and
practices are used to their full potential.

The further development of the AU institutional
and political role is unstoppable. The reinforcement of
the United Nations presence in Addis Ababa is the
recognition of the AU's progressive affirmation as a
leader organization and indispensable player in African
peace processes. It also represents a serious effort to
make United Nations interaction with the AU more
coherent and efficient. Let us not forget that roughly
two-thirds of the issues addressed by the Security
Council pertain to Africa. As such, the views of the
African Union should be adequately taken into
consideration in the decision-making process of the
Council.

In addition, the ongoing dialogue between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council is critical in that regard. We need to
make sure that that dialogue is more substantive and
productive. We could achieve that by identifying more
clearly the issues of common concern to both bodies,
be they country situations or cross-cutting issues. Key
among those are human rights, democracy, the rule of
law, the defence of women and children in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and effectively addressing
sexual violence in armed conflicts, especially by
bringing the perpetrators to justice. We should also
look more carefully at how we can improve the
efficiency of our preventive diplomatic initiatives,
which should be geared towards more coordinated
action.

During its presidency of the Security Council last
November, Portugal promoted a debate on new
challenges to international peace and security (see S/PV.6668), which feature regularly on the agendas of
both the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. The outcomes of such
discussions must be fed into the larger United Nations-
AU dialogue, as they will enhance our understanding
of and response to specific African security concerns.

Another important aspect of the United Nations-
AU relationship is the further development of the
African Union's capacities, which should include the
areas of mediation and conflict prevention. The African
Union and subregional organizations are often much
closer to conflict situations on the continent than
anyone else and enjoy privileged access to local actors.
Those are clear advantages when trying to prevent
tensions from escalating into conflict. The United
Nations and other international partners, such as the
European Union, should thus continue to support the
capacities of the African Union. In that regard, the full
implementation of the 10-year capacity-building
programme is clearly a priority.

Portugal also strongly supports international
efforts aimed at strengthening the various dimensions
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
Through our active participation in the Africa-
European Union Strategic Partnership, we have
consistently advocated European financial and
technical assistance for African initiatives in the peace
and security fields.

On that score, let me underline the important
contribution of regional arrangements to peacekeeping,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. We
strongly encourage enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations Office to the African Union and the
African Union when planning and conducting
peacekeeping operations in Africa, as well as on any
other initiatives that seek to improve the
interoperability between the United Nations and the
African Union. Accordingly, we welcome the recently
published AU report, detailing its strategic vision on
the partnership between the African Union and United
Nations in peace and security matters.

We note that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are two models of
concrete peacekeeping cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU. We have learned many lessons
from those two experiences, but there is still room for
improvement. Meetings such as yesterday's on
AMISOM. (see S/PV.6701), bringing together key
partners from the AU and the United Nations, as well
as representatives of countries that contribute troops to
AMISOM, are fundamental in that joint learning
process. In that way, we will ensure that the strategic
dialogue between the two Councils translates into
effective operational cooperation on the ground.

Finally, we underscore the fact that contradictory
signals from international actors are likely to prolong
conflict and delay peaceful solutions in Africa.
Stronger United Nations-AU cooperation and a better
use of existing channels between those two
organizations are clearly the only way to ensure
coherence and to avoid the duplication of efforts.
Indeed, they are the only way to ensure the effective
response of the international community to crises,
including when they occur on the African continent.
Let us all work together to make sure that that is so.
