Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I too want to join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, and your very efficient
team not only for your spirit of endurance in a tumultuous
month, but especially for a superlative performance even
in the face of the numerous demands for your attention.
The wrap-up session offers us an opportunity for self-
assessment, and you have gone further by providing
a concept note to guide our discussion (S/2014/536, annex). I believe that we could utilize this opportunity
for self-assessment as a springboard for the future.

The month of July has been characterized by very
robust engagement on numerous rapidly developing
situations all around the globe. I want to limit my
intervention to three issues, namely, the Central African
Republic, the situation in Gaza, and Ukraine.

Regarding the Central African Republic, the
Council noted the state of preparations for the full
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic as it is poised to assume full authority from
the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic on 15 September. The
violence has imposed a very heavy humanitarian toll
on the Central African Republic. It is important to note
that this spate of tragedies in other theatres of conflict
appeared for a while to distract the Council from the
traditional arenas of conflict.

Some time ago, I talked about the forgotten
conflicts in Yemen, the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I believe that
the challenge for the Council in the future will be how
to maintain a prudent balance in its attention to threats
to international peace and security. There is a tendency
for us to concentrate our attention on the immediate
conflicts while we forget others that are still going on.
I draw on the analogy to the mother with sextuplets, all
ofthem crying for attention. She has to be very creative
in dealing with them. I think we are encouraged, in
spite of this omission, by the regional initiatives that
were taking place while we were paying attention to
other things.

For instance, in the Central African Republic, the
signing of the agreement on cessation of hostilities
and violence in Brazzaville on 23 July should serve
as a point of departure in the search for peace in that
country. This brings me to the debate that we held a few
days ago on partnerships in peacekeeping operations
(S/PV.7228). While we were distracted the regional
arrangement was in full force, and that served to
bridge the gap. I think that this phenomenon and such
developments must be encouraged.

The tensions over the kidnapping and killing of
three Israeli students and the apparent revenge killing
of a Palestinian teenager evolved into a major conflict
between Israel and Palestine. The story has been
replayed in this Chamber on and off. We regret that,
despite the calls by well-meaning leaders around the
world for de-escalation and restraint, the conflict has
continued to deepen both in intensity and in its scope,
claiming numerous lives, including those of women and
children. As we speak, the death toll on both sides is on
the increase.

I believe that our concern at this point must be to do
everything possible to propel the parties to respect their
commitments to a ceasefire that will permit the creation
of corridors for the delivery of humanitarian supplies.
While the Council responded swiftly by holding two
emergency meetings, it is unfortunate that it could only
agree on a presidential statement, three weeks after the
outbreak of hostilities. In the future, the Council should
aim for a quick and robust action - action designed to
avoid colossal loss oflife and alleviate human suffering.

The third issue, the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 on 17 July, was a very regrettable, tragic
and unfortunate incident. In the face of what seemed
like an apocalyptic end of the world, the Council kept
the world in suspense for a while over an obviously
amoral act capable of being replicated in other parts
of the world. We can see the copy-cat tendency in the
world today.

The Council's eventual unified stance in denouncing
and condemning the incident, with the adoption
of resolution 2166 (2014), must be commended. In
adopting the resolution, the Council has demonstrated
that it is capable of speaking with one voice when it
so chooses. That is precisely the higher moral ground
that the world expects from this Council. Indeed, it
must constitute the pattern for the future. It must serve
as credible scaffolding on which the future of global
peace and security will be built. We want to take the
opportunity to present that scaffolding to the United
Kingdom delegation as it assumes the presidency, and
we do it with tremendous confidence, hoping that this
will be the pattern for the future in the Council.

