Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): 1 would like to join
other delegations in expressing our appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing and
dedicated service as Head ofthe United Nations Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We wish him every success
in his future assignment.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today, I would like to add our voice to the
sincerest condolences to the people and Government of
Afghanistan, as well as those of Nepal and India, with
regard to yesterday's heinous terrorist attacks in Kabul
and Badakhshan.

We would like to note some important progress
made by the Government of Afghanistan in stabilizing
the political situation in the country since our last
meeting on this subject (see S/PV.7645). The assignment
of candidates to fill key Government positions in the
security sector, obtaining their approval by the National
Assembly, the promotion of legislative reforms on
elections, and the fight against corruption and terrorism
are all welcome developments.

Yet, we are concerned that the preparations for
the long-awaited parliamentary and district council
elections, scheduled for October, are being hampered
by disagreements over the electoral process and by the
ambiguity over the appointment of the leadership of
electoral management bodies. If the current political
impasse and security threats posed by terrorist groups
are used as an excuse for postponing the polls, the
prolonged delay will cause further fragmentation
among political elites in Afghanistan and overshadow
the legitimacy of the legislature.

To ensure the country's economic growth, in
our view the Government should focus attention on
addressing the fiscal gap, poverty and unemployment,
as stipulated in the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework. Cooperation with relevant
international financial and trade organizations should
also be carried out in order to further the implementation
of the Government's economic reform agenda.

We regret that the efforts of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group have not resulted in real prospects
for moving forward a national reconciliation process
and organizing direct peace talks between the Taliban
factions and Afghan Government representatives. To an
even greater extent, the ongoing insurgency campaign
of various terrorist and violent extremist groups
continues to adversely affect Afghanistan's political,
economic and security stability.

The annual Taliban spring offensive, followed by
a range of deadly terrorist attacks, have shocked the
world with the number of fatalities. In that regard,
we praise the courage of the Afghan nation in
withstanding that terrorist threat and preventing the
insurgency from widening its geographical reach. We
call on the United Nations and the whole international
community to continue to support Afghanistan in those
endeavours, including by strengthening its counter-
terrorism capacities.

We also welcome the efforts of Afghanistan's
internationalpartners to combat the Taliban, in particular
the elimination on 21 May this year of its leader,
Mullah Akhtar Mansour. However, the swift election of
Mansour's successor, Haibatullah Akhundzada, and his
deputies, who have strong connections with Al-Qaida
through the Haqqani network, have demonstrated the
resilience of the Taliban threat. Some experts heralded
a decline in hostilities while the new Taliban leadership
seeks pledges of allegiance with field commanders, yet
there is a danger of an intensification of the insurgency
as those commanders try to expand their influence
and support base in order to bargain with Akhundzada
for privileges. It is also alarming that the new Taliban
leader has never appeared on the relevant United
Nations sanctions list. Here, we agree with those who
call for this omission to be corrected without any
delay. Ukraine would also like to reiterate its call on
members of the international community with a degree
ofinfluence on the Taliban to persuade its leadership to
finally renounce aggression against the Afghan nation
and earnestly participate in peace negotiations.

The protection of civilians in Afghanistan has
become an increasingly complex challenge, particularly
in the light of the ongoing Taliban offensive. The ever-
growing numbers of casualties, especially among
women and children, and the displacement rates ofthose
forced to abandon their homes and seek refuge, warrant
our close attention. Another part of that problem is the
protection of humanitarian, medical and health-care

facilities in situations of armed conflict. Last month,
the Security Council sent a strong message concerning
this pressing issue by adopting resolution 2286 (2016).
However, as pointed out in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2016/532), health and humanitarian institutions of
the United Nations, international and non-governmental
organizations, including those carrying out demining
activities, continue to be subjected to arbitrary
searches, threats, looting and abductions by all parties
to the conflict. That constitutes a blatant violation of
international humanitarian law.

We are deeply concerned by these facts and call
on all sides to follow both the legal and fundamental
moral obligations to protect civilians in armed conflict
and to ensure their unimpeded access to humanitarian
aid. We also call on the Government of Afghanistan to
systematically investigate, with the support of UNAMA,
all such violations and bring those responsible tojustice.

