The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Germany, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hanz
(Germany) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/248, which contains the text of a
2

draft resolution submitted by Croatia, France,
Germany, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 5/2008/219, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it
(8/2008/248). Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1808 (2008).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.10pm.
08-30597

