Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I will try to be
very brief. I thank Ambassador Wittig for inviting
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and the Force
Commanders from the African Union-United Nations

Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to brief
the Council. I would like to thank them for their
insights this morning, and more importantly for the
work of the Force Commanders and police
commissioners and the hard work of all the women and
men who are under their command, frequently, as we
know, in very challenging circumstances and at great
personal risk. These risks were highlighted by the
recent attacks on UNIFIL. I join others in condemning
the attack earlier this week and in wishing a speedy
recovery to those who were injured.

The United Kingdom very much supports the
ongoing initiative, which has become something of a
tradition now, to ensure that force commanders and
police commissioners have an opportunity to brief the
Council during their annual conference in New York. It
is important to ensure that we do as much as is feasible
to improve the Council's understanding of the
operational demands placed on troops and police by the
peacekeeping resolutions we write.

As we demonstrated during our November
presidency of the Council, we have access to new
technology to ensure that we can hear from operational
commanders more frequently, and we believe that we
should take up that opportunity on a more regular
basis. It will be important that we can hear in due
course from the new Force Commander of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.

In the light of what I have heard from the Force
Commanders and from colleagues on the Council, I
would like to make observations on four brief points.

First is the protection of civilians. I took from the
presentation of General Nyamvumba a clear message
about the importance of the responsibility to protect
civilians under attack or threat of attack. That is
fundamental to peacekeeping responsibilities. I am
interested here in the linkage between that and the use
of a robust posture - a concept which is well
understood among UNAMID senior leadership. I am
aware that for some this is a controversial issue, but I
join my Nigerian colleague in expressing robust
support for robust posture. I am aware that the
Secretary-General has referred to UNAMID's
robustness as having contributed to a reduction in
attacks on the Mission, and I think that is an important
point.

Second is the impact of conditionality policy. I
listened to General Prakash's remarks on conditionality
with great interest. Conditionality is a requirement to
ensure that peacekeepers are not supporting activities
that fall outside international humanitarian law. The
application of such a policy must, obviously, be
rigorous.

But we have to also keep an eye on operational
effectiveness. General Prakash spoke about the balance
between the desirable and the feasible. I am interested
in the concept of that balance - how to strike it - if
there is time, but I appreciate the fact that we are
running against the clock. I would be interested in
General Prakash's view as to whether there are useful
general principles for this balance that can be
identified for wider application, or whether this is
something that needs to be determined very much on
the ground.

General Prakash also gave some useful guidelines
about implementing conditionality, in particular that it
is easier to implement at the start rather than
downstream. I think that is an important consideration
in the light of the new peacekeeping operation under
way in Southern Sudan.

My third observation is about inter-mission
cooperation, where I would briefly like to echo my
Nigerian colleague once again, and my United States
colleague, in expressing strong support for the
principle of inter-mission cooperation. There are
situations where this makes good operational sense,
and the asset-sharing between UNMIL and the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) is an
important example. I think the potential for this needs
to be fully explored.
My final observation is on clear mandates. I think
it was my Indian colleague who spoke about the
importance of clear mandates. We have all referred to
the risks and hardships that our peacekeeping
operations have to endure. I think the least that we can
do is to provide the peacekeeping missions with clear
mandates. It is all too easy for us around the Council
table to try and bridge differences through ambiguity
or elaborate wording. We always need to be mindful of
the problems this can pose to peacekeeping operations
in the field as they carry out their important work.

Finally, listening to the Force Commanders this
morning, I was reminded once again of the enormous
value that we get from the direct view from the field. I
would like to thank them very much for taking the time
from their annual conference to speak to the Council. I
hope we will be able to hear from them in the future on
a regular basis.

