Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

On 7 October, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1322 (2000), which called for the immediate
cessation of violence, and for all necessary steps to be
taken to ensure that violence ceases, that new
provocative actions are avoided, and that the situation
returns to normality in a way which promotes the
prospects for the Middle East peace process. Since
then, the Security Council has had the opportunity to
be briefed in private meetings with the President of the
Palestinian Authority, with the Permanent
Representative of Israel and with the Secretary-
General.

Today's meeting is a signal of the depth of our
concern at the deteriorating situation, which now poses
a threat to the stability of the region. We are concerned
at the almost daily loss of life, in many cases resulting
from the use of excessive force; nearly 300 persons,
many of them Palestinians, have lost their lives, and
more than 6,000 civilians have been injured. Jamaica
deplores the deaths and injuries among civilians
including innocent children, whether Palestinian or
Israeli, and we convey our sympathy and condolences
to the bereaved families.

The suffering of the people has been further
aggravated by the serious humanitarian and economic
situation in the Palestinian territories and by the plight
of vulnerable civilians, despite the strenuous
diplomatic efforts of the Secretary-General and of the
leaders of several countries - particularly the
Presidents of Egypt and of the United States of
America - to bring peace to the region. We urge the
parties to adhere to the ceasefire agreement reached at
Sharm el-Sheikh and to refrain from retaliatory action.
The establishment of a fact-finding mission to inquire
into the tragic events is an important part of that
process. We urge that its work begin forthwith.

A proposal has been made for the deployment of
a United Nations observer mission. We continue to
believe that this proposal, as well as others that could
deter further Violence and act as confidence-building
measures and promote dialogue between the parties,
deserves the serious consideration of all concerned.

Jamaica continues to encourage an end to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict through an active
negotiating process that takes into account the right to
security of all States in the region, including Israel, as
well as the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

Bearing in mind the responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of peace and security, it is
important for the Council to remain actively seized of
this matter, to continue to support the diplomatic
initiatives of the Secretary-General, and to continue to
work to bring about a lasting and comprehensive peace
within the framework of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

