Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): On behalf
of my Government, I would like to join other members of
the Council, the United Nations and the international
community in expressing appreciation for the role of the
multinational protection force, and in particular the
leadership of Italy, in Albania during the past several
months.
The mission of the multinational protection force to
facilitate the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian
assistance, protect international relief workers and help
create a secure environment in which elections could be
held has been by all accounts a success. In the wake of the
tragic violence and loss of life in this recent period, we
hope that Albania is at last on the road to stability,
democracy, and an economy based on free-market
principles.

I also wish to take this opportunity to emphasize the
remarkable work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), especially the role of the
personal representative for Albania of the OSCE Chairman-
in-Office, Mr. Franz Vranitzky, and his team. Their work
was instrumental in helping to organize the holding of
elections acceptable under the prevailing conditions, against
tremendous odds. This was a crucial first step in creating
viable institutions of democratic government in Albania. In
the critical period ahead, the OSCE will remain the central
coordinating body for international initiatives to assist the
newly elected Government.

We also welcome the results of the second
international meeting on Albania, held at Rome on 31 July,
which reaffirmed the commitment of the United States and
our partners in the international community to aid Albania,
but which also outlined the necessary fiscal and economic
steps which must be taken to put Albanian on a sound
economy footing.

One of the most urgent tasks which Albania must
address is the restoration of civil order and the creation of
a viable security structure consistent with a democratic
society. This task includes reconstruction of the Albanian
armed forces and the training of a non-partisan
professional police force. We applaud the decisions of
countries to remain involved in assisting the Albanian
military and police with bilateral training assistance
following the departure of the multinational protection
force. We welcome the decision of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), under its Partnership for
Peace programme, to send an assessment team to Albania
within the week. The recommendations of the team will
be incorporated into long-term plans to rebuild Albania's
security infrastructure within a democratic society.

The crisis of recent months has precipitated a period
of change in Albania. Much remains to be done, however.
Difficult and painful reform lies ahead if Albania is to
succeed in fostering political and social reconciliation,
economic development, consolidation of a fully
functioning and independent judiciary and electronic
media, and the creation of active civil-society institutions.
Finally, there must be a complete end to the pyramid
schemes that have ravaged the country and deprived
millions of their life savings. There must be an end to
banditry, factionalism and the rampant proliferation of
arms and disorder in the country. While the responsibility
ultimately lies with the Albanian people themselves, the
international community stands ready to provide
assistance and support in the days ahead.

