Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I
would like at the outset to convey the Movement's
appreciation to the Japanese presidency of the Security
Council for convening this open debate to discuss the
progress achieved in the implementation of the
measures set out in the note by President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2006/507,
and for the concept paper dated 5 April 2010 (see S/2010/ 165) to direct the discussion towards enhancing
the credibility, transparency and accountability of the
work of the Security Council, particularly in terms of
meeting the expectations of States that are not
members of the Council.

The Non-Aligned Movement attaches great
importance to the issue of improving the working
methods of the Security Council. That is reflected in
the comprehensive, clear and specific position
stipulated in the relevant paragraphs of the Final
Document adopted at the fifteenth Summit Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries held in Sharm el-Sheik (S/2009/514, annex),
as well as in several initiatives presented by the
Movement throughout the years since the launching of
the Security Council reform process. Those initiatives
include, but are not limited to, the comprehensive
negotiating paper submitted by the Movement in 1996,
as contained in the report of the Open-ended Working
Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and Other Matters Related to the Security
Council (A/51/47).

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
Security Council should stop encroaching on the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council by addressing issues
which traditionally fall within the competence of those
organs. Moreover, the Security Council should avoid
resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella
for addressing issues that do not necessarily pose a
threat to international peace and security and should
fully utilize the provisions of other relevant chapters,
where appropriate, including Chapters VI and VIII,
before invoking Chapter VII, which should be a
measure of last resort.

Furthermore, it is vital to continue to have regular
interaction between the presidency of the Security
Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations, which can help to enhance the quality of the
annual report of the Security Council. In the same
context, the Security Council should submit, pursuant
to Article 15, paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3,
of the United Nations Charter, special reports for the
consideration of the General Assembly and should
fully take into account the recommendations of the
Assembly on matters relating to international peace
and security, consistent with Article 11, paragraph 2, of
the Charter.
In order to increase transparency, openness and
consistency in exercising its mandated activities, the
Security Council should increase the number of its
public meetings, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32
of the Charter, to take into account the views and
contributions of the wider membership of the United
Nations, particularly non-members of the Council
whose issues are under discussion in the Council.
Moreover, and unless there are exceptional
circumstances, briefings by Special Envoys or
Representatives of the Secretary-General and by
members of the Secretariat should take place in public
meetings.

The Non-Aligned Movement appreciates the steps
taken to date through the Security Council's Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under your chairmanship, Mr. President,
including those set out in the concept paper under
consideration, to increase the transparency and the
efficiency of the Security Council, as well as its
interaction and dialogue with non-members of the
Council. The Non-Aligned Movement further believes
that more steps are needed to improve the working
methods of the Council through the General Assembly
and the Security Council.

The Movement is of the View that improving
working methods requires strong political will,
particularly that of the permanent members of the
Council, and the adoption and implementation of many
of the comprehensive proposals submitted by Member
States over the years, including by the Non-Aligned
Movement, to improve the working methods of the
Council. Consequently, we look forward to intensified
consideration of those proposals by the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions in order to consider in
depth the proposals of Member States, including the
well known positions and papers of the Non-Aligned
Movement concerning improving the working methods
of the Security Council, and we call on the Security
Council to adopt further measures in that regard.

That concludes my statement on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Allow me to add a few thoughts in my national
capacity. I begin by fully associating my country with
the statement I just made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of the
African Group.

I stress the need to achieve tangible results on the
issue of improving the working methods of the
Security Council as an important part of the interlinked
negotiables specified in General Assembly decision
62/557, through intergovernmental negotiations on the
reform of the Security Council and the process of
enlargement of the Council.

The Council, and particularly its permanent
members, should work with the General Assembly to
achieve the desired and long-anticipated results as soon
as possible. Egypt believes that the main step that must
be taken to improve the working methods of the
Security Council is to achieve a balance in the power
structure between the permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council. The time has come for an
agreement on a permanent set of rules of procedure to
replace the current provisional rules, which have been
in force for more than 60 years.

Moreover, the Informal Working Group dealing
with this important subject in the Council should adopt
official, bold measures that would consolidate the
concept of equality between countries, promote justice
in the way their issues are dealt with, enhance
transparency, increase interaction and encourage
efficiency.

Furthermore, it is imperative to revisit the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Organization's other principal organs in order to
restore the missing institutional balance set forth in the
Charter. The International Court of Justice has a major
role to play in settling any dispute that may arise
between these organs with respect to their mandates in
accordance with the Charter. It should be utilized
whenever necessary.

It is vital to give Member States whose issues are
under consideration the opportunity to attend the
informal consultations of the Council on an equal
footing with the representatives of the Secretary-
General. It is also vital to improve the quality of the
annual report submitted by the Council to the General
Assembly by making it more analytical and
explanatory.

The working methods of the Council will not be
improved unless we effectively address the misuse of
the veto right, or the threat of use of the veto, in a
manner that would rationalize and restrict its use to
cases where severe violations of human rights are
being committed, including cases of genocide, ethnic
cleansing, crimes against humanity and grave
Violations of international humanitarian law, as well as
to the cessation of hostilities between belligerent
parties and the election of the Secretary-General.
Pending the achievement of this intermediate step
towards the complete elimination of the veto, the right
of the veto should be granted to all new permanent
members joining the Security Council within the
enlargement process.

In conclusion, what is missing is not additional
proposals, but the additional political will to achieve
real reform of the working methods of the Security
Council, as well as all other negotiable terms in the
Security Council reform process as outlined in General
Assembly decision 62/557. The credibility and validity
of the Security Council and its members will be
seriously damaged unless we achieve those reforms as
soon as possible.

