Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal associates itself
with the statement made by Finland on behalf of the
European Union.

Mr. President, my delegation congratulates you on
organizing this important meeting. The fact that we have
had this debate for three years in a row shows how the
United Nations is committed to dealing with persistent
concerns of conflict and development in Africa.

The report (S/1998/318) that the Secretary-General
submitted to the Security Council in April 1998 contains
an exhaustive and detailed analysis of the causes of the
conflicts that plague the African continent. But of equal
or perhaps even greater importance than the diagnosis he
offers are the concrete proposals he makes with a view to
eliminating or relieving those causes and thereby opening
the way towards a process of sustainable development in

 

Africa. We should now turn from our process of reflection
towards developing a programme of decisive action.

Portugal has consistently advocated that the
international community would be committing a grave error
of judgement if, in the face of the crises and difficulties
that persist in Africa, it were to allow itself to fall into
indifference. We should heed the wise words of the
Secretary-General yesterday, at the beginning of this
important debate, when he warned against "Africa fatigue"
and "Afro-pessimism".

By helping Africa to solve its problems, we are at the
same time helping the international community, since it is
in its Vital interest that societies be freer and more
democratic, that human rights be respected and that
economies prosper. A more stable and developed Africa
leads to a richer and safer world for all humanity.

That reality requires that we develop with Africa a
closer and more dynamic cooperation in a joint task with its
peoples and Governments. The international community can
and should help Africa, but Africans themselves must also
assume fully their destiny and responsibilities in the
construction of a better future.

In this regard, we would like to single out the
remarkable efforts of Mozambique in achieving a smooth
transition from war to peace and for being now on the road
to a better future for its people.

National reconciliation is also being pursued in
Guinea-Bissau, with the assistance of the United Nations,
and we would like wholeheartedly to commend this effort.

In meeting its fundamental responsibility for
guaranteeing international peace and security, including in
Africa, the Security Council should, whenever possible, act
in strict coordination with African regional organizations,
as it is doing in Sierra Leone.

Furthermore, it is unrealistic to hope or to demand that
the United Nations provide quick and full solutions to the
conflicts in Africa if the belligerent parties themselves -
and those who directly or indirectly support them - are
unwilling to show the necessary political will to abide by
the agreements that they have signed. It is useless to
pretend that the international community can, in any
situation, make up for a non-existent political will and
impose peace on those who deliberately choose war. The
expectations of what the international community can and
should do must, therefore, be realistic and adapted to
circumstances.

It is also worrying that, while the international
community is accused of showing a lesser interest in, or
commitment to, resolving African conflicts than those
elsewhere, the decisions of the Security Council that have
been taken and that seek to guarantee peace are openly
flouted.

In the case of the conflict in Angola, for example,
the United Nations has dedicated significant human and
material resources in the search for a negotiated solution.
But, so far, to no avail. We are now faced with reports of
persistent violations of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council on UNITA that sought to prevent that
movement from acquiring the weapons that would allow
it to continue the war. In this way, UNITA is not only in
violation of Security Council resolutions, but also of the
"Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol it signed of its
own free will. Portugal fully supports the determination
expressed yesterday by the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim,
to promote efforts aimed at putting an end to what he
called the bleeding and destruction that are taking place
in Angola, essentially due to the intransigence of the
UNITA leadership.

There is undeniable proof that those States that
practise good governance and respect democracy, the
principles of the rule of law and human rights enjoy
incomparably higher levels of stability, development and
well-being than those States under authoritarian regimes
that violate or defend a limited and
restricted concept of human rights.

Now we should also pursue the process of reflection
started by the Secretary-General in his speech before the
General Assembly last week on how the United Nations
should respond to situations of crisis that threaten the
basic values inherent to human dignity. In this context,
we need only recall what occurred in Rwanda.

On the economic front, Africa should not merely be
an exporter of raw materials for the more developed
countries, thereby remaining on the margins of the trend
towards the new economic globalization. Africa must be
fully integrated into the world economy in parity with and
competitive with the more developed regions; otherwise,
existing developmental delays will only worsen. This will
more readily succeed with the continued and deepened
process of regional integration in Africa, which, by its

 

very nature, will reduce the risk of political instability
among States and create at the same time more attractive
markets for foreign investment.

The reduction of the debt of African countries is a
fundamental element for their economic development, since
this will free the resources necessary for development
projects and programmes - resources that would otherwise
be consigned to servicing that debt. However, the reduction
or forgiveness of debt should be accompanied on the part
of debtor countries by solid macroeconomic reforms and
policies that eliminate existing distortions by way of a
rigorous and transparent management of the funds made
available.

We believe that what is needed now is a candid
dialogue in the international community on the best way to
tackle the challenges faced by Africa. Portugal has sought
to work together with its African partners in the
development of a close and mutually beneficial relationship
between Europe and Africa. In this context, the planned
Cairo summit of the European Union and Africa, which is
expected to be held next April, represents an important
opportunity to expand and deepen this dialogue. Portugal
believes that this summit will be an important contribution
to placing on a firmer footing the long-term relationship
between Europe and Africa.

