Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We should like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Skender Hyseni of Kosovo, and to thank them for
kindly enlightening us on the current situation in
Kosovo. We also Wish to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
gave us an excellent briefing on the issue. We
congratulate him on his appointment and wish him
every success in his new duties. We also take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to his predecessor,
Mr. Joachim Rucker, for the work accomplished.

After having listened very closely to all the
information provided to us, we must note that the
situation on the ground in Kosovo continues to be
worrisome. Indeed, many political and security
difficulties remain on the agenda and continue to be
sources of great concern, including the Kosovo Serbs'
boycott of the institutions of the new State and the
establishment by the Kosovo Serbs of parallel
administrative structures, despite the entry into force of
Kosovo's Constitution.

The 11 May 2008 holding by the northern Serbs
of parliamentary and municipal elections, whose
results have, moreover, been invalidated by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), have contributed to this situation and have
further exacerbated the tensions among Kosovo's
communities.

Another source of great concern in the area of
security is the trafficking and illegal possession of a
large amount of weapons in the country. That poses a
strong challenge to the Security Council to remain
vigilant and to devote the closest possible attention to
those signs, which are harbingers of a potential
conflict - particularly in the northern part of Kosovo,
where there seem to be hints of partition.

Given such a context, we think that the Secretary-
General's proposals, presented to the Council on
20 June (see S/PV.5917) and aimed at changing, Within
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), the structure
and profile of UNMIK and some operational aspects of
the international civil presence in the new State, are
courageous and realistic and deserve particular
attention by the Council.

However, from an analysis of the situation, we
note a certain ambiguity: on the one hand, the Kosovo
authorities' acceptance of the continued United Nations
presence in Kosovo and, on the other, a real will to
fully take charge of their destiny as a free and
sovereign State. Hence, the absence of any reference to
the United Nations in the Constitution, which entered
into force on 15 June 2008.

That being the case, we understand the
imperatives imposed by the new situation and continue
to believe that the Secretary-General's proposals,
mentioned previously, could provide a just and
equitable alternative, in that they preserve UNMIK's
many achievements while guaranteeing the stability
and peace of Kosovo and the region.

We commend the efforts of the Government of
Kosovo to promote good governance and the rule of
law. In particular, we have taken good note of the
progress made in implementing the standards for
Kosovo. In that regard, we urge the international
community and, in particular, the European Union
(EU) to support the programme for Kosovo's
development, including within the framework of the
new action plan for a European partnership agreed
upon with the European Union.

Despite the persistence of tensions between
Pristina and Belgrade, there is no doubt as to their
common European destiny. Therefore, we welcome
Serbia's initiative to postpone its decision to close its
diplomatic missions in certain EU States, as well as its
efforts to facilitate the implementation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU.

It is important to continue to support Kosovo,
because there remain many challenges, which can be
met only with help from everyone, in particular the
international community, UNMIK, the International
Security Force in Kosovo and the EU. We reiterate our
appeal to all the parties and to the entire international
community to cooperate with the Secretary-General
within the framework of his new approach for Kosovo.

