Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to extend my warmest congratulations to you as representative of a kindred country, the Republic of South Africa, for taking up the presidency of the Security Council for this month of December 2020. I also wish to welcome the initiative of holding today's meeting on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his commitment and support for the cause of my country. I would like to include within these thanks all members of the Security Council, for the particular attention that they never fail to pay to the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2020/1150), which was just presented by the Special Representative and Head of MONUSCO, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, whose presence by video-teleconference and sustained efforts in favour of peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are most welcome. Allow me to add the voice of my delegation to this discussion to share the point of view of my Government on the concerns raised in the report and to make some comments, particularly on the political, security and humanitarian situation in the country and on human rights issues and the exit strategy of MONUSCO. The political scene at the moment is currently being dominated by the address to the nation that His Excellency Mr. Felix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, gave on Sunday, 6 December 2020, after the political consultations among all national stakeholders, which were held from 2 to 25 November. In his capacity as guarantor of the nation, and taking into account the broad convergence of views at the national level on issues essential to the security, economic and social rehabilitation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Head of State announced an end of the coalition between the Front commun pour le Congo and the Cap pour le changement after two years of tireless effort, patience and self-sacrifice aimed at preserving the essence of that coalition - in his words, two years of grace that unfortunately were not successful in preventing the infiltration of ongoing crises and the wasting of time. This decision was also motivated by the fact that, on the one hand, the coalition Government set up in the wake of the transfer of political power in January 2019 did not make it possible for the Head of State to implement the programme for which he had been elected to the highest office in the land, and, on the other hand, he, the President, was therefore unable to respond to the expectations and aspirations of the Congolese people. He therefore decided, in accordance with the provisions of article 78, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, to appoint a rapporteur who will be responsible for identifying a new coalition, bringing together the absolute majority of members of the National Assembly. Withthis new coalition, the President of the Republic will put in place a Government that will conduct its action during the remainder of his five-year term and continue striving to implement his vision, with the aim of meeting the aspirations of the Congolese people. The objective is to build the future of democratic life in the country around and with the sacred union of the nation - in other words, a group of men and women of good will, no matter what their political, ideological or ethnic origins may be - adhering to the principles and values that will make it possible to establish a true rule of law and democracy and produce concrete results on the socioeconomic front. The security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained calm in general. However, in some well-identified areas in the east of the national territory, in the provinces of North and South Kivu and Ituri, there have been attacks by armed groups of both internal and external origin, as well as other remnants of still-active militias acting in flagrant violation of human rights while causing many casualties and massive destruction of property and infrastructure. These terrorist groups, some of which have sworn allegiance to the Islamic State, practice asymmetric warfare and continue to indiscriminately attack the civilian population, humanitarian workers, MONUSCO peacekeepers and the Forces armees de la Republique Democratique du Congo (FARDC). In this context, let me inform the Council that since the military offensive was decided by the President of the Republic and carried out by contingents of the FARDC, with the logistical support of MONUSCO, starting in October 2019, many of these armed groups have been weakened. Many militias have laid down their arms and many strongholds of national territory formerly under the control of these negative forces have been recovered. Rest assured that the FARDC is determined, with the support of its partners, including MONUSCO, to continue its offensives against all these negative forces that have not complied with the Head of State's call to lay down their arms until they are completely eradicated, in order to impose peace and thereby secure the population. Moreover, in keeping with his commitment to restoring peace and security in the eastern part of the country and in order to address those security concerns in the east ona lasting basis, the President of the Republic has also established and implemented a three-track strategy, namely, first, building the capacity of the defence and security forces through security sector reform in all its aspects; secondly, promoting national reconciliation, particularly between local communities in conflict, such as the Hima and the Lendu, the Twa Pygmies and the Bantu, the Bandundu and the Batende and Banyamulenge herders and the Babembe and Bafuliru farmers; and, thirdly, enabling regional diplomacy through an ongoing dialogue at the highest political level, which has significantly contributed to easing tensions in the region, strengthening relations among countries and restoring confidence among the respective Governments. All those initiatives are aimed at peace, security, stability and economic development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region and a return to normal life. If such initiatives are sustained, they will bring about a lasting and definitive change in the narrative in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region by moving from conflict-driven rhetoric to discourse that focuses on the path to regional development. My country counts on support for those initiatives, including through the political will and the resolve of all our partners and countries of the region in particular, to effectively combat mineral trafficking, which empowers armed groups, as well as the Mafia- style trafficking in arms and smuggling, in order to give the Government the necessary support for the ongoing justice and security sector reforms; to provide funding and adequate support for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or repatriation; to advocate for the effective implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and the United Nations regional strategy for peace consolidation, conflict prevention and conflict resolution for the Great Lakes region; and to work towards the comprehensive implementation of MONUSCO's mandate and the strengthening of the offensive capabilities of the overall force, in particular its rapid reaction force. For my Government, those tasks and prerequisites of MONUSCO's mandate must be followed to the letter so as to enable the United Nations force to succeed in its core role in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, namely, the protection of civilians, as well as in its responsible and scheduled exit in accordance with the timetable jointly agreed with the Government. The Council is preparing to renew MONUSCO's mandate, which expires on 20 December under the terms of resolution 2502 (2019), of 19 December 2019. The same resolution recommended that the Congolese Government and the United Nations conduct a strategic dialogue in order to reach agreement on the arrival of the United Nations Force Intervention Brigade and its gradual and responsible exit in order to safeguard the gains of the past. That work was carried out by means of direct talks between experts of the two stakeholders in October, resulting in a joint strategy for the gradual and phased withdrawal of MONUSCO from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was validated by the political authorities of my country and MONUSCO officials. During those exchanges, we also discussed the effectiveness of existing initiatives, strategies and mechanisms with a view to strengthening them where necessary and better coordinating our joint action for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region in the light of the current reality on the ground. The ultimate objective is to strengthen collaboration within MONUSCO units and with the FARDC so that the force required to protect the civilian population and restore peace, security and State authority throughout the national territory is effective. Given that the Force Intervention Brigade will once again have to play an important role in neutralizing terrorist movements and armed groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my country supports the idea of increasing the Brigade's operational capabilities, in particular by equipping it with special units suited to the asymmetrical warfare waged on us by the armed groups in the eastern part of the country, reinforcing it with adequate equipment, such as Rooivalk combat helicopters, artillery, combat engineers and geolocation and operational devices appropriate for dealing with the situation on the ground. In that context, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its partners, notably the Southern African Development Community (SADC), have accepted the United Nations proposal to realign the current strength of the Force Intervention Brigade to allow the rapid reaction units to have the necessary scope of action and to form two rapid reaction units with troops from six SADC member contributor countries and a third unit from a non-SADC member country. My country's Government commends the support of MONUSCO, in particular the logistical facilities provided to the FARDC and the Congolese National Police in their work to restore order and security. However, in his address of 15 February 2019 to the diplomatic corps accredited in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the President of the Republic recalled the Government's decision to support MONUSCO's gradual withdrawal, based on the evolving security situation, by fully participating in the development of a joint exit strategy and its progressive transition in the context of a strategic dialogue. To that end, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is of the view that the reduction in MONUSCO's force, with the ultimate objective of complete disengagement, should start with troops deemed non-essential. After having jointly assessed the security situation in the country, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO therefore reached a common understanding on three kinds ofareas, namely, first, post-conflict areas- Kasai, Central Kasai and Tanganyika provinces; secondly, areas affected by armed groups and intercommunal violence - northern Tanganyika and Ituri; and, thirdly, areas affected by the militancy of local and foreign armed groups and negative forces, as well as terrorist acts by the Allied Democratic Forces and the Madina Al-Tawheed Waljihad in Ituri and North and South Kivu provinces. In view of what I have just said, the two partners agreed the following draft timetable, namely, that the United Nations Mission would definitively leave Kasai province in June 2021 and Tanganyika province in 2022. That gradual withdrawal of the MONUSCO force will be accompanied by a temporary reinforcement of the police and civilian component, which will support the strengthening of the rule of law functions and the gradual transfer of the Mission's tasks to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the assistance of the United Nations country team and other stakeholder partners. In areas affected by local armed groups and intercommunal violence, MONUSCO will maintain its presence to support the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in implementing a community-based approach to conflict resolution and stabilization. In areas affected by the militancy of local and foreign armed groups, MONUSCO will maintain its presence with a prevention and response capacity. The Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo must recommend that such a response capacity be adapted to the threat of asymmetrical warfare. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO have agreed to set up a joint working group to propose practical modalities for the transfer of tasks. The Congolese Government has already experimented with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) in the framework of the Commission Nationale de Desarmement, Demobilisation et Reinsertion and the implementation unit of the national DDR programme. It therefore reaffirms its determination to establish a comprehensive programme and, to that end, has launched consultations to draw lessons from the past in order to better master this issue. Knowing that a regional or provincial focus should be favoured for the reinsertion and reintegration of ex-combatants, the Government has opted this time to resort to community-based DDR. Ex-combatants will be reintegrated into their communities of origin in particular through agricultural work. To that end, a national structure is being established under the coordination of the presidency. The vision of the Congolese Government is to prioritize community-based DDR in order to enable sustainable demobilization and _ reintegration of former combatants from local armed groups and also to consider the regional approach of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or repatriation (DDRRR) in resolving the issues of foreign armed groups through dialogue with their countries of origin, thereby combining non-military options with military pressure. Moreover, in the current context dominated by many surrenders, the community-based DDR and DDRRR programmes, as well as the National Stabilization and Reconstruction Programme, need to operate at full capacity. To do so, they need fresh capital and support from partners. The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains committed to the framework agreement, which we consider to be the best regional path and strategy to follow in order to definitively emerge from the instability, which has been affecting the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region for many years. For its part, the Government of my country will continue to implement all its national, regional and international commitments under that agreement and to assume its responsibility so that peace and harmony can be fully restored in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region. The Democratic Republic of the Congo takes this opportunity to call on the countries of the region and the guarantors of the agreement to seize the opportunity of the regional momentum in recent months to implement the commitments which they have all made. It should be noted that if the provisions of this framework agreement are translated into concrete action, they will enable the region to better manage issues of peace, security and especially cooperation and development through the logic of integration. My delegation would like to renew the call made by our President on the international community, during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly (see A/75/PV.5), to ensure that appropriate, targeted and effective sanctions are applied to all armed groups and criminal networks involved in the illicit trafficking in blood minerals from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The illegal exploitation of natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has consequences for peace and security in the country and in the region, and the fight against the organized criminal traffic in these minerals is crucial, as it is a major source of funding for the belligerent and harmful activities of armed groups. Indeed, it will be hard for us to neutralize and defeat the armed groups if we do not succeed in eradicating their sources of support and financing. In accordance with the constitutional requirement, the Government continues to implement its programme for the defence and promotion of all human rights, with particular emphasis on combating impunity and corruption, as well as strengthening the rule of law and reforming the justice sector. The actions taken to reform the justice system include capacity-building for legal personnel, in particular through training; strengthening the legal framework, especially the harmonization of national legislation with the Rome Statute; building and rehabilitating prison infrastructure to improve the conditions for detainees and prisoners; resolving intercommunal violence by creating and implementing transitional justice mechanisms through respective structures, including the National Council for the Prevention and Transformation of Conflict, and a fund for victims of severe human rights violations. With regard to the fight against violations of human rights and international humanitarian law against children in territories affected by conflicts, a road map has been drawn up in order to put an end to the recruitment and use of children by armed groups and ensure their protection from sexual violence. This road map was signed by some 10 commanders of armed groups in December 2018 and January 2019, thereby making it possible to release 553 children in the provinces of North Kivu and South Kivu, Ituri, Tanganyika and greater Kasai. With respect to sexual violence in conflict, it should be noted that all crimes related to rape are severely punished by the Congolese State, and the Congolese Army applies a policy of zero tolerance for any such crimes. In that regard, I note that between 2019 and 2020, the military justice system tried and convicted at least 428 perpetrators of reported acts of sexual violence. These statistics amply demonstrate that the Congolese Government does not allow the perpetrators of these odious crimes to go unpunished. Allegations against elements of national security forces are always investigated, since wearing the uniform of Democratic Republic of the Congo security forces in this conflict area is not always synonymous with actual membership in the FARDC or the Congolese National Police. It has been repeatedly demonstrated by the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo that military property, as well as natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have often been stolen and trafficked by armed groups. However, after investigations and trials, the perpetrators are and will always be punished in an exemplary manner in accordance with the law, regardless of their social status or rank in the security services of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, allow me to inform the Council that the President's programme to combat sexual violence has three components: awareness-raising and community mobilization through a change of mindsets; fighting against impunity for the perpetrators of these actions; and, thirdly, support for the victims with psychosocial support, free legal assistance and the operationalization of the zero-tolerance programme. In the context of the fight against impunity, it is worth noting the conviction on Monday, 23 November, by the Operational Military Court of North Kivu of Mr. Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, leader of the Nduma Defense of Congo militia for war crimes, murder, rape, sexual slavery, child recruitment, looting, the destruction of property and physical harm. It should also be noted that one of its main co-defendants, Mr. Nzitonda Habimana Seraphin, known as Lionceau, of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, was also sentenced to life imprisonment by the same Military Court. During the same lengthy trial, which lasted more than two years, Jean Claude Lukambo, known as Kamutoto, was sentenced to 15 years in prison and Jean Batechi was acquitted. The verdict handed down by military justice in this trial shows the determination of the Congolese authorities to continue the legal fight against all war criminals, past and present, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is particularly concerning in the eastern part of the country following the multifaceted crisis caused by the consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19), as well as the numerous displacements of populations fleeing atrocities in conflict zones. Furthermore, in order to respond to the various complex challenges created by the pandemic in the health, economic and security sectors, the Government has established amultisectoral committee and atechnical secretariat, which has drawn up a structured plan for a COVID-19 response as well as a multisectoral plan for the urgent mitigation of the impact of the pandemic, which was launched on 18 June by the President of the Republic. Thanks to those efforts, we have been able to reduce the fatality rate of the pandemic from 10 per cent at its inception to approximately 2.6 per cent today. We believe that the return of all displaced persons to their places of origin could make an effective contribution to a lasting peace and to renewed economic and agricultural activity in the region. Furthermore, with approximately 5.5 million displaced persons, of whom around | million 6,000 are living in very precarious conditions, humanitarian needs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for that category of the population remain tremendous and require increased support from partners. Turning to the issue of refugees in Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, concerned by this issue, calls for the reactivation of the legal mechanisms created for that purpose: the tripartite agreements among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and Rwanda; the Democratic Republic of the Congo, UNHCR and Uganda; and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, UNHCR and Burundi, in order to undertake the effective repatriation of all concerned refugees. I would like to reiterate the determination of the President of the Republic and of the Government to break the vicious circle of armed conflict and insecurity in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with a view to fostering a return to normal life on that part of the national territory after more than two decades of upheaval. To that end, we are counting on the support of all partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure the success of that undertaking. I cannot conclude without expressing the gratitude of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the troop- contributing countries for their support, and I wish to pay tribute to the memory of all those who lost their lives for the sake of peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the MONUSCO Blue Helmets, six of whom have fallen victim to COVID-19.
