Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Security Council of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Jeremie,
and thank him for his assessment of the situation
regarding developments in Kosovo, which we share.

We cannot say the same of the opinions voiced by
Mr. Hyseni.

We welcome Mr. Zannier, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, whose mandate is, of course,
determined by the unchanging provisions of resolution
1244 (1999) and not by the wishes of individual
members of the Security Council. We thank Mr.
Zannier for his briefing and for introducing the report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). While we take note of that document, we
object to a number of its conclusions.

The Russian approach to the situation in and
around Kosovo has been consistent. We are convinced
that Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence
and its recognition by a number of States run counter
to the norms of international law, above all the United
Nations Charter, the Helsinki Final Act, resolution
1244 (1999) and other decisions of the Security
Council. We insist on strict compliance with resolution
1244 (1999), which, as the Secretary-General has
repeatedly confirmed, remains in force, and with the
UNMIK mandate approved therein by the Security

Council. In that regard, we expect the Secretary-
General promptly to inform the Security Council
regarding the obstacles placed in the way of UNMIK's
work by the Kosovo Albanian side. Such actions
represent a manifest violation by Pristina of its
obligations under the resolution.

We reaffirm our position that UNMIK's
reconfiguration is inadmissible without the Security
Council's authorization. The Secretary-General has
exceeded his authority in these circumstances by
intruding into the Council's statutory prerogatives.
Russia is concerned by attempts to destroy the format
of the international presence in Kosovo established by
the Security Council on the pretext that it purportedly
does not correspond to altered realities. We discern
behind such attempts an endeavour to legalize a
structure for implementing the Ahtisaari Proposal that
was not approved by the Security Council, but which
would in actuality abet the unilateral establishment of
the sovereignty of an unlawfully proclaimed construct.

We also consider it inadmissible to seek, on the
pretext of reconfiguring UNMIK, to achieve the
Mission's departure from the Serb enclaves in southern
Kosovo and to curtail its work in other Serb-populated
areas of the province. That would lead inevitably to a
rise in tensions that could have unpredictable
consequences for the situation in the region as a whole.
Furthermore, such arbitrary steps complicate even
further the implementation of the democratic standards
established by the international community and the
guaranteed rights and security of national minorities,
including the return of Serb refugees and internally
displaced persons.

As confirmed in the Secretary-General's report,
things are going badly awry in that respect. From
January to May, only 49 Kosovo Serbs returned to
Kosovo, indicating a downward trend in the number of
returnees. The causes of that are the well-known recent
political developments in the province, including the
illegal proclamation of its independence. Incidentally,
that causal link can even be discerned in the report.
The ongoing wanton seizure of land in Kosovo is
of the gravest concern. We are outraged by the
sabotaging by the Kosovo authorities of the Decane
municipality of the Special Representative's decisions
regarding the land surrounding the Visoki Decani
monastery. The situation has deteriorated to such an
extent that UNMIK's representative in the municipality
has been the target of violent intimidation.

The absence of real progress in upholding the
rights and ensuring the security of national minorities,
in conjunction with efforts forcibly to integrate the
Kosovo Serbs into a quasi-independent State, will only
exacerbate the mistrust and inter-ethnic tensions in the
province that led to clashes in northern Mitrovica in
March. With regard to those sorry events, in its
paragraph 7 the report refers to an independent
investigation conducted at the Secretary-General's
request. We continue to insist that the members of the
Security Council be informed of the investigation's
findings as soon as possible. Mr. Ban Ki-moon has
been giving the Council assurances in that regard, and
we expect them to be swiftly fulfilled. It is impossible
to understand why the outcome of the investigation
should take longer to reach Council members than the
investigation itself took.

The Russian Federation entirely understands the
European Union's aspiration to play a more robust role
in Kosovo affairs, but that aspiration must be met not
unilaterally - as is currently the case - but on the
basis of resolution 1244 (1999) and with respect for the
statutory prerogatives of the Security Council. In that
regard, we advocate as essential further consultations
by the Secretary-General both with the parties and with
all interested members of the international community.
We consider that it is important to take fullest possible
advantage of the readiness of the Serbian leadership to
engage in dialogue with the United Nations with a
view to finding a formula for UNMIK reconfiguration
that will be acceptable to Belgrade and that can be
approved through a Security Council decision. We
expect the Secretary-General to play a vigorous and
proactive role in this sphere.

In our view, real progress in contacts between the
United Nations and Serbia on Kosovo affairs, including
on the reconfiguration of UNMIK, would make it
possible to substantially ease the situation while
remaining on the solid ground of resolution 1244
(1999). We are convinced that a long-term solution to
the Kosovo problem can be found only on the basis of
the consent of the parties and with full respect for
international law and the prerogatives of the Security
Council.

