Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to acknowledge the leadership
of Japan in proposing this timely debate, 10 years after
the approval of the first presidential note (S/2006/507)
of the Council on working methods. Japan's renewed
commitment to the issue allows the General Assembly
to bring to the Council one aspect of the broader
discussions we have conducted on Security Council
reform, which should undoubtedly continue.
Panama aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. We have the honour to add
some considerations in our national capacity and from
our experience as a non-permanent member of the
Council on five occasions.

First, in the light of the various exchanges that
have taken place in recent years in order to lend greater
efficiency and effectiveness to the Security Council,
Panama has repeatedly raised the issue that this forum
needs to be revitalized, not just to be representative
but also inclusive, transparent and increasingly open to
accountability. There is an urgent need for improved
and greater access to the Council's information and
decision-making process; an increase in the frequency
of consultations and open briefings and Arria
Formula meetings, and thereby, greater interaction
and coordination with the General Assembly, with a
view to enabling the Council to reach a higher level
of effectiveness in its working methods. The global
dynamics and our membership have experienced
permanent changes since 1946. Therefore, the internal
structures and internal dynamics of the Organization
need to be updated to respond effectively to the new
realities - an update demanded by 97.4 per cent of the
membership in order to feel represented.

Secondly, the Security Council needs more diverse
and closer participation by non-member States, in
particular developing countries and/or traditionally
underrepresented regions. There is also a need to
strengthen the role of the non-permanent members.
Nevertheless, Panama emphasizes that the presidency
of the Council and the chairmanships of the subsidiary
bodies should be assigned solely to non-permanent
members in order to create a balance in the performance
of the membership.

As a member of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, Panama stresses the
importance of the reports prepared by the Special
Advisers to the Secretary-General on the prevention of
genocide and the responsibility to protect when it comes
to early warning about situations where populations
are at risk of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's Human Rights Up Front initiative.
With that vision of a more democratic Security
Council, Panama has expressed its support for the code
of conduct promoted by the Accountability Coherence
and Transparency Group.
Thirdly, the ongoing process for the selection of
the next Secretary-General must exhibit credibility and
transparency. It should also highlight the attitude of a
Council whose permanent membership is aware of the
new realities and the aspirations of the majority they
represent, and therefore aware that the central role of
that process concerns the General Assembly.

In conclusion, our aspiration is that periodic
changes resulting from the deliberations of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters translate beyond a new consolidated document
and into effective action to strengthen a Council with
open doors, a Council ethical in its decision-making
and with a transparent and accountable attitude.

