As the world commemorates the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the Security Council is holding this summit debate, proposed by President Mahamadou Issoufou, to discuss post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global governance. China welcomes and supports this initiative. Earlier this week, President Xi Jinping spoke at the high-level meeting to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and the general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session (see A/75/PV.4, annex IV). Reviewing the global situation and the trend of the times, President Xi addressed a series of key questions from a strategic, long-term and historical perspective. What kind of world will humankind live in? What kind of country will China look like? And what kind of United Nations is needed for the world? The answers, as President X1 underlined, lie in the steadfast commitment to the path of multilateralism and to the United Nations-centred international system, and joint efforts to build a community with a shared future for humankind and a new type of international relations. Many leaders have also recalled the founding missions of the United Nations, expressed strong support for multilateralism and displayed a shared aspiration for defeating COVID-19 with solidarity and pursuing peace and development. The world today is undergoing once-in-a-century changes, which are accelerated by COVID-19. Global threats and challenges continue to rise, whose solution urgently requires improved global governance and closer coordination and cooperation. Meanwhile, the collective rise of developing countries and the trend towards a multipolar world - one of the contemporary features of international politics - need to be reflected in the global governance system. If we are to promote global development in the light of the changing needs, we need better top-level design and a reformed, stronger global governance system. To this end, China would like to propose the following five points. First, we need to act on the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. All countries, big or small, are equal members of the international community. Major risks and challenges respect no borders and impact the future of each and every country alike. To tackle them requires strong synergy supported by a global pooling of resources and wisdom. Global affairs must be discussed and decided by all, governance systems built by all and benefits of governance shared by all, so that every country is a participant in, contributor to and beneficiary of world peace and development. Developing countries face greater difficulties. There is every need to make sure that their voices are heard, their concerns respected and their rights and interests safeguarded, which is an embodiment of international justice. Secondly, we need to jointly tackle non-traditional security threats. The first two decades of the twenty-first century have seen the onset of numerous global risks and challenges, from the 11 September attacks to the global financial crisis to COVID-19. Traditional and non-traditional security threats should be managed holistically. Public health security and climate change should be given greater priority on the international agenda. Non-traditional security threats, often multifaceted, can be tackled effectively only with comprehensive, well-calibrated efforts to address both the symptoms and root causes. That is where the Security Council needs to play a bigger role pursuant to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Thirdly, we need to enhance coordination and cooperation among major countries. Global governance will be strengthened when major countries set an example of acting on the Charter of the United Nations, provide more global public goods and step up their efforts for world peace and development. In such a challenging moment, major countries are even more duty-bound to put the future of humankind first, discard the Cold War mentality and ideological bias and come together in the spirit of partnership to overcome the difficulties. Fourthly, we need to uphold international law and rules. A sound global governance architecture must be undergirded by respect for law and rules. All must adhere to the basic norms governing international relations, such as those of sovereign equality, non-interference in internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Rules must be followed and commitments kept. Unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction need to be opposed in order to safeguard the authority and sanctity of international law. Laws and rules need to keep pace with the changing times. The international community needs to establish rules in frontier areas such as the deep sea, polar regions, cyberspace and outer space, to regulate their development and ensure equitable benefits to all countries. Fifthly, we need to bring the role of the United Nations to bear. The major global risks and challenges we face are crises with compounding effects, which cannot be addressed separately. As the most universal, representative and authoritative international institution, the United Nations is better positioned and capable to play a leadership role than any country or any other international organization . Meanwhile, the Organization needs to evolve with the times, increase the representation and voice of developing countries, enhance its efficiency and emergency preparedness and build an up-to-date governance system and capability. The Security Council, the centrepiece of the collective security framework, is part and parcel of the global governance system and tasked with the primary responsibility for international peace and security. Under the new conditions, the Council needs to effectively fulfil the duties conferred upon it by the Charter of the United Nations, contribute to the maintenance of world peace and the stability of international order, ensure security for all peoples and bring hope to global governance. China will continue to work with countries around the world to improve the global governance system and build a community with a shared future for humankind.
