President Ramos-Horta: Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor today; it is
always a privilege to speak before this body, and in
doing so I wish to reiterate my sincere gratitude, and
that of the people of Timor-Leste, for the steady
engagement of the United Nations in assisting us to
overcome the inevitable and predictable setbacks and
all of the natural challenges encountered in the process
of nation-building and peace-consolidation.

I am honoured and touched by the presence of the
Secretary-General, as it illustrates his strong
commitment to the well-being of the people of Timor-
Leste and his determined leadership in ensuring that
we succeed.

I am pleased to be here in the company of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Atul Khare, who has earned the gratitude
and respect of all of us - leaders and common people
alike - because of his intimate knowledge of Timor-
Leste, his integrity and his dedication. I wish also to
commend the international and national staff of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), in particular the United Nations police
(UNPOL), for their selfless dedication to our country
and to the cause of peace.

Almost exactly one year ago, on 11 February
2008, I was on that dark frontier between life and
death. At that time, doctors and nurses of the Aspen
3

Medical Centre in Dili were operating on me. Then I
was flown to the Royal Darwin Hospital, where I was
very well looked after. Almighty God decided to defer
my departure from this Earth and guided the hands of
the doctors and nurses who operated on me. Once
again, to the devoted doctors and nurses in Dili and
Darwin, my family and friends and the anonymous
thousands around the world, leaders and common
people, of all walks of life and of all ages - to all
those who devoted countless hours to praying for me,
in my own beloved country and elsewhere - I reiterate
my eternal gratitude.

I wish also to reiterate my heartfelt gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his personal interest and
concern about my well-being, as well to the members
of the Security Council for holding an emergency
meeting following the ll February attacks on me and
the Prime Minister (see S/PV.5833).

I recall my appearance before this body on 5 May
2006 (see S/PV.5432) as my country began the descent
towards renewed social unrest. I said then that Dili was
a city on the edge and that fear was palpable. I
appealed to the Council then to take decisive action to
prevent the worst. Upon my return to Timor-Leste, I
began intense efforts to bring about dialogue and an
end to the tensions and to prevent the worst from
happening. I met with all - and I emphasize all -
East Timorese actors in my attempts to bridge the
divide, and I regularly briefed the diplomatic
community. A meeting involving all civilian and
military leaders was to be held in the last week of May
2006. However, on 23 and 25 May 2006, separate but
related violent incidents occurred, compromising my
efforts.

As the security situation deteriorated at the end of
May 2006, the East Timorese political and military
leadership decided to put aside our pride and appeal to
friends to assist us immediately. Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia and Portugal responded positively.
Their prompt response and the expeditious deployment
of troops with credible force and equipment can be
classified today as a remarkable success and as having
set a new precedent in peace-enforcement history.

In August 2006, the Security Council established
UNMIT, equipped with a robust police component but
without a peacekeeping force with airborne and
extraction capabilities. As Malaysian and Portuguese
formed police units integrated with the new UNPOL,
we negotiated with Australia, New Zealand and the
United Nations a unique trilateral arrangement that
remains in force today and has proved to be extremely
effective.

I wish to register my appreciation for the
forthcoming decision of the Council to extend
UNMIT's mandate until February 2010, as contained in
the draft resolution that the Council will be
considering. In my view, the International Stabilization
Force that comprises contingents from Australia and
New Zealand should continue its mandate in tandem
with that of UNMIT.

I am here today amid a very different, more
positive and promising scenario. In mid-2006, our
country was sucked into the most serious challenge and
the greatest danger seen since 2002. As a result, our
vulnerable economy, which had shown signs of
recovery in 2005, contracted into negative growth. But
as the crisis eased by the end of 2006, 2007 saw some
robust recovery, with non-oil gross domestic product
estimated to have grown 8 per cent in real terms.

Today, Timor-Leste is at peace. The most recent
report on the situation in Timor-Leste by International
Crisis Group concluded that "security in Timor-Leste is
strikingly improved. Armed groups are no longer at
large. The atmosphere in the streets of Dili is far less
tense". Incidents ranging from assault to homicide
have significantly declined since 2007; they are less
frequent than in previous years and even less frequent
than in some more established democracies. For
instance, a United Nations compilation of data
comparing incidents of assault reveals that in 2008
there were 169.1 assaults per 100,000 people in Timor-
Leste, while there were 796 cases recorded in two
major industrialized countries. During the same period,
there were 3.2 homicides per 100,000 people in Timor-
Leste and 5.6 in a major industrialized country.

Our economy is doing very well, exhibiting real
growth of more than 10 per cent at the end of 2008.
With a 2009 budget of $680 million and $200 million in
donor programmes, I believe we will be able to maintain
double-digit growth in spite of the international
financial crisis. Why and how do I make such an
optimistic prognosis for our economy in 2009? We are
an importing nation, importing cement, steel and basic
foodstuffs like rice. While our petroleum revenues will
be significantly reduced, so will our import bill as
commodity prices fall. We have strong liquidity - more
09-24239
than $4 billion - in our Petroleum Fund, which can be
drawn upon to support continued investment in strategic
sectors of the economy and thus to fuel economic
growth and relative wealth. Apart from our continued
firm commitment to investing in education and health,
the 2009 budget shows that the total amounts allocated
to agriculture and infrastructure - $34 million and
$130 million, respectively - have increased
substantially compared to previous years.

The food crisis of 2007 and 2008 was a wake-up
call for all of us. In a number of comments then, I said
that we must not always react to crises with fear and
despair but that we must rather seize them as
opportunities. In Timor-Leste, the food crisis prompted
the Government to refocus attention on the agricultural
sector, increasing investment in the provision of high-
yield seeds, tractors and hand tractors, enabling farmers
to learn new farming techniques and expanding food
production. As a further incentive, the Government
purchases locally produced, non-perishable produce,
such as rice, corn and beans, above international market
prices. The purchased items are redistributed to
hospitals, schools and vulnerable groups. As a result of
timely and proactive Government intervention, Timor-
Leste was able to avoid social unrest and instability and
the further deterioration of the livelihood of the poor.

In the 2009 budget, $205 million was allocated
for major capital development projects, including the
building of a new national electricity project to provide
reliable and cheap electricity to the whole country
within two or three years. This is a heavy-fuel-based
power plant with new transmission lines that can be
switched to gas and Wind power. However, we believe
that, even if we are able to operate with gas and wind
energy, Timor-Leste will continue to need
supplemental support in the form of heavy-fuel-based
energy. There will be strict monitoring to ensure that
the project will be in full compliance with World Bank
environmental standards and the Kyoto Protocol. An
international tender will be announced shortly for an
independent consultant to oversee the implementation
of the project in all its technical aspects as well as in
terms of environmental impact.

Over the next 10 years, the Government will have
to mobilize approximately $5 billion, inter alia to build
a new international airport, estimated to cost $700
million; a new port, estimated to cost $300 million; and
a modern, first-class network of national and rural
09-24239
roads, estimated to cost between $1 billion and
$2 billion.

There are no short cuts to development and
modernization, and there are no miracles. I have told
my good friend Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao: Be
audacious, courageous, decisive and take risks, and
you will be remembered as a Lee Kwan Yew of
Singapore or a Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia -
leaders of vision and courage who have transformed
the conditions in their countries from conflict and
poverty into peace and prosperity in one generation. I
added: Or you will be remembered as a small
shopkeeper-owner if you are not courageous enough to
invest aggressively in the next few years.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2009/72), the events of 11 February 2008 have
resulted in a kind of watershed; we have turned the
corner. Let me share some facts with the Council.

With regard to internally displaced persons, the
visible calm and feeling of security in the country have
permitted the Government's ongoing success with the
national recovery strategy. Fifty-eight of the 60 camps
that were open in 2006-2007 have now closed. There
are few camps remaining in Dili, which the Ministry of
Social Solidarity is working to have closed within the
first few months of 2009. The Ministry, with the
assistance of the United Nations, is continuing to
address the needs of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and the receiving communities, as well as
monitoring the situation in receiving communities to
ensure that any problems that may arise as a result of
the relocation will be addressed in an appropriate
manner.

The Government, led by Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmao, has, in one year, managed to resolve many of
the outstanding problems inherited from the 2006
crisis. Within approximately a year and a half, the
situations related to IDPs, petitioners, pensions for the
elderly, vulnerable persons and former combatants of
the national liberation movement were resolved.

Security sector reform and the further
development of our national police and defence forces
have been my main concerns, and I have made them
priorities of my presidency. That commitment had
already been demonstrated when I took office as Prime
Minister in the midst of the 2006 crisis. Speaking then
before our national parliament, I defined my role as
that of an army chaplain and pledged to heal the
wounds of the country's heart and soul and not to buy
more weapons. I made it a priority to heal the wounds
within our police and defence forces, between the two
institutions and between them and the people. I was
aware then - and remain aware - that only a healthy
relationship of trust between the two security
institutions can ensure that the 2006 crisis will not
recur. I have continued that effort as President, in
partnership with the Speaker of our national parliament
and with our Prime Minister, and I believe we have
achieved much since.

Today, we can say with a degree of confidence
that many of the divisions within the two institutions
have been resolved. That does not imply that all the
weaknesses and failings have been overcome. We still
have a long way to go in professionalizing and
modernizing the two security forces, but I believe we
can achieve our most ambitious goals by 2012.

In line with the Government's view that "the
rebuilding of the national police is a long undertaking,
requiring national ownership and continued
international assistance", key developments in the area
of security sector reform have focused on greater
consultation and participation. With the assistance of
UNMIT, and following the signing of the Security
Sector Review project between the United Nations and
the Government of Timor-Leste, the Government will
undertake a comprehensive review of the security
sector.

A number of activities were undertaken last year
to support the strengthening of national institutions. In
September 2008, representatives of a broad spectrum
of Timorese society, police and military personnel,
parliamentarians and Government officials met, in a
Government-initiated process to develop the national
security policy, at the Asia-Pacific Center for Security
Studies in Honolulu.

In an effort to canvass a broader range of
opinions and views, a nationwide survey is being
conducted on perceptions of security threats and of the
security sector in general. In December 2008, the
Prime Minister and I, with full support from UNMIT,
co-hosted a security sector reform and development
seminar. The seminar brought together a range of
diverse national and international actors to discuss
topics such as national security legislation and policy
and was an important step in developing a consensus
vision on what Timor-Leste would like to achieve in
6
the security sector. Key legislation, such as the national
security law, the national defence law and the internal
security law, has been drafted.

The resumption of policing responsibilities by the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) from UNMIT
has sparked a call from PNTL officers - ever
conscious of their need to be prepared for the eventual
full assumption of policing responsibilities from the
United Nations police - for greater training and
logistical support. The establishment of assessment
teams, the handover of districts and the terms of
reference for a joint technical team that will monitor
the transition process are currently being finalized.

With regard to handover in the districts, decisions
will be based on the meeting of four criteria: the ability
of the PNTL to respond appropriately to the security
environment in a given district; final certification of at
least 80 per cent of eligible PNTL officers in a given
district or unit to be handed over; the availability of
initial operational logistical requirements; and
institutional stability.

The PNTL and the Secretary of State for Security,
together with UNMIT, are finalizing the indicators that
will be used to assess the overall criteria. We are also
discussing the work ofjoint assessment teams that will
determine whether a district or unit has met the
criteria. The handover itself will be of vital importance
as a confidence-building exercise for officers of the
PNTL, but the Government also realizes that the
handover is only one stage in the development of a
mature, professional, disciplined and neutral police
force with due regard for human rights and the rule of
law.

I now turn to the justice sector. In 2008, a number
of key challenges faced that sector, including
insufficient capacity, issues regarding the composition
of the Court of Appeal and insufficiently robust
institutions. However, despite those challenges, there
were some significant accomplishments. The drafting
and review of important legislation for the
development of the legal framework in Timor-Leste
was completed. Draft laws regarding witness
protection, juveniles, the establishment of an anti-
corruption commission, domestic violence and the
criminal code are now before the Council of Ministers
for review and adoption.

Efforts have been made to enhance cooperation
between the prosecution and the police. That
cooperation has concerned the serving of notifications,
the long-awaited transfer of prosecution files to their
respective jurisdictions in two districts - Baucau and
Oecussi - and the consideration of an overall case
management system that will, it is hoped, result in a
significant increase in the number of criminal cases
processed. A strategy has also been formulated for
further reform of the corrections service.

As regards the fight against poverty, the recent
Timor-Leste survey of living standards conducted by
the National Statistics Directorate and analysed by the
World Bank has revealed that the incidence of poverty
increased significantly between 2001 and 2006, from
36.3 per cent to 49.9 per cent. As a result of the decline
in the non-oil economy in per capita terms, real non-oil
gross domestic product (GDP) fell by 12 per cent in
that period, despite the increase in Timor-Leste's oil
revenues.

The next survey will reveal the impact of the
Government policies currently being implemented.
However, with increased Government expenditures
since the last quarter of 2007, non-oil GDP has
increased dramatically, which will reverse the decline
in per capita terms as shown in the Timor-Leste survey
of living standards and hence should begin to reduce
poverty levels.

While poverty levels seem to have increased in
the years 2001 to 2006, I believe that Timor-Leste will
remain on target to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 if the Government and our
development partners continue to work hand in hand to
enhance support for rural development, job creation,
public health and education. Other highlights from the
2009 budget include vital social programmes to reduce
poverty via $96 million in transfers for pensions to
support veterans, the elderly and the disabled.

In conclusion, what Council members have heard
from me are the natural and inevitable challenges
facing most developing countries, and in particular
post-conflict communities. Nation-building and peace-
consolidation are lengthy processes that require the
patience and steady commitment of all. In August this
year, we will mark the tenth anniversary of the Popular
Consultation that not only brought about our freedom
but that also saw the complete devastation of our
country and the resulting staggering human toll.

In the past 10 years, with assistance from the
United Nations and our friends, we began the painful

process of healing hearts and souls, building bridges of
reconciliation among the fractured East Timorese
communities, building infrastructure and institutions,
creating an economy and building bridges with our
neighbours. Nation-building and peacebuilding require
vision and long-term, steady commitment. That is true
for my country and is equally true for Haiti, Palestine,
Somalia, Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries.
The list is a very long one. The challenges are always
overwhelming and could discourage the weak and the
impatient. Only the few who dare to dream and act on
their dreams of an ideal abode for all human beings
will see the fruit of their dreams.

On my part, I will do my best to relieve the
burden of the international community and not to
betray its trust, as it has been too patient and generous.
I will do my best not to fail our people and not to
betray their trust.

For those who are quick to make simplistic and
sweeping judgements about the perceived failures of
the United Nations, 1 am here to testify that we East
Timorese owe the United Nations our very existence. A
recent nationwide survey of people's perceptions
conducted by the International Republican Institute
found the following: UNMIT has an approval rate in
Timor-Leste of 75 per cent; the Government has an
approval rate of 66 per cent. It seems that UNMIT has
performed better than our Government. The Prime
Minister did better than the rest of the Government -
without offence to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
sitting behind me - receiving a 79 per cent approval
rating. The National Police Force of Timor-Leste
received an 80 per cent approval rating. That is most
surprising in view of the fact that, in 2006-2007, the
popularity of our police force was probably zero.

This shows the achievements we all have made
and the results of the commitment of the Secretary-
General and of the Security Council. Our defence
force, which also had a low rating for respect following
the 2006 crisis, today has an approval rating of 78 per
cent. I will not share with the Council my disapproval
rating, because it was embarrassingly low. And for
those in the media and pseudo-academics with a
penchant for inserting cliches like "failing State" into
their sanctimonious lectures on my country and several
others, I can only say, admittedly with poorly disguised
disdain, that we are doing very well, thank you. May
God the almighty and the merciful bless us all.

