On behalf of the United Kingdom, I want to express our thanks to Mr. Lounceny Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his continued efforts to support and promote peace, stability and security in Central Africa, especially in the light of the difficult circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We welcome the recent progress in the region, particularly the establishment of the new Economic Community of Central African States Commission. However, as Special Representative Fall has set out, Central Africa continues to face serious political, economic and security challenges, which have been exacerbated by the impacts of COVID-19. As ever, it remains important that the countries of the region work together, with the support of the United Nations, to strengthen regional peace and security, protect civilians in conflict and promote human rights and resilience, as well as economic recovery. In that regard, I commend the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) for its ongoing conflict prevention and mediation efforts across Central Africa. I encourage greater coordination between UNOCA and United Nations country teams in the subregion, with a particular focus on strengthening early warning. The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by the ongoing crisis in the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon, as described by Special Representative Fall. The impact on civilians continues to be profound. The conflict in that region has driven around 770,000 people from their homes and has forced 60,000 people to seek refuge in neighbouring Nigeria. Only 30 per cent of schools are currently open. This conflict, compounded by the effects of COVID-19, has exacerbated humanitarian needs across the country. In September, the United Kingdom announced a further $6 million to fund humanitarian actors in Cameroon. That funding will provide vital assistance, including food, medical supplies and sanitation provisions to tens of thousands of vulnerable people, and brings our total humanitarian support to Cameroon in 2020 to $18 million. We remain deeply concerned by reports of human rights violations and abuses committed by both security forces and separatists in the North-West and South-West regions. Among the many reported acts of violence against civilians, the killing of seven children by unidentified gunmen in Kumba in October was particularly shocking. We continue to support the Secretary-General's call on all actors not to attack civilians, and we call for an end to violence and for unhindered humanitarian access. The United Kingdom urges respect by all parties for human rights, including freedom of expression, association and assembly. We continue to urge full cooperation by the Government of Cameroon with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. I commend the steps taken by the Government of Cameroon to address the crisis and respond to the recommendations throughout the dialogue in October 2019, including the holding of regional elections on 6 December. These elections were an important step towards decentralization. Inclusive dialogue remains, as does achieving a just, peaceful, and durable resolution to the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions that meets the reasonable demands of the moderate majority. All parties should remain engaged in good faith in dialogue and peacebuilding efforts, including the Swiss-led efforts to facilitate talks between the Government of Cameroon and separatist groups. I hope that Cameroon's international and regional friends and partners will also continue to support efforts to restore peace and security in the North-West and South-West regions. The United Kingdom also strongly condemns the terrorist attacks on civilians in Cameroon's far north and across the wider Lake Chad basin area. We express our condolences to the innocent lives lost, including the 70 civilians killed in Nigeria's Borno state on 28 November. We welcome the efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force to tackle Boko Haram and the Islamic State West Africa Province in the region. We urge the Governments of the Lake Chad basin countries, with the support of international partners, to redouble their efforts to tackle the root causes of conflict, which should include efforts to demobilize and reintegrate former combatants, improve governance and mitigate the impacts of climate change on regional security. I would like to end with a few words about the Central African Republic. The upcoming presidential and legislative elections on 27 December will be an important milestone in the Central African Republic's journey towards lasting peace. We urge the Central African Republic Government and all political actors in the country to ensure that the elections are inclusive, peaceful, free and fair. The United Kingdom has committed $640,000 to efforts to fund the elections through the United Nations and support the participation of women, youth and marginalized groups. But elections are, of course, only one element of democratic governance. We hope to see continuing efforts by all stakeholders in the Central African Republic aimed at strengthening political inclusivity, protecting and promoting human rights and meeting the needs of the population, including with respect to basic security and humanitarian needs.
