Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
commend Egypt for its timely convening of this open
debate on the crucial matter of maintaining international
peace and security, United Nations-African Union (AU)
peace and security cooperation and the future of the
African Peace and Security Architecture.

Let me thank the Egyptian delegation for the
concept note (S/2016/428, annex) provided to guide
our deliberations today and our briefers for their very
concise and constructive contributions to this debate.

I also take the opportunity to welcome the African
Union Peace and Security Council presence in New
York to discuss strategic issues with the Security
Council, with a view to strengthening cooperation
between our organizations. That coincides with the
tenth anniversary of the annual joint meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council,
which was held very constructively yesterday.

Tomorrow the African continent will celebrate the
fifty-third anniversary of the moment when 32 African
leaders expressed their determination to promote
the ideals of pan-Africanism, understanding and
cooperation among the African peoples, and to create
the conditions needed to establish and maintain peace
and security on the continent. However, the pledges
made at the time to establish justice and sustainable
peace in Africa have still not materialized to this day
and remain aspirations rather than reality for a good
number of African countries and peoples.

The African continent is currently hosting 9 of the
16 peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council, consisting of more than 90,000 troops and
supported by more than 15,000 personnel. The African
Union Peace and Security Council has deployed a
considerable number of troops under Security Council
mandates, which must render the two bodies' dialogue
and cooperation necessary and more coordinated and
effective, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Last year, the African
Union deployed a road map for the African Peace and
Security Architecture for 2016 to 2020 as a strategic
document, putting particular emphasis on deliveries
by all stakeholders involved in the Peace and Security
Architecture, including partners and external actors.
The road map aims to cover the various phases of the
conflict cycle through five strategic priorities - conflict
prevention, conflict management, post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding, strategic security
issues, and coordination and partnerships.

How can the Security Council support the successful
implementation of those strategic priorities? And how
can the outcomes of the 2015 reviews that the United
Nations has conducted of its peacekeeping operations
and architecture, and of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, be
coordinated with implementation of the African Union
road map and, more broadly, with the African Peace
and Security Architecture? In trying to give answers
to those questions, we will focus on the three phases of
the conflict cycle - prevention, management and the
post-conflict period. With regard to the prevention of
conflict, the institutions and mechanisms of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, such as the Peace and
Security Council and the early-warning systems at both
the continental and regional level, play a critical role
through preventive diplomacy, mediation and electoral
observation missions aimed at defusing any potential
threats or risks to peace and security.

The 2015 reviews underscored the importance of
addressing the root causes of conflict by involving all
segments of society, promoting inclusive development
and human rights and protecting fundamental individual
and collective freedoms. They also emphasized the
importance ofaddressing the specific concerns ofyoung
people, in order to promote harmonious development,
and of ensuring women's equal participation in
conflict prevention efforts and increasing their role
in the decision-making process. During yesterday's
discussion of the partnership between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, a consensus developed on the need to improve
their collaboration in analysing and assessing threats,
as well as their coordination of preventive diplomacy
and mediation efforts. When, despite the best efforts of
national stakeholders and the international community,
a conflict cannot be avoided, the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council have additional reasons
to join forces in helping the parties to that conflict to
reach a political agreement in order to put an end to the
hostilities and, ifnecessary, to resort to the use of force,
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter.

Last year, the United Nations engaged in a review
of its peacekeeping operations. The High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, chaired by
Jose Ramos-Horta, former President of Timor-Leste,
presented a comprehensive report (S/2015/446) focused
on the changing nature of conflict, the evolving mandates
of peace operations, managerial and administrative
arrangements and difficulties, planning, partnerships,
the protection of civilians and human rights, and special
political missions. In particular, the African Union
Peace and Security Council was extensively consulted
and given an opportunity to lay out its common position
and focus on the priorities for regional institutions in
managing crises and conflicts - recognition of the
Security Council's authority to authorize enforcement
action and the need for constant consultations and
exchange of information related to ongoing crises and
conflicts and for mutual respect and complementarity.

The new, unprecedented threats faced by some
African countries in 2013 led them to devise a solution
to the delays in the operationalization of the African
Standby Force, which was originally scheduled for
2008. The African Capacity for Immediate Response
to Crisis has been proposed by a number of African
countries, including Angola, in order to fill the
capability gap, find funding, provide ownership for
African countries of conflict situations on the continent
and come up with an immediate response to crises. It
is not intended to replace the African Standby Force,
and steps are being taken to harmonize it with the
Standby Force's structure. The Security Council should
be better informed and engaged about that process and
should assess how it can better support it and render
it operational.

Last month, the Security Council adopted resolution
2282 (2016), while the General Assembly adopted
an identical resolution (70/262), on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, extending
the scope of peacebuilding to all phases of conflict,
not just the post-conflict period. Noting that the 2016-
2020 road map addresses peacebuilding, we would
suggest that the African Union appropriate the new
United Nations approach to peacebuilding, in order to
adapt the African Peace and Security Architecture to
today's challenges.
As the three reviews of the United Nations
framework for peace have outlined, preventing conflict
and implementing the principle of aid in the definition
of sustaining peace are key to avoiding conflict - the
unfulfilled aspiration first expressed more than 50
years ago and reiterated in the African Union's fiftieth
anniversary Solemn Declaration, in which Africa's
leaders stated their determination to achieve the goal of a
conflict-free Africa, now a pillar ofthe African Union's
visionary Agenda 2063. Today's debate is therefore a
timely one, and I am sure that our deliberations and
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/ 8) we adopted
this morning will contribute to making Africa a more
peaceful and prosperous continent, as we all desire.

