Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): South Africa
strongly condemns the continuing violence and the
huge loss of life in Syria. It is now 16 months since
the crisis began, and there is no end in sight. Instead,
the security and humanitarian situations have become
worse. The deteriorating situation in Syria highlights
the urgency for all sides to stop armed violence in all
its forms, implement the six-point plan presented by
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, and move rapidly
towards a political dialogue and a peaceful, democratic,
Syrian-led transition.

The International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies has just classified the situation in
Syria as meeting the conditions of an internal armed
conflict. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has made a similar statement. This
means that the situation has reached the threshold of a
civil war, in which all parties have responsibilities and
obligations under international humanitarian law.

The highest priority should be to stop the killing
and end the suffering of civilians. The suicide bombing
in Damascus yesterday, which killed the Syrian
Defence Minister and others, coupled with frequent
horrific massacres in various parts of the country,
clearly indicates that there is more than one party to the
conflict. This volatile situation has also become fertile
ground for terrorist groups. Acts of violence committed
by any party are unacceptable and a clear violation
of their commitments under the six-point plan, and
should be condemned. Reports of the continued use of
heavy weapons by the Syrian security forces are also of
serious concern to us.

South Africa strongly supports the efforts of Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan and believes that his plan is
the only credible mechanism that could deliver apositive
and realistic outcome. Coupled with the Annan plan is
the final communique' of the Action Group for Syria
(S/2012/523, annex), adopted in Geneva on 30 June. It
constitutes a significant proposal on the way forward
in Syria and has been supported by all permanent
members of the Security Council. We should not fail
to support Mr. Annan, as his efforts may be the only
branch to which to cling before the seismic currents of
a bloody civil war push Syria over the brink into a state
of total collapse.

South Africa is disappointed that, because of
the divisions among the members of the Council,
the Council has been prevented from executing its
responsibilities. Differences within the Council should
be addressed in a spirit of compromise and mutual
respect, and with the Council's broader responsibility
in mind. All members of the Council have consistently
expressed their support for the Kofi Annan plan, the
Geneva action plan communique and the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS).

Yet the common cause that we affirmed when we
adopted resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) three
months ago has not seemed to prevail. We should have
shown the utmost maturity in strategically executing
these crucial tasks, taking into account the realities of
the situation on the ground. Instead, we allowed narrow
interests to destroy our unity of purpose.

We agree with the Joint Special Envoy that
the Council must insist that these decisions be
implemented, that a strong message should be sent to
all parties involved, and that there will be consequences
for their non-compliance with its decisions. We fail to
see, however, how the text that was submitted today by
the sponsors would end the violence or contribute to
the implementation of the six-point plan. Instead, the
text, in an unbalanced manner, threatens sanctions
against the Government of Syria without realistically
allowing any action to be taken against the opposition,
which would be permitted to defy the six-point plan
without consequence. In similar situations where
the international community, including the Security
Council, has preferred one side over the other, such bias
has resulted in the polarization of the conflict. This is
especially true for such fractious societies as Syria's.

The failure of the Council today to reach a
balanced agreement threatens the Kofi Annan plan
and undermines the possibility of finding a peaceful
political solution to the Syrian crisis. Our failure to
renew the mandate of UNSMIS - the only functional
tool for verifying and corroborating information on the
ground and supporting the Annan plan, as recommended
by the Secretary-General - is disappointing. While we
are concerned about the safety of the observers, South
Africa continues to believe that UNSMIS has been a
critical part of our effort to find a solution to the Syrian
crisis, and should therefore continue its work in one
form or the other when conditions on the ground so
permit. South Africa is therefore deeply disappointed
that the future of UNSMIS is under threat because of
the divisions in the Council.

It is for these reasons that South Africa abstained in
the voting on draft resolution S/2012/538. South Africa
stands ready to work with all members ofthe Council to
achieve a strong, balanced outcome in support of Kofi
Annan's efforts and a renewal of the UNSMIS mandate.

In conclusion, for the time being South Africa
supports the proposal for a possible technical rollover
of UNSMIS for a very short term.

