Mr. Ramadan (Lebanon): We would like to
commend you, Mr. President, for your excellent
stewardship of the Council, which has firmly supported
my country over the past three years.

Lebanon has long been the victim of terrorism in
all its forms - from the ultimate manifestation of
terrorism in the form of foreign occupation to the
terrorist attacks perpetrated against our civilians and
armed forces that we have all witnessed over the past
two days and the assassinations that have taken the
lives of our leaders, journalists and politicians.

Lebanon is determined to fight the scourge of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Lebanon
is a staunch ally in the international efforts tot
eradicate terrorism. Lebanon has signed and ratified 11

of the 13 international conventions on terrorism, in
addition to the Arab convention in that regard. Lebanon
also continues to cooperate fully and in a timely
manner with the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

Today more than ever, Lebanon is in need of the
support of this body and of the international
community in the face of the ruthless terrorist groups
that have been targeting our civilians and armed forces
since last Sunday. Seventeen Lebanese Army soldiers
were the victims of a surprise attack that took their
lives in a vicious and ruthless manner - some of them
beheaded while they slept. Our civilians, as well as
Palestinian civilian refugees living in Lebanon, have
been attacked and their lives have been threatened.
Two explosions have disturbed the peace of Beirut,
resulting in loss of life and material damage. Even as
we speak, our Lebanese army is relentlessly fighting
those terrorist groups, while doing its utmost to
safeguard and protect Lebanese and Palestinian
civilians.

Since the end of October 2004, Lebanon has been
the victim of assassinations that have taken the lives of
our Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and many others, as
well as of attempted assassinations. The Security
Council has stood by Lebanon in its firm determination
to bring the perpetrators of those heinous crimes,
including those who financed and executed them, to
justice.

Israel, the State responsible for the ultimate form
of terrorism committed against my country in its
continued occupation of Lebanese lands since 1978,
renewed its aggression against Lebanon during its war
in the summer of 2006 - a war that took the lives of
more than 1,200 Lebanese civilians, one third of whom
were children, left more than 4,000 injured and caused
more than $8 billion in material damage.

After that war, Lebanon fully committed itself to
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), including the
prevention of the flow of arms into its territories
without its consent, as affirmed on several occasions
by a number of Lebanese officials. Lebanon is also
cooperating fully, with assistance provided by the
United Nations in this regard. Israel, however,
continues to occupy Lebanese lands, including in Al
Ghajar village, and is violating - sometimes on a
daily basis - our national sovereignty.

It is worth mentioning in this regard that

Hizbullah did not exist in 1978, when Israel first

invaded my country, Lebanon. Nor did it exist in 1982,

when the Israeli invasion reached our capital, Beirut.

Hizbullah was only a popular resistance movement in
response to occupation.

The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories,
Professor Dugard, speaking in another forum within
this Organization, advised the Israeli delegates not to
level accusations of terrorism, since they add nothing
to the debate and do not solve the real cause of the
problems of the Middle East. Professor Dugard
concluded that the real cause of the problems in the
Middle East is occupation.

Lebanon remains fully committed to fighting the
scourge of terrorism and to cooperating with
international efforts aimed at eradicating it.

