Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, to thank the Ambassadors of Australia and
Lithuania and you, Mr. President, for your briefings and
leadership as the Chairs of the respective committees.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be made by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union.

Terrorism is a threat more present than ever,
as illustrated by recent tragic events. France joins
others in condemning with the greatest firmness the
terrible killings that took place at the Jewish Museum
in Brussels. We express our full solidarity with the
Belgian people in that ordeal and offer our condolences
to the families of the victims.

For the struggle against the terrorist scourge
to be effective, the Council, through its Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, must have at its disposal a flexible tool
enabling it to implement swift sanctions when an
emergency requires it. In that regard, several days
following the Paris summit on security in Nigeria held
on 17 May, the Committee took a decision, on 22 May,
to place Boko Haram under sanctions, a decision that
my country co-sponsored.

It is important to continue our efforts to update the
sanctions list so that it correctly reflects the emerging
threats in the fight against Al-Qaida. Today, France is
particularly concerned about a new phenomenon, that of
foreign combatants. These fighters are self-radicalized
young people who travel to fight alongside terrorists.
They represent a threat not only to the countries to
which they travel, but also to their countries of origin,
where they will probably return to settle. It is urgent
that the sanctions Committee take action against that
phenomenon, and in particular against the networks
that aid and abet them.

Finally, the listing and delisting procedures of the
sanctions list must respect the fundamental freedoms of
the persons on the list. By creating and strengthening
the Ombudsperson's mandate, the latest resolutions
have allowed us to improve the procedural guarantees.
While the Council is about to review the mandate ofthe
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) Committee, it is important
that it continue to improve those guarantees.

Besides the Al-Qaida sanctions Committee, the
issue of foreign combatants, which poses a new threat,
must be taken seriously by all United Nations counter-
terrorism bodies. We therefore encourage the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to continue to address that issue,
especially as its new mandate, defined by resolution
2129 (2013), includes the need to focus on recent
trends in the field of terrorism. We also commend the
Committee's particular focus on new threats through
the holding of discussions on resolution 2133 (2014), on
abductions for ransom.

Lastly, we would like to thank the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate for its programme of
work, including several follow-up visits, to ensure the
due implementation by Member States of the Council's
requirements in the fight against terrorism, namely,
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). It is essential
to pursue that dialogue with Member States by carrying
out regular follow-up visits.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to recall that
the proliferation of nuclear, radiological, biological and
chemical weapons and their means of delivery and the
risk of their falling into the hands of terrorists pose a
genuine threat. Resolution 1540 (2004) and its rigorous
implementation by Member States plays an important
role in averting that risk. In that regard, I would like
to thank and congratulate you, Mr. President, for the
successful organization of the high-level Security
Council debate to commemorate the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1540 (2004) (S/PV.7169) in early May.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, which the
Council adopted on that occasion, also serves as a road
map for the work of the 1540 (2004) Committee.

Since its adoption in 2004, the progress noted in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has been
important. Today, a majority of States in the world have
adopted measures to replicate the provisions of the
resolution in their national legislation, and the main
international, regional and subregional organizations
have adopted strategies to promote and implement that
important resolution. In that regard, we must continue to
encourage countries that have not yet done so to provide
the Committee with a report on the implementation of
the resolution in their national legislation.

Over the past 10 years, the Committee has also
continued its cooperation with several international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as with
other subsidiary bodies of the Council whose activities
are aligned with the goals of resolution 1540 (2004).
The Committee has much to gain from expanded
cooperation with the international bodies responsible
for combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular in developing partnerships
related to technical assistance. We hope that this
cooperation will continue unhindered.

In the light of those developments, the Committee
should undertake a strategic review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the longer
term and to incorporate the results of that analysis in
the Committee's comprehensive review in 2016. The
presidential statement adopted at the start of the month
paves the way for conducting that important exercise.

In conclusion, to meet the growing challenge
of terrorism, we must continue to promote close
cooperation between all structures combatting that
phenomenon. It would be useful for the fourth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which will take place in June, to address strengthened
coordination, as well as emerging problems, such as
that of foreign combatants, so that the international
community is better equipped to confront those threats.

