Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to commend you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate. Portugal attaches
particular importance to peacekeeping efforts in Africa.

Six of the seven United Nations missions
and peacekeeping operations in which Portugal
participates are in Africa, namely, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

With respect to MINUSCA, Portugal participates
with its largest contingent - 165 military personnel
and 13 police officers, including a rapid reaction
force - operating without restrictions or reservations
in circumstances that require a high level of mobility
and rapid response, in particular to deal with the
situation of unprotected civilians.

With regard to MINUSMA, our participation is
a concrete example of best practices of cooperation
among the various States Members of the United
Nations. That initiative, which takes the form of a pilot
project on sharing air capacity in the context of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, illustrates well
the huge potential that joint work brings to strategic
coherence, the efficient use of available resources and
the improvement and effectiveness of missions.

The increasing scope and complexity of mandates
have not always been matched by the resources
and capacities required by missions to address
contemporary, asymmetrical and, often, transnational
threats. We therefore fully share the importance attached
by the Secretary-General to conflict prevention, the
stabilization of tensions, the primacy of politics and
the use of diplomacy as a preferred means to achieve
lasting peace.

Indeed, Portugal is one of the 151 signatories to
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, further to the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
In that regard, my country supports the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the context of peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. The complementary
action of the European Union, including through
trilateral cooperation in various scenarios and formats
on the African continent, represents value added.

As to how that cooperation can be improved, we
support the measures contained in the Secretary-
General's report on options for authorization and
support for African Union peace support operations of
26 May 2017 (S/2017/454). Indeed, that document sets
out various modalities to ensure flexible and predictable
funding for missions. It proposes responsibility and
audit procedures. In that context, it stresses the need
for African Union peacekeeping forces to be properly
trained on respect for human rights and the code of
conduct in peacekeeping operations.

Portugal also supports peace operations in Africa
through the African Peace Facility of the European
Union. We believe that it is essential to ensure
predictable and sustainable funding for African peace
operations, whether led by the African Union or
regional organizations through the African Union.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Portugal remains ready to participate in the training
of military contingents from other troop-contributing
countries, as is the case within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

