Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
United States joins in expressing deep sorrow and shock
at the loss of innocent civilian lives at a United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) site in Lebanon this
morning. We offer our condolences to the Government
and people of Lebanon. And we extend our sympathies to
the people of Fiji, whose peace-keepers were participating
in the UNIFIL mission and suffered casualties.

During the last few years, we have seen moments of
high hope and promise in the Middle East. We have
heard eloquent pleas for an end to blood and tears and for
an end to death, misery, suspicion and fear. We have
heard calls for a new era symbolized by the olive branch
and based on Anwar Sadat's statement that

"there can be no happiness based on the detriment of
others."

 

Today, more than ever, we have reason to recall those
statements made in support of peace. We know that courage
is necessary to restore momentum to the path of peace. And
we know that those who pray for security and justice will
find it only through reconciliation and peace.

Earlier today, President Clinton called upon all parties
to agree to an immediate cease-fire. The Governments of
Israel and Lebanon have welcomed the initiative. And the
resolution we have just adopted also calls for a cessation of
hostilities by all parties. An end to the fighting is essential
if diplomatic efforts, in which Secretary of State
Christopher is fully engaged, are to move forward.
Undeterred by acts of terrorism, the goal of those efforts
remains the same. And they are made yet more urgent by
tragedies such as those that occurred today. That goal is a
comprehensive and lasting peace throughout the Middle
East.

Unfortunately, the draft resolution put before the
Council by Lebanon and others was not one that the United
States could support.

There should be no doubt that the actions taken by
Israel were in response to Hezbollah strikes launched from
Lebanese territory against civilian centres in Israel. The
draft resolution sponsored by Lebanon and others did not
mention this. It was one-sided and highly selective in its
discussion of the Violence. By singling out Israel, and Israel
alone, for condemnation, it would have set back, not
advanced, negotiations towards an end to the fighting.

This is a time for the Council, and for nations around
the world, to renew the call for peace. We must do all we
can to see that an incident such as today's will be viewed
in historic context, not as a trigger to a new round of
killing, but as the last explosion of sorrow prior to a new
era of reconciliation and hope.

That process requires from the parties restraint and a
willingness to confront directly the sources of violence.
And it requires from this Council a sense of fairness and
balance that is present in the resolution we have just
adopted, but not in the draft resolution put forward by
Lebanon and others today.

Let me add that our position on Security Council
resolution 425 (1978) is unchanged. None of the principles
in the resolution we have adopted can be fulfilled outside
the context of the peace process.

