I thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for his briefing. Through him, we once again thank all humanitarian workers, volunteers and local organizations. In the most unthinkable circumstances, they still go out every day to serve the needs of the Syrian people. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has a different dimension in conflict-affected countries. We are all shaken and disrupted by the effects of such an unprecedented situation. But we must recognize that in contexts such as the Syrian Arab Republic there are deep, protracted layers that contribute to a much complicated environment. The country's limited testing capacity, its collapsed health-care system and an increase in burials and death certificates could be telling a very different story from the one the numbers tell. We commend the efforts, led by the World Health Organization in support of the national health authorities, to increase Syria's overall capacity to address and respond to the pandemic. We continue to be extremely concerned over the levels of food insecurity in the country. We are thankful that the explosion in the port of Beirut will not have an impact on the delivery of food assistance led by the World Food Programme. However, we are concerned that the situation in the north-west, for example, where 2 million people could become food insecure, could deteriorate even further given the difficult economic situation and the ever-present possibility of increased hostilities. We therefore reiterate that humanitarian access must be sustained and facilitated in order to provide emergency food assistance and prevent more damage. In that same vein, we wanted to highlight something that Mr. Rajasingham has already touched upon, namely, that, due to the closure of the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, humanitarian assistance in the north-west has become more costly, more risky and less timely. That is truly both concerning and shameful. But in the north-east, while cross-line access has been possible to a limited extent, we continue to pay attention to the existing gap created by the closure of Al- Yarubiyah. The numbers speak for themselves, and we are seeing more COVID-19 cases in the north-east than in the north-west. In that regard, we emphasize the humanitarian imperative to utilize the most efficient and effective means for impartial needs-based assistance to the people in the north-east. To conclude, it is only with a renewed sense of humanity and solidarity that we, the Security Council and the entire international community, will be able to support the Syrian people in these circumstances. Political will is necessary now more than ever to end the suffering that Syrians are enduring. The political solution to this conflict therefore needs to be the top priority of all stakeholders. Humanitarian assistance is not, and should not, replace our shared responsibility to that end. We are living in unprecedented times of fear, suffering, indifference and uncertainty. Let us do our best to get all stakeholders to adhere to a national ceasefire, facilitate humanitarian access, release the detainees, abductees and information on missing persons to their families and work with determination to achieve the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Children and teachers need to go back to school safely. Hospitals, schools and other critical infrastructure need to be respected, Civilians need to be protected from harm, food insecurity, diseases and violence, and humanitarian access needs to be guaranteed. Above all, in the midst of a deadly pandemic, we need to be able to see the reality and prevent a catastrophic outcome.
