Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) back to the Security Council
and by thanking her for her briefing today. The United
Kingdom is grateful for her twenty-fourth report,
and we thank her and her Office for their continuing
investigation of the situation in Darfur.

TheUnitedKingdom supports the ICC in its vital work
of challenging impunity and ensuring accountability
for those who bear the greatest responsibility for the
most serious crimes of international concern. It is a
tragedy that crimes such as these continue in Darfur.
The Prosecutor's report notes that lately crimes have
decreased, but we have still seen worrying reports of
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, notably in Jebel Marra. We remain
particularly concerned about reports of attacks on
civilians by the rapid support forces and other militias.
We call on all the parties to end Violence against
civilians, violations of international humanitarian law
and violations and abuses of human rights.

The United Kingdom welcomes the signing of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
Roadmap Agreement by both the Government of the
Sudan and the opposition parties, but we remain deeply
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Darfur,
where 2.6 million people are still displaced, with no
solution for the root causes of their displacement.
This year saw a spike in displacement in the wake of
conflict in Jebel Marra that strained humanitarian
actors' capacity to meet the needs of suffering Darfuri
civilians, particularly in the face of obstacles to their
access. Civilians continue to be the main victims of the
ongoing instability, and the United Kingdom urges the
Government of the Sudan to allow access throughout
Darfur, including all parts of Jebel Marra. That will
enable the Prosecutor to carry out her investigation and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians
and facilitate humanitarian assistance. There is an
urgent need to address the gaps in the rule of law and
accountability, which breed violence and instability, as
witnessed in inter-communal clashes and widespread
allegations of gender-based crimes and serious sexual
violence against women.

We call on the Government of the Sudan to
meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) to
cooperate fully with the ICC, execute outstanding
arrest warrants and fulfil its international obligations.
The United Kingdom is frustrated about the fact
that fugitives from the Court, including President
Al-Bashir and Mr. Hussein, have been able to travel
unhindered to a number of States that are parties to
the Court, and therefore under an obligation to arrest
and surrender them. Together with our international
partners, we will continue to raise our concerns with
the relevant Governments and make it clear that we
expect compliance with the arrest warrants for all those
indicted by the Court. Such non-cooperation with the
Court weakens the rules-based international system.

We agree with the Prosecutor that the Council
should play a more active role in the area of compliance,
and we support effective measures to ensure that
instances of non-cooperation with the Court are
taken seriously. The United Kingdom believes that
achieving justice for victims should be at the heart
of the international community's response to mass
atrocity violence. It is essential to ensure that fugitives
from international justice do not enjoy impunity. We
call on all States parties to the Court to cooperate with
it and abide by their Rome Statute obligations. We
commend the ongoing investigations of the Office of
the Prosecutor, and welcome the fact that despite these
challenges, real progress has been made and significant
additional evidence gathered. We recognize that the
investigations are complex and take place in very
difficult circumstances.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom would like
to take this opportunity to renew its commitment to
supporting the Court both as a State party to the Rome
Statute and as a member of the Security Council. We
recognize the financial constraints that the Prosecutor's
Office faces and respect her independence in deciding
on the best use of those resources.

