The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of Greece.
We give many thanks to Mr. Alvaro de Soto, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his comprehensive and useful briefing on the latest
developments in the Middle East.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the United Kingdom on
behalf of the European Union.

Today's open debate comes at a most critical
juncture on the long and difficult road towards
achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in
the region.

Over the past few months, we have witnessed a
strong and solid commitment by both sides. Their
respective leaderships have taken bold decisions, often
at great political cost, to move the process forward.
They have resisted sizeable internal pressures. On
numerous occasions they have publicly declared that
they will honour and proceed with the commitments
they have undertaken. That is to be commended.

The upcoming Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and
parts of the northern West Bank, when completed, will
indeed constitute an important milestone. It should be
seized upon as a momentous opportunity to revitalize
the road map and to move the process a step closer
towards achieving a fair, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East.

The success of Israeli disengagement is of
paramount importance. All parties have an important
stake in it. We are well aware that there are a number
of issues that need to be addressed immediately and
that need to be resolved in a manner that ensures a
positive and successful outcome.

Both sides should make every effort to work
directly with each other and to cooperate in finding the
optimum solutions to the various issues involved in a
coordinated, peaceful and smooth handover. Contacts
between the two sides at all levels should be intensified
and should be operational and forward-looking. Greece
fully supports the mission of the Quartet's Special
Envoy for Gaza Disengagement, Mr. James
Wolfensohn, and his efforts to assist in the non-
security-related aspects of the disengagement and in
the revival of the Palestinian economy.

The Israeli disengagement will be judged over the
long term. Thus, provisions for the day after
disengagement should be put in place. The viability of
a successful disengagement should be consolidated by
developing the necessary conditions - political,
economic and security - to ensure, to the extent
possible, that there will not be a reversal of the
progress that will have been achieved.

The economic revival of the Palestinian
territories will be crucial to ensuring long-term benefits
arising from the opportunity presented by the Israeli
disengagement. All efforts in that direction should be
supported and enhanced. Initiatives such as the
1 March London meeting on supporting the Palestinian
Authority must include the appropriate follow-up.

Notwithstanding Israel's legitimate security
concerns, immediate steps must be taken to relieve the
economic hardships faced by the Palestinian people
and to facilitate rehabilitation and reconstruction by
easing the flow of people and goods in and out of Gaza
and the West Bank and between them.

Although our attention is focused on the
upcoming Israeli withdrawal, we must not lose sight of
the wider context. Our shared goal is the realization of
a two-State solution: Israel and a democratic, viable
and territorially contiguous State of Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security.

We are concerned at the recent upsurge of
violence, which has threatened to upset the delicate
truce of the past few months. As tensions are running
high, it is necessary that both parties do their utmost to
curb attacks and counterattacks, including extrajudicial
killings, in order to prevent a return to the vicious
circle of violence that has beset the region for so long.

Therefore, confidence-building between the
parties is a key aspect. Greece would like to recall the
understandings reached at the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit
on 8 February and encourages both sides to proceed
without delay with the implementation of those
understandings.

We are also concerned at continued Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories and at the continued construction of the
separation barrier, as well as the Israeli cabinet's
decision to immediately complete its construction in
and around East Jerusalem, with apparent dire
humanitarian consequences for a large number of the
city's Arab inhabitants.

It is important to reiterate that the road map
remains the framework for the achievement of just and
lasting peace. Both parties should concentrate on
fulfilling their respective obligations and commitments
under the road map. They should also refrain from any
and all unilateral actions that threaten to prejudge the
outcome of final status negotiations and that undermine
efforts to build confidence on the ground.

The role of the international community, the
Quartet in particular, remains extremely important in
that it has to be actively involved and engaged in
supporting the parties in their efforts to realize and
implement their respective commitments.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting until 2.50 pm.

The meeting was suspended at I p.m.
