Mr. Madrakhimov (Uzbekistan): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as chair
of the OIC group. I would ask you, Sir, to accept my
warmest congratulations on Sweden's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you every success. I also wish to congratulate the
other newly elected members of the Council - Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan - on the assumption of
their responsibilities.

At the outset, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation welcomes the recent adoption by this
organ of resolution 2334 (2016), which, among several
important elements, reaffirmed that the establishment
by Israel, the occupying Power, of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes
a flagrant violation under international law, and
reiterated the Council's demand that Israel immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and fully respect all its legal obligations in
this regard.

The international consensus in this regard and the
urgency ofjustly and peacefully resolving the question
of Palestine, the core of Arab-Israeli conflict, have
been made abundantly clear by this important action
of the Council. We urge the Security Council to accept
serious follow-up efforts to compel compliance with
and ensure the implementation of the resolution towards
providing tangible political support for international
efforts aimed at ending the Israeli occupation and
achieving a two-State solution on the basis of pre-1967
borders and promoting, in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions and the moderate principles
of the Arab Peace Initiative, the realization of a just,
lasting and peaceful solution to which OIC remains
unflinchingly committed.

Significantly, this meeting assumes special
importance as it comes two days after convening the
Paris Middle East Peace Conference. Such a historic
timely meeting highlights the will and commitment
of the international community to continue its pursuit
to salvage the two-State solution before it is too late
and reach a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
without delay.

This meeting takes place overshadowed by an
extremely volatile and continually deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, owing to Israel's prolonged occupation
and illegal policies and measures, including, inter
alia, systematic human rights violations against
the Palestinian civilian population; gross collective
punishment perpetrated against Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip under the decade-long Israeli siege and
blockade; continuing house demolitions; the arrest
and administrative detention of Palestinian civilians,
including political and human right activists; settlement
and wall construction; and the expansion and isolation
of Jerusalem from its natural Palestinian environs.

The recent attempts by the Israeli Government
with regard to a bill aimed at further entrenching its
illegal settlement outposts is not only undermining
the credibility and significance of political efforts and
damaging the viability and territorial contiguity and
integrity of the State of Palestine; it also goes against
international law and United Nations resolutions.
All of such illegal measures must be ceased and the
occupying Power must abide by its legal obligations
under international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as stipulated in resolution 2334 (2016). The
OIC remains firm in its conviction that the Security
Council must act to ensure the halt of all Israeli illegal
acts, provide protection and justice for the Palestinian
people and compell Israel, the occupying Power, to
strictly abide by its obligations under international
law and comply with the countless resolutions of the
Security Council and General Assembly.
Once again, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation must draw attention to its great concerns
regarding the ongoing Israeli violations against holy
places, particularly the al-Aqsa Mosque, which are not
only violations against religious rights of Muslims,
but are also threatening to ignite religious conflict.
We forewarn about the recent decision of the Israeli
Government banning the call for prayer in mosques in
the occupied city of Al-Quds and its suburbs, given that
the decision constitutes a grave violation of the freedom
to worship and threatens to destabilize the situation on
the ground. Such provocations and incitement must
be brought to an end. The OIC views with concern
the unprecedented levels of assaults by extremist
Israeli settling groups against civilians in the city of
Al-Khalil/Hebron, including the recent harassment
and threats against human rights activists, including
human rights defenders who had documented on Video
the crimes of an Israeli soldier shooting an injured,
unarmed Palestinian.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the OIC's support and solidarity and
readiness to engage with relevant international efforts
in order to enable the Palestinian people to regain
their inalienable national rights, including the right to
return, self-determination and realize the independence
and sovereignty of the State of Palestine on the land
occupied by Israel since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We must reach ajust solution to the question
of Palestinian refugees according to the relevent
resolutions of the United Nations and establish lasting
peace and security.

