Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
comprehensive and illuminating briefing of Ms. Bintou
Keita. We would like to welcome the appointment
of Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
Head of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti and wish her every success. We also welcome
the Prime Minister of Sint Maarten.

Three months ago, we adopted resolution 2410
(2018), which extends the Mission's mandate until
April 2019 and lays the groundwork for ensuring the
transition to a post-peacekeeping presence by the
United Nations system in the country. To that end,
we wish to stress the importance of the goals and the
46 indicators proposed by the Secretary-General to
monitor the progress and effectiveness of the transition
promoted by the Mission, the Government of Haiti and
the United Nations country team.

However, we believe that much remains to
be done to achieve an effective an transition. The
violent demonstrations in July and the subsequent
resignation of Prime Minister Lafontant, as noted by
Ms. Keita, reflect the volatility of the situation and the
precariousness of the balance required for the political,
economic and social consolidation of the country.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Jean Henry
Ce'ant as the new Prime Minister. We look forward to
his prompt ratification by Parliament and the formation
of a new Government. We also stress the need for
Parliament to speed up the process of adopting the
criminal code and the criminal procedural code, as
well as the urgency of constituting the Permanent
Electoral Council.

In the area of security, on the one hand, we are
concerned about the increase in gang-related violence
and violent protests; on the other, we highlight the
important programmes to reduce communal violence,
and in particular the work of mobile teams and the
implementation of quick-impact projects.

We also stress the importance of the Mission's
support for the national police. However, we are
concerned about reports of human rights violations by
law enforcement agencies and the lack ofinvestigations,
which favours impunity and limits access to justice. We

hope that the completion of the first annual evaluation
of the strategic development plan ofthe national police,
carried out with the assistance of the Mission, will
make it possible to improve capacities to defend and
promote human rights.

In the justice sector, we are concerned about the
persistence of prolonged pretrial detentions and prison
overcrowding. We therefore appreciate the growing
number of legal cases and the Mission's assistance
with the penitentiary system. We also welcome the
appointment of the Ministry of Justice as the new
focal point for human rights, and we hope that it
will soon be formalized. We also look forward to the
speedy ratification of the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, which has been pending since its signature
in 2013.

We consider it essential to remedy the problems
of overlapping functions with the Ministry of Justice
and to speed up the appointment of judges in order to
ensure the efficient functioning of the justice system.
We believe that the draft strategic plan of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary should serve those objectives.

Additionally, we would like to highlight the
renovation of the headquarters of the unit to combat
sexual crimes, thanks to Norway's cooperation, as
well as the increase in the number of investigations.
To that end, we emphasize that due attention to
victims and access to justice require psychological and
medical assistance.

Those are some of the areas in which the
Government of Haiti needs to redouble its efforts in
order to achieve the goals set within the framework of
the Mission's exit strategy.

I conclude by reiterating my country's commitment
and support for the efforts of the Haitian people and the
Government to build sustainable peace.

