Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I am taking the floor
to explain my delegation's vote on resolution 2240
(2015), which was just adopted and which Malaysia
also co-sponsored. We thank the United Kingdom for
facilitating consultations among Council members in
its capacity as a penholder for this initiative. We greatly
appreciate the flexibility of Council members during
the highly challenging, yet ultimately constructive and
fruitful, negotiations on the draft.

Malaysia welcomes the adoption of resolution
2240 (2015). It is a timely response by the Council
towards addressing the plight of migrants attempting
the dangerous Mediterranean crossing in a desperate
attempt to flee from conflict zones.

In a horrendous exploitation of the misery of
those migrants, unscrupulous human traffickers
and smugglers seek to profit from them by offering
passage across the Mediterranean while charging
exorbitant rates. The shear number of fatalities among
those attempting the Mediterranean crossing is a
humanitarian crisis in itself. The harrowing visuals
of migrants, particularly of the three-year-old Syrian
boy arriving by the Sea, is seared on our collective
conscious. This situation cannot be allowed to persist.

The text just adopted calls for action to stop the
human smugglers and traffickers through activities
such as the search and seizure of vessels suspected of
being involved in such activities. At the same time,
the resolution clearly outlines the parameters of such
actions to a degree of specificity that prioritizes the
preservation of life and the safety and security of
migrants in accordance with applicable international
standards. In short, the text delicately balances the need
for humanitarian protection of the victims of human
traffickers and smugglers with the legitimate safety
and security concerns, as well as with the sovereignty
and territorial integrity, of the concerned States.

Malaysia will play its part and is prepared to
receive 3,000 migrants fleeing the conflict in Syria, as
announced by Prime Minister of Malaysia Najib Razak
(see A/70/PV.22) in the general debate of the General
Assembly last week. We urge all countries in a position
to do so to consider taking similar steps.

The challenge posed by the network of people
smugglers and human traffickers is not confined to
only the Mediterranean. South-East Asia is also not
immune to such challenge. The implementation of these
resolutions provides many countries facing similar
troubling developments an opportunity to draw on the
European Union's experiences and approaches with
a view to addressing similar threats and challenges
within their regional contexts. Having said that, while
the present text may address immediate concerns on
the situations of migrants in the Mediterranean, we are
under no illusions that the root causes, particularly the
situations of conflict and violence that have led them
into such desperation, must be addressed without delay.

In this regard, Malaysia renews its commitment
to work alongside other Council members, as well as
with other partners and stakeholders in seeking to find
peaceful solutions to various conflicts in the Middle
East and North African region and beyond in our
collective effort to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.

