Mr. McIvor (New Zealand): It is my honour to
address the Council on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group of countries that maintain
permanent missions in New York, namely Australia,
the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and
my own country, New Zealand.

We welcome the Council's continuing
consideration of the issues surrounding the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons. The Programme of
Action adopted at the 2001 United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects underscored the multifaceted nature
of this issue and the real and immediate threat that the
illicit trade in and possession of these weapons poses to
the security of nations and individuals. The
destabilizing effect of the proliferation of such
weapons, their role in exacerbating unrest and conflict
and their disproportionate effect on civilians, women
and children were further recognized at the First
Biennial Meeting on the Programme of Action, held in
New York last July.

National and regional action remains critical to
the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action. However, there is also an important role for
international initiatives and, in particular, for the
Council, to play. Small arms and light weapons remain
a significant factor in many of the conflicts currently
under the Council's eye. The need for the Council to
continue to address small arms issues in its response to
particular conflict and post-conflict situations remains
real.

In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's most recent report (S/2003/l2l7) on
initiatives undertaken to implement his earlier
recommendations on ways and means in which the
Security Council can contribute to dealing with small
arms questions in situations under its consideration.
Those recommendations set out a series of practical
steps that the Council may take, and we are heartened
by the progress made so far.

In particular, targeted and specific arms
embargoes - if effectively enforced by Member
States- are an important tool at the Council's
disposal to prevent the proliferation of small arms in a
particular conflict. Strengthened national export
controls, including effective end-user certification and
an effective cross-border tracing mechanism, are also
integral to defending against illicit transfers and
ensuring that legally exported arms do not end up in
illicit hands.

In the post-conflict phase, effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration elements are crucial
in ensuring that small arms and light weapons do not
disrupt peace-building and reconstruction efforts. In
that regard, we support the Secretary-General's
comments about the importance of increasing the
funding for such programmes.

It also remains critical that the Council continue
its efforts to identify the links between the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources. Both have
demonstrated their capacity to fuel and sustain
conflicts.

Our own region has experienced the lawlessness
and political instability that accompanies the
unchecked proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. It has benefited from the Council's support in
managing the role of small arms in respect of the post-
conflict situation in Bougainville, where the collection
and destruction of weapons is a critical part of the
peace process.

Pacific efforts to address the small arms issue
centre on a regional approach. The importance of
working collaboratively to address security issues was
reaffirmed by Pacific leaders in the Biketawa
Declaration, which provides for a regional approach to
regional security issues. The Biketawa Declaration
forms the basis for the current police and military
support that Pacific Island countries have extended to
Solomon Islands, at the request of its Government, to
overcome instability and lawlessness, exacerbated by
the spread of illicit small arms. The Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands has led to the
surrender of more than 3,700 weapons, the
establishment of 16 police posts and the arrest of key
militants, providing the conditions for donors to re-
engage, for economic recovery to begin, and for a more
stable, safe environment.

The effective implementation of the Programme
of Action remains a priority for the Pacific region.
Pacific Island Forum members have agreed on a
common regional approach to weapon control,
reflected in the Nadi Framework. At their last annual
meeting in August 2003, Pacific Islands Forum leaders
endorsed model weapons-control legislation based on
that framework. Those steps have been complemented
by a regional workshop, co-hosted by Japan and
Australia in Tokyo in January 2003, to enhance
cooperation in legal and institutional areas, law
enforcement and effective small-arms stockpile
management.

Finally, that progress notwithstanding, improving
national legislation and regional coordination in border
controls, law enforcement and armoury management
will be essential to combat the threat posed by small
arms. In this respect, the Secretary-General's report
provides a useful practical guide and outlines areas
where further progress is possible. The Security
Council's continued attention to small arms issues,
particularly in the regional context, will help maintain
the international community's resolve to address
effectively the issue's security and humanitarian
dimensions.

