Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to this briefing on the ongoing situation in
Somalia. I bring greetings to the Security Council from
the African Union (AU) Chairperson, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.

Since 17 May, when I last addressed the Council
(see S/PV.7942), there have been significant diplomatic,
political and security developments that have had a
significant and varying impact on Somalia. Thanks to
the combined efforts and proactive mobilization of the
Federal Government of Somalia, innovative fieldwork
by humanitarian actors and the generous contributions
of international partners, this year Somalia has been
able to avert what could have been a repeat of the 2011
catastrophic drought.

The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
has worked closely with its partners, collaborating
under the umbrella of the Drought Operations
Coordination Centre, to identify challenges and provide
practical assistance for an effective humanitarian
response through information sharing, AMISOM-
uniformed personal escorts and protection for United
Nations humanitarian assessment missions in Adado,
the provision of security for World Food Programme
airdrops in Hudur and civic engagements in areas
under AMISOM. deployments, food and non-food
item distribution to internationally displaced persons'
camps in Mogadishu and the coordinated airlift of 18
metric tons of nutritional food supplies to Bulo Burte.
However, the situation continues to require close
monitoring and adaptation, as problems still loom over
many places in Somalia. Any neglect might result in
a recurrence ofa drought, with gloomy consequences.

The AU-United Nations joint review took place
in May. Each report that was adopted by the African
Union Peace and Security Council on 12 July presented
recommendations for key political and security
resourcing for the work of AMISOM. so that the Mission
can complete its transition and start its drawdown.

Since June, Somalia has been affected by the Gulf
crisis between a Saudi Arabia-led coalition and Qatar. I
will not go into further detail, but I will say that we are
happy the anticipated disruptions of governance and
the economy, as a result of the crisis, have so far been
contained. We are not sure what is in store for tomorrow.

In order to deliver on its political agenda,
the Federal Government of Somalia aims to draft
19 pieces of legislation that will be forwarded to the
Federal Parliament for debate and approval as part of
its current session. That process may eventually face
challenges related to time constraints. After concluding
stakeholder consultations in preparation for a
nationwide constitutional review process, the Minister
for Constitutional Affairs is laying the foundations for
political and constitutional reforms in the country, to
take place ahead of the one-person, one-vote elections
in 2020.

A joint constitutional review parliamentary
committee has been established. AMISOM. supports
the country's political road map on a transfer of
power by 2021, which resonates well with the need
to meet requisite political conditions for an effective
implementation of the AMISOM. exit strategy.

In a related development, Somalia's National
Independent Electoral Commission completed its
drafting of a strategic plan for the 2020-2021 election.
However, budgeting difficulties are already emerging
as a major challenge in the implementation of its priority
activities. The formation and consolidation of regional
institutional frameworks and the enactment of requisite
legislation at the regional and state levels will be key
in addressing issues related to regional and political
instability - what we are witnessing in HirShabeIle,
the south-west and many other places - and in finding
a lasting solution to the protracted dialogue and ending
dialogue between the state Government and Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a. A lasting solution to those challenges
would go a long way in facilitating the implementation
of the AMISOM. mandate and fulfilling its conditions-
based exit strategy.

AMISOM. continues to contribute to enhancing
security in Somalia, despite violent asymmetrical
Al-Shabaab activities. The primetargets ofAl-Shabaab's
indiscriminate attacks remain the Federal Government,
AMISOM. and the Somalia national security forces
forward-operating bases in all sectors.

Improvised explosive devices (IED) remain
Al-Shabaab's weapon of choice. In the period under
consideration, there were a total of 139 improvised
explosive device incidents in AMISOM. areas of
operation alone. Thirty-two IED explosions were
averted as a result of action taken by AMISOM. teams
to identify and neutralize those devices. Despite
the increase in attacks, AMISOM. is responding
appropriately to IED threats, as the identification rate
of such explosive devices has increased considerably.
Nevertheless, Somali civilians remain the main
casualties of treacherous Al-Shabaab IED attacks.

From May to June, the Government implemented
the Mogadishu stabilization force, which was built using
joint Somali security forces, which, to a great extent,
contributed to a peaceful holy month of Ramadan. The
public appreciated the steps taken by the Government,
which was supported by AMISOM. and partners.
Mogadishu is much safer today than it was yesterday.

Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab is mobilizing efforts
to regain initiative through its Amniyat cell network
in Mogadishu. They must be effectively dissuaded
from continuing that endeavour - through a robust
intelligence-collection capability and action. Elsewhere
there are varying levels of insecurity, especially in the
country's hotspots of Galmudug state and the Hiraan
and HirShabelle regions. On the other hand, the security
situation in Gaalkacyo is promising, following the
establishment of a 100-troop-strong stabilization and
law enforcement joint police force and after progress
in the political dialogue between the Galmudug and
Puntland states' Presidents of May 2017, and AMISOM
and UNSOM. police collaborative training efforts. The
operations in Juba corridor have witnessed the Somali
National Army and the Jubaland security forces taking
the lead, supported by AMISOM. troops and partners to
implement their commitments to degrading Al- Shabaab
before AMISOM. starts its drawdown.

In response to the presidential amnesty decision
with regard to Al-Shabaab militant elements who
renounce violence and extremist ideologies, AMISOM
and the Federal Government of Somalia saw a steady
increase in the number of defectors from Al-Shabaab
from May to August 2017. In that period, a total of 47
Al-Shabaab militants surrendered to various Somali
regional authorities. More Al-Shabaab elements have
expressed their intention to defect and hand themselves
over to the Government. There is therefore a need to
help create conducive conditions for that process to
continue and thrive. The fact that a prominent former
leader of Al-Shabaab, Mr. Mukhtar Robow, handed
himself over to the Federal Government on 13 August
is very telling.

In order to address the recruitment of children into
Al-Shabaab, AMISOM, along with other international
partners, participated in the development of the 2017-
2018 work plan of the child protection unit at the
Minister ofDefence. with a focus on children associated
with armed conflict.

AMISOM, working closely with the Federal
Government of Somalia and international partners,
is pressing ahead with the implementation of the
commitments made at the 11 May London Conference
on the national security architecture and the new
security pact, the recommendations of the AU-United
Nations joint review, the decision of the AU Peace and
Security Council of 12 July communique on AMISOM,
and resolution 2372 (2017) on the mandate of AMISOM
until elections are held.

On 2 July, on the margins of the AU Summit,
the a ministerial meetiong of AMISOM. troop- and
police-contributing countries was held in Addis
Ababa to discuss the AU-United Nations joint review
recommendations, especially as they relate to the
AMISOM. drawdown and further related tasks. Given the
unpredictable and unsustainable resource mobilization
for AMISOM. after June 2018, and considering the
challenges at hand, the meeting agreed to commission
an AU technical expert team to come up with options
for the AU in the light of the recommendations by
the AU-United Nations joint review of AMISOM's
exit strategy.

In order to identify the most effective ways of
implementing the recommendations of the AU-United
Nations joint review on AMISOM, a joint African
Union Mission in Somalia and the Federal Government
of Somalia conference on the transitioning of security
responsibilities from AMISOM. to the Somali security
forces was held from 24 to 28 July in Mogadishu.
That conference of security experts from both sides
provided a platform where AMISOM. and the Somali
Federal Government forces deliberated on the
transitioning imperatives. The conference discussed
the handover and takeover of AMISOM's and Somali
security forces' forward-operating bases in order to
release 1,000 AMISOM. troops for expanded military
operations before the commencement of the drawdown
in December.

The Federal Government of Somalia outlined its
priorities, including the need to conduct an operational
readiness assessment of Somali national security forces
and forward-operating bases as a first step during
the transition, as well as no the need to empower the
Somali national security forces through training,
mentoring, infrastructure, equipment, sustainment
and mobility * if those forces are to gradually and
effectively fully take over security responsibilities of
the country from AMISOM.

Prime Minister Hassan Ali Kheyre launched the
Federal Government of Somalia's operational readiness
assessment conference on 15 August in Mogadishu.
The Federal Government of Somalia-led exercise,
with the active participation of AMISOM, the United
Nations, international partners and the Federal member
states, is aligned with resolution 2372 (2107) and the
aims and objectives of the comprehensive approach to
security. Once it is completed, it is expected to yield
a very credible picture of the current shape, size,
capacities and state of health of the Somali national
security forces - including their number - and to
provide key steps to be undertaken for a responsible
conditions-based transition of security responsibilities
from AMISOM. to the Somali security forces. That
exercise is essential if we really want to undertake a
transition that can preserve the gains so far with our
joint material, financial and human effort.

AMISOM. police has provided support to the
ongoing verification of Somali police force strength.
The exercises are still inconclusive. As a follow-up
to the Federal Government/AMISOM. conference
on transitioning of security responsibilities from
AMISOM. to the Federal Government of Somalia
in August, AMISOM. and Somali national security
forces commanders held a planning session for joint
coordinated operations for the rest of 2017 and beyond
to disrupt, degrade and contain Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups, protect the population centres, open and
secure main supply routes and undertake a realistic
agreement on the handover of some forward-operating
bases in Somalia.

As the Security Council is aware, the University
of Mogadishu has already been handed over to the
Somalis. The Somalis are expected to take over the
Academy and four other operating bases. But, given the
resources, we will not hand over those positions unless
and until the Somalis themselves tell us that they are
ready to take them. Meanwhile, in Addis Ababa, a few
days ago, on 5 September, the Military Operations
Coordination Committee for the African Union
Mission in Somalia held its twenty-fourth meeting,
at which it agreed on a way forward to implementing
resolution 2372 (2017) in terms of an initial reduction,
by 1,000 troops, of AMISOM's military personnel by
December, as well as on AMISOM's new tasks. That
exercise has already begun. We have identified the
numbers of soldiers that will have to be cut from each
contingent. The Committee also agreed to establish a
team of experts to work on options, including a detailed
plan for AMISOM's exit from Somalia in case the plan
agreed on both in London and through the Joint Review
committee is not provided with the resources it needs
for effective implementation.

The Security Council has stressed the importance
of enhancing the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of AMISOM's financing. On 22 August,
the Head of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia briefed potential donors on the status of the
United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. and the
Somali National Army ahead of a donor conference
scheduled for September. Of the $94.6 million raised
for AMISOM. through the Trust Fund, only $388,593 is
available as uncommitted funds. Of the $52.2 million
raised for the Somali National Army also through the
Trust Fund, a balance of $3.8 million is available for the
10,600 troops who are supposed to operating alongside
AMISOM.

Under the structures agreed on in London and
followed by the United Nations-AU Joint Review, the
role of strand 1 f of which AMISOM, with the Federal
Government of Somalia, is co-leader is to identify,
organize, plan and execute activities aimed at mobilizing
a concrete, commensurate, predictable and sustainable
flow of material, technical and financial resources that
will enable AMISOM, in close cooperation, coordination
and complementarity with the Somali national security
forces and partners, to undertake effective operations
to further disrupt and destroy Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups; protect population centres and enable
reconciliation processes; open and secure main supply
routes; support the capacity-building of the Somali
national security forces, at various levels; facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance; support the
speedy restoration and extension of State authority;
and implement a gradual, conditions-based transition
of security responsibilities from AMISOM. to Somali
institutions in a manner that ensures that the gains
made against Al-Shabaab so far are not reversed.

 

In line with the comprehensive-approach security
provisions and the national security architecture, that
will entail a gradual strategic shift in AMISOM's
operating methods from a leading to a supporting
role, through our transitional planning, so that the
Somalis can increasingly assume responsibility and
play a greater leadership role in the building, delivery
and sustainment of an environment of peace, security
and enhanced stability in Somalia. It will also entail
developing options and modalities through which
predictable and sustainable funding for AMISOM. can
be effectively assured.

In conclusion, I have to insist that such predictable
funding is central to AMISOM's ability to remain in
Somalia and to the ability of both AMISOM. and the
AU to honour their obligations under resolution 2372
(2017). It is essential for us to be able to undertake the
operations expected of us with responsibility, honour
and in full respect for human life. The alternative is
very gloomy. We may be forced to reconsider all our
commitments if that funding is not available.

