Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to first congratulate you,
Madame President, your country and your delegation
for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. We know that the
experience and leadership of Brazil, a sister country in
our region and an important partner in the sustainable
development of Nicaragua, predicts the success of the
work of the Council this month. We also welcome the
noble determination and energy of Brazil in this
initiative to convene this open debate on the
maintenance of international peace and security,
interdependence between security and development.

At the outset, I wish to align myself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

In this debate, during which we are called on to
reflect on the interdependence between security and
development, we should, as a starting point, take into
account the functions, powers and responsibilities of
each of the United Nations bodies and their respective
agendas in strict compliance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter.

Issues related to development fall within the
purview of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. The primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
matter for the Security Council. The interdependence
between the issues of security and development
continues to be an open debate in which the entire
United Nations has a responsibility.

The complexity of peacekeeping operations
requires a slightly different approach than the current
one, an approach which takes into account the needs of
each situation for which such operations are being
mobilized. The full agreement and involvement of the
States affected are imperative.

We must continue to work to strengthen the
Peacebuilding Commission and ensure the efficient and
effective coordination with the States involved, the
General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the United Nations agencies.

Central America offers a clear example of the
options for resolving conflicts, and our experience -
both the good and the bad - should be taken into
account. The conflict that we experienced was the
result of foreign interference and wars of aggression,
but was resolved thanks to the determination of our
own peoples and the assistance of sister countries in
our region. In the end, without the presence of
foreigners in our region, we were able to reach peace
agreements that prioritized an approach based on the
need for sustainable development in order to begin the
demobilization process, which led to stability, peace
and security.

However, and with regard to the issue before us,
we should like to point out that, after the signing of the
peace accords, the development funds earmarked for
our region were not channelled to us as quickly or in
the amounts reserved as had been the funds provided
for the war against our people. Unfortunately, today we
see history repeating itself in other regions of the
world. The lack of security in Central America was
mentioned earlier today. Part of the problem is that we
do not have sufficient funding for development
projects.

Our commitment to security includes a
commitment to promoting human development,
defined as sustainable development with the human
being at its centre and carried out in an environment of
good governance and with direct civic participation in
conditions of social equity. All of these elements are
required for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and beyond. That includes, as a
priority of my Government, development in the most
underserved areas of Nicaragua with the goal of putting
an end to their historical exclusion. We refer here
specifically to the Rio San Juan de Nicaragua area. Our
army's ongoing presence in that area has been a
constant factor there for many years now. It guarantees
security in the context of the fight against drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. It is the
responsibility of our Government to ensure security for
our citizens throughout our national territory. We will
continue to exercise our sovereign right in this regard.

Moreover, and in order to guarantee sustainable
development for our people, our Government has
assumed its responsibilities by undertaking to dredge
and clean up the San Juan de Nicaragua River and to
open our historical access to the sea. This is being
carried out to enhance one of our most important
natural resources, which will secure the development
of that area and serve the well-being of our people.
The interdependence between security and
development must take into account the balance
between the socio-economic realities of conflict and
post-conflict situations. This balance is necessary to
drawing up strategies in which development
programmes are the first weapons we must consider
and wield before we resort to weapons of war. At
times, that order has been reversed. Sustainable
development will ensure security, stability and,
ultimately, peace in the world.

