Mr. Boisson (Monaco) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, the delegation of Monaco is delighted to see
you presiding over the Security Council during the month
of August, and we warmly congratulate you. We are
extremely grateful to you for having taken the initiative
to place on the Council's agenda this important question
of children and armed conflict. We also express sincerest
thanks to Mr. Otunnu for his statement. He has displayed
not only great competence but also great sensitivity of the
individual appointed by the Secretary-General to be his
Special Representative on this painful question.

The information that regularly reaches us on armed
conflicts that now strike so many parts of the world is
horrifying to us. It is all the more so since the moral rules
of the law of war and humanitarian law seem less and
less respected, paving the way for a brutal return to
barbarity. It seems to the most careful and qualified
observers that this twentieth century, which is coming to
an end, has seen a slowing, but we hope not an end, to
the advances of humankind and the hopes placed in its
moral progress. The plight of a growing number of
children involved in armed conflicts is in this respect very
revealing of this phenomenon, whose causes are not
always very precise or well determined. Indoctrinated,
used as messengers, spies, combatants, unwilling torturers
or, worse yet, in the grasp of threats or drugs, as human
bombs, these children are no longer their own masters.
They become for the belligerent parties, for the warlords
who are arrogant and totally unscrupulous, pliant
instruments of the most ignoble violence.

The reports that the Secretary-General has presented
to us recently - that of Mrs. Graga Machel in 1996, the
expert he had appointed upon the invitation of the
General Assembly to study the impact of armed conflict
on children, and the more recent report of Mr. Olara
Otunnu, his Special Representative - provide us with
elements of information and reflection whose calibre and
accuracy we wish to commend.

Among the thoughts put forward to explain the
magnitude of this unacceptable phenomenon, some
deserve special consideration. For example, we share
without reservation the idea that there is a crisis in the
values of civilization, whose causes are difficult to
understand with certainty, but whose consequences
worsen day by day not only for the communities

 

concerned, but also undoubtedly for the societies of the
future whose youth will not find ethical and moral
foundations for their social behaviour.

All human societies have a tendency first and foremost
to protect women and children not only because of their
vulnerability, but because they consider them to be the
source of their destiny. However, this traditional and very
effective protection is tending to decline in proportions that
are today alarming. It is true that because of external
influences many societies are inexorably changing, and at
the same time losing the moral terms of reference -
without being able to replace them - that in many cases
constituted the underpinnings of personal relations both
within communities and among communities.

Consequently, a self-centred and selfish attitude often
prevails over the general will, breaking down and
undermining the very functioning of these communities and
the human and social relations that bind them. The same
applies to the frightful and frequently reported evidence of
the development of violence in today's societies and, worse
yet, the fact that violence has become so commonplace.

Many studies and research efforts have dealt with the
causes of this violence. Their roots are numerous and
varied: political, economic, social and even cultural.
Poverty, exploitation, excessive inequalities and social
upheaval, as well as changes of all types, which are
sometimes overly rapid, are clear sources of destabilization
and of conflicts. They encourage in particular the most
immoral and unscrupulous power-hungry individuals whose
desire for domination is unbridled to slake, with probable
impunity, their ambitions, if not their perversions.

Technical progress and its consequences, particularly
with regard to the characteristics and the nature of weapons
that become increasingly deadly while being lighter and
easier to handle, have also had an impact on the growing
number of children involved in armed conflict. Children's
relative weakness and their lack of experience and military
training no longer constitute a serious handicap for the
transport and the handling of today's weapons, in particular
small arms.

Like the campaign against anti-personnel landmines
that led to the Ottawa Convention, the convention in
preparation against light weapons and small arms, of which
children are also the first Victims, should, we firmly hope,
at least lead to stronger controls in order to reduce their
use, if it is impossible to prohibit these weapons. These
steps and all initiatives taken in this respect deserve to be
seriously encouraged.

While the establishment of an international ethic and
of a value system is a longstanding endeavour with
constant advances and setbacks, it is nonetheless an
endeavour that needs to be steady and conducted without
discouragement. This is a guarantee for the future, and the
Government of the Principality is deeply convinced of
this.

We have just commemorated, on 12 August, the
fiftieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions that
constitute the basic instruments of international
humanitarian law, but their provisions seem to be
increasingly ignored. We note with dismay that present
conflicts no longer take any account of the distinction
between combatants and the civilian population and
therefore children, as required in particular by the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the 1977 additional protocols.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child is also
broadly and regularly violated, in particular the provisions
of its article 38, but also those of its articles 19 and 34.
The entire range of international instruments devoted to
the protection of human rights is completely ignored and
scorned in the armed conflicts of our day. To bridge the
growing gap between existing international norms and
their implementation and compliance with them must
therefore be an absolute priority of the international
community and of its institutions.

The optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child now under preparation, or the fact
that the Statute of the International Criminal Court
qualifies as a war crime the recruitment of children under
the age of 15 and their involvement in hostilities, are
accomplishments and bear hope for the future, as long as,
once these texts are enforced, we see to it that they are
strictly implemented and as long as, when necessary,
offenders are prosecuted. In fact, we in Monaco believe
that the development and the strengthening of
international norms for the protection of children should
proceed even though the implementation of norms already
adopted sometimes seems difficult and faces real
obstacles.
Producing an awareness of the necessary and
continued efforts for the social reintegration and physical
and mental rehabilitation of children who are orphans,
refugees, displaced, disabled for life, victims of or actors
in armed conflict, with a View to improving their plight,

 

also represents a major stage of considerable proportions.
Education, professional training and attentive treatment and
care are, in our view, indispensable if we are to shape and
re-shape the children of war and make them full-fledged
human beings for whom violence would not be the sole
means of expression or the sole means of obtaining social
recognition.

The resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on
the item "Children and armed conflict", including resolution
48/157 dated 20 December 1993 and resolution 51/77 dated
12 December 1996, as well as the remarkable debate that
the Security Council already devoted to this issue last year
and which concluded with a presidential statement, have
made it possible very substantially to deepen our knowledge
and our thinking in this respect.

The Principality of Monaco, which has always shown
special interest in children in difficult situations, is very
sensitive to the situation of children both during and after
hostilities. We have provided, within our means, through
voluntary contributions, our support for the United Nations
and have endeavoured to help the international non-
governmental organizations that are dedicated to the
protection of children, some of which have their
headquarters in Monaco. For example, the Monaco
authorities encourage the deployment of long-term
educational, health and social programmes designed to
improve the condition of children and, in particular, in the
needy regions.

The Government of Monaco is completely determined
to continue its efforts in this direction, aware as we are that
the actions undertaken, however modest, are indispensable
and that they must continue for many years after the end of
fighting. We are also aware that, while it seems
indispensable to protect children from armed conflicts and
from their consequences, it is also Vital to make preventive
efforts to avoid the outbreak of these conflicts which bring
tragedy and chaos in their wake.

The strengthening and the increase of the forms and
methods for the peaceful settlement of disputes must
therefore also be given the attention of the international
community. Here, in the Security Council, whose main task
is the constant quest for peace and security in the world, it
is undoubtedly superfluous to recall this, but it may be less
superfluous to underscore the importance of research in this
field. Dispute and peace studies undertaken both from an
academic and practical standpoint regarding the sources of
conflict or the causes of violence represent steps which can
undoubtedly contribute to overcoming the most formidable
obstacles to the restoration and maintenance of peace in
many regions.

Towards this end, the science of peace must go
beyond conventional thinking. Mr. Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, certainly
understands this concern, since for many years he
presided brilliantly over the destiny of the International
Academy for Peace, which succeeded the International
Peace Institute founded in Monaco in 1903. The science
of peace should in this context be viewed as an applied
science aimed at preventing conflicts by analysing in
depth, and on an ongoing basis, their origins and their
development.

Wars, we believe, are not inevitable. They are in no
way predetermined. They are, like famine or epidemics,
the result of events that can be known, analysed and even
controlled if we provide ourselves with the means to do
so. Any knowledge acquired to combat war could
therefore, in our view, be reflected not only in terms of
action and negotiation but also, as is advocated in the
report of Mr. Otunnu, in programmes to raise the
awareness of world public opinion, whose moral weight
and influence on political decision-making, are undeniable
today.

The gravity and the magnitude of the question on the
agenda of the Security Council this 25 August therefore
completely justifies a public meeting which is addressed
even beyond civil society to international opinion in the
broadest sense of the term.

