Mr. Muiioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile would like to express its
appreciation to you, Madam President, and to Denmark
for having convened this open meeting to consider the
situation in Haiti. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Ronaldo Sardenberg, for having introduced the report
of the Security Council mission to Haiti, which took
place from 13 to 16 April.

The Security Council mission, which was
undertaken in conjunction with the mission of the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council and was the first such visit to Latin
American and Caribbean region, reaffirmed the United
Nations commitment to the process of Haiti's political
stabilization and economic and social reconstruction.

Since last December, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has nearly
attained the military and police strength provided for in
resolution 1542 (2004), thereby enabling it
successfully to carry out a number of operations in
Haiti. That progress was achieved in the context of a
security situation that remains fragile.

We therefore agree with the Council that there is
a need to implement, without further delay, an in-depth
and comprehensive programme of demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration (DDR). Bringing peace
to Haiti will require the disarmament of the whole of
Haitian society, not only those who have served in the
army. But disarmament without the reintegration of
such forces will certainly not achieve the ultimate
objective of consolidating peace.

In this connection, we consider it of paramount
importance that MINUSTAH be provided with the
financial resources requested by the Secretary-General
so that the effective implementation of the DDR
programme can begin as soon as possible, without
prejudice to any voluntary contributions that might be
made.

One of the international community's main tasks
is to equip Haiti with a police force whose institutional
doctrine is founded on respect for the rule of law and
the promotion and protection of human rights. Great
care must be taken in recruiting and training such a
force, which must also be carried out in a transparent
manner. That is the only to gain the trust of the
citizens.

When the United Nations forces leave, the
National Police will have to be the backbone of the
maintenance of the rule of law. We welcome the
improved coordination between the military and police
components of MINUSTAH and the Haitian National
Police, including with regard to joint military
operations.

My delegation is pleased to inform the Council
that our uniformed police - the Carabineros de
Chile - signed, on 11 March, a bilateral cooperation
agreement with the Haitian National Police. Under that
agreement, a delegation of Carabineros worked for 10
days with the Haitian National Police in order to assess
the professional requirements of that force.

We reiterate that efforts to strengthen the police
force will prove fruitless if they are not pursued within
the context of a total overhaul of the key institutions
responsible for enforcing of the rule of law in Haiti,
which are currently in a very fragile state. This will
require the strengthening of democratic institutions, the
reform of the judiciary and the prison system and - no
less important - the consolidation of political parties
and of civil society.

Chile notes with particular interest the Council's
recommendation to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations that it undertake a comprehensive
evaluation of the security situation in Haiti with a view
to determining whether it may be necessary to
strengthen the military and police contingents,
especially given the crucial need for a secure
environment for the forthcoming elections. Those
elections are due to be held in a few months' time, and
while their success will not in and of itself resolve all
of Haiti's problems, a smooth and legitimate electoral
process is a necessary condition for progress towards
the strengthening of democracy and ensuring the full
restoration of the rule of law.

Chile has thus consistently stressed the urgent
need for a broad national dialogue involving all
stakeholders in Haitian society that renounce the use of
violence. We note with satisfaction that such a dialogue
has been initiated by the Haitian authorities - but that
initiative must be supported by efforts to promote the
participation of all stakeholders and must extend
beyond the elections.

No one today can deny that security and
development are inseparable and mutually reinforcing
requirements. It is therefore essential that Haiti receive,
as soon as possible, the resources pledged at the donors
conference that took place in Washington one year ago.
Such resources will enable Haiti to address the urgent
social needs of its people and to launch medium- and
long-term programmes for reconstruction.

There can be no doubt that the United Nations
presence in Haiti should be viewed as a fourth-
generation peacekeeping operation whose goals are not
limited merely to the suppression of violence. Our
collective task will be crowned with success when we
make progress towards eradicating the causes of
political instability and violence and when Haiti can
stand on its own feet. That is precisely why we
welcome the fact that the Security Council mission
took place in conjunction with that of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group of the Economic and Social Council.
That will make possible an integrated approach to
Haiti's problems.

Reaffirming our commitment to the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group, we endorse the conclusions and
recommendations resulting from that mission to Haiti,
presented by the Ambassador of Canada, in particular
the poverty-reduction strategy, which must include
measures for the creation of jobs, reforestation, the
protection of the environment, the rehabilitation of
infrastructure and the improvement in the quality of
public services in the areas of health and education.

In that connection, we also welcome the fact that
MINUSTAH is undertaking many quick-impact
projects in areas such as education, health, agriculture,
combating HIV/AIDS, infrastructure and the promotion
of human rights. Those actions will not only directly
benefit the Haitian population, but will also improve
the image that Haitians have of the United Nations. We
therefore urge Member States once again to provide the
Mission with the resources that it needs if it is to
succeed in its tasks.

Shortly after the conclusion of the joint mission
of the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, a delegation from the Foreign Relations and
Defence Committees of the Senate and the Chamber of
Deputies of Chile visited Haiti. Their purpose was to
familiarize themselves with the situation in the country
and to assess the performance of the Chilean troops
there, as well as to identify areas for bilateral
cooperation. That is consistent with the national
character of the task that my country bas undertaken in
Haiti. That is why President Ricardo Lagos is
personally committed to ensuring that our National
Congress extends the stay of the Chilean forces in that
Caribbean country.

Today, in reaffirming our commitment to Haiti
and its people, we would like to reiterate that, if we
want to ensure the United Nations mission does not
fail, as it has done in the past, it must be carried out
with a view to the long term. We therefore urge the
Security Council to renew the mandate of MINUSTAH
for a period of no less than 12 months in order to
guarantee its continuity throughout the electoral
process and the subsequent transfer of power to the
new authorities.

Let us not ignore Haiti yet again. It will depend
on us, to a large extent, whether its long-suffering
people regain their hope for a better future and for a
life of dignity, free from fear and want.

