Mr. Jessen-Petersen: For the past 12 months,
this Council has been noting positive developments in
Kosovo, including improvements in security and in the
fields of standards implementation. But the Council
has also underlined the need for further progress. A
fortnight ago, upon Ambassador Eide's report, the
Secretary-General recommended to the Council that
the process of settling Kosovo's future status should
begin very soon. I also want to thank Ambassador Eide
for a very honest, objective and balanced report.

The start of the status process will be a
galvanizing moment in Kosovo. And though its
ultimate outcome cannot be known, I am confident that
the resolution of Kosovo's status can have only a
positive effect on the wider region, including on
Serbia, in terms of political stabilization, reconciliation
and economic growth. While the way ahead will no
doubt be difficult, it must nonetheless be clear to all of
us that continuing with the status quo is not a viable
option.

I know that the Prime Minister of Kosovo has
transmitted to you this morning a letter for circulation
in the Council. In the letter, the Government commits
itself to moving forward, addressing with
determination those obstacles still in the way of
Kosovo's journey towards fulfilling its aspirations and
towards a future in Europe.

Prime Minister Kostunica notes in his letter that
forward movement is needed outside the status process
as much as it is within it. In other words, political life
in Kosovo cannot be consumed entirely by status talks,
vital as they would be. There is a huge amount of work
to be done even as talks proceed, and, as Ambassador
Eide just noted, with a lot of leverage in the hands of
the international community.

With that in mind, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
identified six priority areas on which we intend to
concentrate over the coming months. In establishing
those priorities, we have, of course, been guided by
Ambassador Eide's report. You will note a strong
commitment by the Prime Minister in his letter to
continue working hard to deliver results in the pursuit
of those priorities.

The first priority is to continue apace with the
implementation of standards. The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and UNMIK have
reviewed the Kosovo standards implementation plan
with a view to reinforcing progress on those actions
that would do the most to improve the living conditions
of minorities in Kosovo and to promote a multi-ethnic
future.

Freedom of movement and returns are two key
areas. On returns, we must continue working hard to
reassure Kosovo Serbs who live in Kosovo and
improve their living conditions while at the same time
promoting the conditions for sustainable returns of
those still displaced. I do not expect major returns
before status is clarified, but to reassure Kosovo Serbs
of their future in Kosovo, and to promote returns, we
need the constructive engagement of Belgrade and the
direct involvement of the Kosovo Serbs.

As the standards implementation plan is
reinforced, we are working with the Provisional
Institutions and the European Union (EU) to integrate
the standards plan and Kosovo's European Partnership
Action Plan, so that progress and standards may be
linked to incentives whose energy would work on
moving Kosovo towards the European future it shares
with all the States in the western Balkans.

One of the key standards relates to the economy.
Privatization, modernization of the management of
publicly owned enterprises and development of a
market-oriented legal regime, all lay the groundwork
for the eventual growth of Kosovo's economy and
prospects for a better future for all its people.

As we speak, the International Monetary Fund is
in Pristina, working with the Provisional Institutions
and UNMIK to reinforce Kosovo's fiscal management
programmes and create the basis for a major donor
support conference in December that can ease the tight
budget constraints and allow for more development, in
turn spurring growth. However, without clarity on
status, progress will be limited, as foreign direct
investments and access to loans will remain hugely
problematic.

In this context, I would like to add that economic
opportunities for all can act as a key source of
reconciliation, whereas continued stagnation and lack
of economic prospects will continue to be a key source
of instability.

The second priority is to support the Provisional
Institutions in pursuing a comprehensive reform of
local government. In order to ensure that Belgrade is
able to inject its thoughts into the debate on
comprehensive reform, I informed President Tadic and
Prime Minister Kostunica during my recent visit to
Belgrade that the Provisional Institutions are ready to
build on the recent meeting in Vienna, brokered by
Ambassador Eide, between the Serbian Minister
responsible for local government and his Kosovo
counterpart. Such direct dialogue might initially focus
on competences of local self-government, an issue of
crucial importance in assuring the minorities that their
future should be anchored in meaningful local
government and authority within a centrally managed
Kosovo process. Comprehensive reform to benefit all
communities in Kosovo is now on the agenda, and,
following the successful implementation of three out of
the five pilot projects, I believe it is achievable in
parallel with status talks.

As regards the third priority, we will continue to
pursue a comprehensive security agenda, including the
transfer of competences from UNMIK to two new
Provisional Ministries - Public Order and Justice -
by the end of the year. The rule of law, with effective
delivery of justice, and the continued combat against
organized crime are key requirements for any viable
society. We still have a way to go, but I believe that
transfers in the areas of justice and police are crucial in
order to prepare for status.

As we do this, we are very conscious of the
sensitivity of these sectors, as Ambassador Eide also
pointed out. We have made it clear that transfers in
these areas would be gradual, phased and dependent on
transparency and non-politicization at each stage. We
will also be looking beyond the immediate
requirements of these two Ministries to the wider field
of security by pushing forward a comprehensive
internal security sector review. This process, which
includes all communities in Kosovo, is intended to help
formulate a sense of the challenge that faces Kosovo in
the field of security and, thereby, to assist in the design
of its future internal security architecture, to be
implemented when status has been resolved.

Fourthly, the Provisional Institutions, UNMIK
and donors must and will strengthen our efforts in the
field of capacity-building in order to ensure that,
regardless of the outcome of status talks, Kosovo's
institutions will be fully capable of taking on the
responsibilities that will flow to them. A lot of progress
has been made over the last 12 months with the
ongoing transfer of competences from UNMIK to
central and local Provisional authorities. The
Provisional Institutions have committed themselves to
establishing an action plan in the very near future,
which will contain an overview of capacity needs and
how to address them, targeted towards managing post-
status Kosovo. That will allow for coordinated and
strategic planning on the part of the Government,
including all its line ministries, and also on the part of
donors who can support the identified needs.

Fifthly, we will continue to restructure UNMIK
throughout the coming period with a View to having an
optimal set-up throughout the status process. At the
same time, we are cooperating with our international
partners, such as the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO, to
develop a phased and well-managed transition to
eventual future arrangements, following, but without
prejudice to, the outcome of status talks. We have
begun a process of informal dialogue with key partners
to identify those areas where there may be need for
continued international presence and support to the
authorities and citizens of Kosovo.

Finally, for close cooperation among the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), UNMIK and the Kosovo Police Service
and, increasingly, with the central and local authorities
in Kosovo, we will continue our efforts to ensure the
maintenance of a safe and secure environment for
everyone in Kosovo. The security environment in
Kosovo is stable at the moment, but isolated recent
incidents remind us that, with the difficult status
process about to begin, there is no cause for
complacency. That process, and possible provocations
from all sides, will undoubtedly test our ability to
maintain the security environment that has, by and
large, prevailed in Kosovo during the last 18 months.

The Commander of KFOR - to whom and to
whose troops I want to pay tribute - and I are
confident that we are well equipped to respond to any
threat that may aim at stopping Kosovo's way forward.
Indeed, the forthcoming status process presents risks
and confronts political leaders with difficult choices,
but it represents a huge opportunity for Kosovo. It is an
opportunity for the Kosovo Albanian leadership to
show true commitment and action and take more
decisive steps to build the kind of multi-ethnic,
democratic and tolerant society that will undoubtedly
bring them closer to realizing their dreams and goals
when status is decided.

I believe the status process also presents a chance
for Belgrade and, importantly, for Kosovo Serbs to
engage. The coming months will provide a singular
opportunity for them to define their role and position in
Kosovo's future. It is vital that they be able to seize
this chance and ensure that their voice is heard in both
the status talks themselves and in the institutions for
Kosovo while those talks proceed. I hope that Belgrade
will see this opportunity to make it possible for the
Kosovo Serb community to take their seats in the
Assembly and in Kosovo's Provisional Institutions at
all levels, so that they can play an active part in
designing Kosovo's future.

Let me emphasize a point that should not go
unstated and that was also mentioned by Ambassador
Eide. The status process is one in which the voices of
civil society and all the people of Kosovo must be
heard and respected. Kosovo's Turks, Bosniacs,
Gorani, Roma, Croats, Ashkali and Egyptians have as
much claim to our consideration and to the future of
Kosovo as its Serbs and Albanians. Kosovo's diversity
is, in fact, its treasure.

We all know that the positions of Belgrade and
Pristina on the issue of Kosovo status are far apart. But
it will remain so until and unless it is resolved by an
international managed process. The sooner it is done,
the better it will be for the citizens of Kosovo and the
region. After more than six years of United Nations
involvement and investment in Kosovo, we now have
the chance and the challenge to support the citizens as
they leave the painful past behind and build a peaceful
and prosperous future.

The Security Council has of course played a key
role in getting us this far. And I know that I can count
on the continued support and active engagement of
members of this Council now and in the next and
decisive phase of the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

