Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
to you, Madam President, the appreciation of the
delegation of Indonesia for convening today's quarterly
open debate of the Security Council on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.

In the past few weeks, there have been significant
developments in the region. They include the decision
by Israel to proceed with its settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, in direct violation
of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). In
that resolution, adopted last December, the Council
declared Israel's establishment of settlements in the
Palestinian territory, occupied since 1967, to be illegal,
a flagrant violation of international law, and a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. To that
end, the Council demanded that Israel immediately and
completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and that
it fully respect all of its legal obligations. The Council
further stated in that resolution that the cessation of
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory is essential to salvage the two-State solution.
The Council therefore called for affirmative steps to
be taken immediately to reverse negative trends, such
as the settlements, which are imperilling the two-
State solution.

In a rather cynical response on 31 March, just three
weeks ago, the Government of Israel announced the
construction of the first new settlement in two decades.
As if in mockery of the Council, the location chosen
by the Government of Israel for this new settlement
is Emek Shilo, well inside the West Bank. The policy
decision itself, and the site chosen for it, appropriately
capture the dismissiveness that has been demonstrated
by Israel with respect to international law and Security
Council resolutions for several decades.

In our statement at the open debate last January
(see S/PV.7863), my delegationjoined those who, while
praising resolution 2334 (2016), affirmed that the real
challenge was in its implementation. We warned - a
warning we now reiterate once more - that the failure
to implement the resolution would ultimately frustrate
the hopes of all Palestinians, as well as of the Israeli
majority who simply want to live side by side in
peace with their neighbours. The implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) is the litmus test ofthe Council's
commitment to peace in the Middle East, for it is the
test of its commitment to the two-State solution.

One ofthe landmarks that we observe in 2017 is the
fiftieth year of Israel's occupation of Palestine. We call
on Council members to recognize the urgency of the
question of Palestine, which can no longer be ignored.
History beckons the Council to rise on the right side
of history, by standing up with courage and a sense of
mission to end this occupation and the grave injustice
that it embodies.

Allow me to briefly highlight three related
issues within the context of peace and security in the
Middle East, namely the situations in Syria, Lebanon
and Yemen.

Indonesia is following the situation in Syria with
concern and is of the view that peace and security in
Syria can only be achieved through dialogue among all
relevant parties in the country, leading to a political,
rather than a military, solution. We therefore strongly
encourage current talks in Geneva and Astana to yield
concrete outcomes and agreements. As a party to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, Indonesia condemns the use
of chemical weapons on 4 April and considers that
an independent investigation must be carried out in
an objective, impartial and professional manner. It is
important to underscore that any multilateral action
and solution concerning Syria must be consistent with
the Charter of the United Nations.

On Lebanon, my delegation is encouraged by
the stable situation in the country and commends the
Government of Lebanon for its exceptional cooperation
with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which we believe contributes significantly
to the maintenance of peace and security, in accordance
with resolutions 1701 (2006), 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
We understand that a strategic review of UNIFIL
is currently being undertaken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. In that regard, Indonesia
requests that the Council take into consideration the
vital role of UNIFIL in the maintenance of peace
and security in a country situated in a region where
hostilities and conflicts persist.
On Yemen, the special attention of the Council
is needed due to the grave humanitarian situation.
Approximately 18.8 million Yemenis are in need of
humanitarian assistance, while 2.2 million Yemeni
children are acutely malnourished. Indonesia supports
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, in his efforts to
encourage the parties to commit to the rapid resumption
of a long-lasting cessation of hostilities.

In conclusion, Indonesia urges the Council to seek
peace, and to seek it now; to seek justice, and to seek it
now through impartial responses to the various issues
taking place in the Middle East.

