Mr. Chambas: I am pleased to be in the Chamber
today to briefthe Council for the first time in my capacity
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa on the situation in the subregion.

Recent developments demonstrate the fragile
political situation in many West African nations in
the lead-up to presidential and legislative elections in
2015 and 2016. Some of these countries' tensions are
linked to incumbent leaders who face resistance in their
attempts at holding on to power through constitutional
revisions.

In the Gambia, on 30 December, fighting erupted at
the State House in Banjul as a mutiny led by Lieutenant
Colonel Lamin Sanneh attempted to unseat President
Yahya Jammeh of the Gambia from his 20-year rule
in power. The attack was defeated by forces loyal to
the President, who was out of the country at the time.
The coup attempt was the third over the past eight
years. Meanwhile, there are reports of arrests of family
members of alleged coup plotters. I am planning to visit
Banjul on 14 and 15 January and look forwarding to
meeting with President Jammeh to discuss the situation
in the country. I will reiterate our firm condemnation
of any attempt to seize power by unconstitutional
means, and encourage the Gambian authorities to work
with the support of international partners to ensure a
credible investigation of the events that occurred in
order to ensure respect for judicial procedures and
human rights.

In Burkina Faso, a popular insurrection at the end
of October forced President Blaise Compaore to resign
following his attempt to amend the Constitution in order
to extend his term in power, bringing his 27-year rule to
an abrupt end. Backed by international partners, a joint
mission of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations helped secure an agreement by national
stakeholders on a civilian-led transition, the guiding
principles of which are enshrined in the Charter of the
Transition, signed on 16 November.

An international follow-up and support group for
the transition in Burkina Faso has been established
to assist the transitional institutions during this
critical period, which will include the organization
of presidential and legislative elections by November
2015. The group will hold its inaugural meeting on
13 January in Ouagadougou, and we look forward to
being there to participate in that meeting.

In 2015, five other West African countries will
hold presidential elections: Benin, C6te d'Ivoire,
Guinea, Nigeria and Togo. In Togo, where President
Faure Gnassingbe's party has been in power since 1967,
a new opposition coalition staged demonstrations in
November and December, and indeed have continued
into January 2015, in Lome. The contentious issue
remains the lack of consensus on political reforms,
particularly the introduction of presidential term limits
and reform of the single-round voting system. Those
issues need to be given priority by the Government to
ease the tensions in the country.

In neighbouring Benin, a consensus needs to
be found on the implementation of the electronic
voter registration lists, which is causing delays in
the organization of local elections and could affect
legislative and presidential elections scheduled for 2015
and 2016, respectively. The United Nations Office for
West Africa (UNOWA) will be closely engaged with
the authorities in Togo and Benin in the coming weeks
with a view to mobilizing efforts and encouraging them
to lay the ground for peaceful and credible elections.

In the Niger, frictions have continued between the
Government and opposition political parties, against
the background of a fragile security situation, due
mainly to violence and instability in neighbouring
countries, especially Libya and Mali, but also Nigeria.
In cote d'Ivoire, while political dialogue between the
Government and opposition parties resumed, tensions
persist, with possible risks of electoral and/or post-
electoral violence in October 2015.

About a month from now - precisely 43 days from
now - Nigerians will go to the polls for the presidential
and legislative elections. The general election is
taking place against a backdrop of violent insurgency
by Boko Haram, a terrorist group in the north-east,
sectarian conflicts in the north-central and north-west
of the country and an increasingly tense pre-electoral
environment. The holding ofpolls throughout the states
of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa will present a formidable
challenge. The risk of pre- and post-electoral Violence
requires the international community to engage further
with Nigeria to address its ongoing challenges and to
support the holding of credible and peaceful elections
throughout the country.

The region remains vulnerable to insecurity and
terrorist threats. In north-eastern Nigeria, the security
situation has shown no signs of improvement despite
national and regional efforts. The civilian populations
in the three north-eastern states of Adamawa, Borno
and Yobe have over the past six months been subjected
to intense attacks and systematic human rights
violations, including the razing of civilian settlements,
kidnappings, suicide bombings, assassinations and
others.

The death toll of that vicious violence, most
of which has been attributed to the terrorist group
Boko Haram, is staggering, and counter-insurgency
measures have failed to provide an adequate protection
of civilians. Since the abduction of over 200 schoolgirls
from Chibok, Borno state, the international community
has been supporting the Government of Nigeria's
efforts to address the problem. As part of the most
recent efforts, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force will hold the first in a series of workshops
for law enforcement officials on human rights, the rule
of law and the prevention of terrorism during the third
week of January.

In my capacity as the Secretary-General's High-
Level Representative for Nigeria, I visited the country
in November and December to consult with high-level
Government officials and other stakeholders with a
View to building consensus to face the threat of the
terrorist group Boko Haram and to assess the potential
of elections-related Violence. While the Boko Haram
terrorist insurgency is deeply rooted in Nigeria, it is
increasingly spilling across the borders into Cameroon,
Niger and Chad. More than 300,000 Nigerians have
sought refuge in north-western Cameroon and south-
western Niger, adding pressure on the local economies
in those countries and destabilizing the internal security
situation. UNOWA, in collaboration with the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
will continue to work closely with the countries of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission to address the regional
aspects of the threat posed by the Boko Haram terrorist

group.

Insecurity in north-easternNigeria has also seriously
impeded the activities of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission, in particular its critical field assessments.
In my capacity as Chairman of the Mixed Commission,
I have endeavoured to address the delay and adapt the
scope of work to the evolving security situation. The
demarcation continues. To complete the demarcation,
767 pillars remain to be constructed, for which funding
is required.

Among other security challenges affecting the
region, violent piracy in the Gulf of Guinea continues to
hinder West Africa's economy and trade. Countries of
the region have made progress on the operationalization
of a maritime security infrastructure. Further efforts
are necessary, including for the resolution of maritime
border disputes. UNOWA and UNOCA will continue
to provide support to ECOWAS, the Economic
Community of Central African States, and the Gulf
of Guinea Commission in the implementation of the
strategic framework adopted at the Yaounde summit of
15 June 2013.

Before I conclude, allow me to quickly touch
upon the Ebola outbreak, which wreaked havoc in
West Africa in 2014, causing at least 8,200 deaths.
In mid-November, together with the President of the
ECOWAS Commission, I visited the three most affected
countries, namely Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia,
which have been politically and economically isolated.
Except for Mali, all neighbouring countries have at
some point closed their land borders and imposed flight
restrictions. That has also hindered the functioning of
regional and subregional mechanisms.

While the laudable humanitarian interventions of
the international community - including the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which
must be highly commendcdfcontinue, we must ensure The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
that the aftermath of the outbreak does not. reverse the Mr. Chambas for his briefing.
gains made during years of pcaccbuilding activities in

thosethree fragile States. 1 now invite Council members to informal

consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

1 would like to thank the Council for its continued
interest and support to the consolidation of peace,
security and democracy in West Africa.

The meeting rose at 3.30pm.
