The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Luxembourg.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his
briefing and his work as the Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his statement.

I align myself with the statement to be made during
the debate by the observer of the European Union.

At the outset, I would like to express my condolences
and sympathy to the family members of the victims of
the terrorist attack on 17 January in Kabul. I would
also dedicate special thoughts to the four members of
UNAMA who lost their lives during that cowardly and
senseless attack. They deserve more than our thanks,
more than our gratitude. They deserve our admiration
for having served in the cause of peace and the cause of
the United Nations.

The tribute I pay to them today is also addressed to
all of the staff members of UNAMA who are carrying
out outstanding work on the Council's behalf to serve
the Organization and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Violence and insecurity, uncertainty about the
future - the Afghan people face those issues each day.
The UNAMA report of 8 February on the human cost
of conflict in relation to civilians speaks volumes of
the sufferings endured by the population. In reading
the numbers of victims and the growing proportion of
women and children among them, we realize that one of
the major challenges still to be met is that of security, in
particular the security of civilians, beginning with the
security of voters and candidates in the presidential and
provincial elections to be held on 5 April.

As an election is meaningful only if all voters
are able to freely go to the polling stations and if the
candidates are able to conduct their campaigns without
risking their lives or being subject to threats, we urge
that no effort be spared to establish an adequate security
framework. We reiterate the importance we attach to
the framework's being applied to everyone, including
specifically to women. Luxembourg believes that the
degree of women's participation will be one of the
benchmarks against which we can measure the success
of the voting and the credibility of the results. The
Independent Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission will also have a
central role to play guaranteeing that the elections are
peaceful, transparent, credible, inclusive and fair.

Although the path leading to the elections of
5 April is still fraught with pitfalls, the very fact that
those elections are taking place is in itselfa remarkable
success. But as important as the elections may be, they
are only one step; they are not the end of a process. The
pacification and stabilization of the country will also
depend upon the progress that the new leaders will be
able to achieve in several key areas. We would like to
underscore at least three.

First is respect for human rights. No society can
rebuild itself if it allows impunity, injustice and the law
of the jungle to take root. That is why it is important
that the Afghan authorities allow the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission to effectively
play its role as a free and independent institution.
Therefore, in accordance with the commitments made
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
women's rights must be genuinely and fully recognized,
and the law against violence against women must be
genuinely and fully implemented.

That is also why, as mentioned by the Special
Representative, we encourage the Afghan authorities
to redouble their efforts to implement the action plan
to halt the use and recruitment of children in the
Afghan National Security Forces, which they signed on
30 January 2011 with the United Nations. We believe,
moreover, that it would be desirable that the section of
the Secretary-General's report dealing with the plight
of children in armed conflict contain information on all
the violations and abuses committed against children in
Afghanistan and on the state of the implementation of
the action plan.

The second key area for bringing peace and
stability to the country is the fight against poverty. Too
many Afghans still live below the poverty line. We do
not have the right to ignore that situation or to accept
it. It is intolerable on a human level;it is disastrous for
the country's stability. It will be up to the newly elected
leaders to address the question of how to proceed to a
more equitable distribution of resources. But it will also
be up to the international community to accord all the
required attention to that aspect when designing its aid
programmes for the Afghan people for the post-2014
period.

In that context, I would like to mention that in
February the European Union and Afghanistan signed
an agreement that marks the completion of bilateral
negotiations for Afghanistan's membership in the
World Trade Organization. That membership should
eventually make a sustainable contribution to the process
of stabilization, economic reform and sustainable
development begun by the Afghan authorities.

The third key area has to do with the lifting of the
uncertainty with regard to the international presence
beginning on 1 January 2015, after the transitional
period. On several occasions, the international
community has reaffirmed its willingness to remain
engaged with the Afghan people. In return, it is crucial
to remove any uncertainty with regard to the framework
for future international missions, including support
missions for the Afghan security forces.

In conclusion, I welcome the adoption of resolution
2145 (2014) in the context of this debate, which renews
the mandate ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan until 17 March 2015. I thank our Australian
colleagues, who led the negotiations on that important
text. In our view, after 2014 UNAMA will be called
upon to continue playing the important supporting
role that it has had so far. To do that, it is essential that
UNAMA have adequate means to maintain its presence
on the ground in Afghanistan's provinces and among
the Afghan people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of India.

