Mrs. Nufiez de Odreman (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela thanks Denmark for the
initiative to draft a non-paper on "Strengthening

06-4010]

international law: rule of law and the maintenance of
international peace and security" in the context of the
Security Council (S/2006/367, annex), as well as for
convening this open debate on the subject of that
document. We also thank Mr. Michel and Judge
Higgins for their valuable statements.

With regard to the topic of this debate, we
consider it necessary to refer to Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations, which provides that the United
Nations, in order to maintain international peace and
security, shall take

"effective collective measures for the prevention
and removal of threats to the peace, and for the
suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law,
adjustment of settlement of international disputes
or situations which might lead to a breach of the
peace".

If we examine the scope of that Article, we can
see that the competencies in this area extend to the
whole Organization, including Member States. It is
clear that conflict prevention and resolution necessarily
involve the negotiation of multilateral agreements
within the United Nations framework. That in turn has
a positive impact on the strengthening of international
public law and international peace and security. In that
connection, Venezuela believes that the Security
Council's action in this area should complement the
General Assembly's leading role because of the
Assembly's strengths as a deliberative, legislative,
democratic and representative organ of the
Organization.

Since the early 19905, we have seen the Security
Council spontaneously increase its powers in dealing
with issues that, by their nature, could not be
categorized as threats to international peace and
security as stipulated in Article 39 of the Charter.
Moreover, the Council's action in a number of cases
has not been free of controversy. As a United Nations
organ whose competencies are derived from the
Charter - which was agreed among Member States
and which serves as a constitutional framework for the
Organization - the Security Council must act in strict
conformity with the Charter in carrying out its
functions. The Council's role in promoting
international law depends on its actions complying
with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.

Article 24 of the Charter does not necessarily
provide the Council with the competency to address
issues that correspond to the functions and powers of
the General Assembly or of the Economic and Social
Council - including the establishment of rules,
legislation and definitions - since the Assembly has
the main responsibility for the progressive
development and the codification of international law.
Therefore, the Council should avoid the practice of
using its authority to impose legislative requirements
on Member States or assuming powers that could be
considered a usurpation of the Assembly's
competencies.

Promoting the international legal order requires
the firm commitment of States to comply rigorously
with the rules and principles of international law in
order to help strengthen international peace and
security. Venezuela believes that the issue of
strengthening the rule of law falls under the exclusive
purview of Member States and their respective citizens.
In that connection, we believe that in both conflict and
post-conflict situations, the support that international
organizations can give in this regard must be provided
on the basis of the consent of the States affected and in
the context of international cooperation, avoiding the
imposition of external criteria that do not take the
needs of those States into account. Such criteria
ultimately violate fundamental rules and principles of
international law - such as respect for sovereignty
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States -
whose provisions Venezuela firmly promotes.

We are aware of the importance of preserving the
rule of law when strengthening States' political and
legal structures in a participatory democratic
framework. To that end, respect for States'
sovereignty - which, traditionally, resides with the
people - is vital in the process of defining the
political and legal framework of each and every nation,
free from interference by any supra-national body. As
long as international legality is respected, then
international peace and security will be strengthened.

The Peacebuilding Commission was created to
support, with the consent of the Member States
concerned, national recovery efforts in post-conflict
situations. In discharging its mandate, it must strictly
adhere to the norms and principles enshrined in the

Charter of the United Nations. The mandate of the
Commission must not be misused - the Commission
should have no other purpose than supporting efforts
aimed at national recovery and sustainable
development.

Peacekeeping operations clearly represent a
valuable mechanism for the Organization in helping to
resolve international conflicts. Venezuela is of the View
that, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the basis for the deployment of peacekeeping
operations in the field must be the strict fulfilment of
essential requirements in order to ensure their smooth
functioning, such as the consent of the parties involved
in the conflict and impartiality in the implementation
of their mandates. A peacekeeping operation cannot
assume the functions of a "peace-imposing" force.
Moreover, peacekeeping personnel and troops must,
without exception, fulfil their respective mandates in
strict compliance with international law. In that regard,
Venezuela supports Secretary-General Kofi Annan's
policy of zero tolerance for all those who commit
abuses when representing the United Nations.

Venezuela views the creation of the International
Criminal Court as a milestone in the field of
international criminal law. The Court's establishment
provides a fairer and more equitable option than ad hoc
tribunals, which are not provided for by the Charter of
the United Nations or by any international treaty
resulting from extensive negotiations among Member
States, but are set up on the basis of a political decision
on the part of the Security Council.

The establishment of the Court represents a step
forward in the fight against impunity and in the
prosecution of individuals accused of committing
serious violations of international law. The fact that the
international community can now count on a legal
body that is independent in nature represents major
progress in the development of international law.
However, we are concerned by the attempts made to
weaken it, such as the conclusion of bilateral immunity
agreements for a number of countries. The Security
Council must support the strengthening of the Court
and should not accept any regime that provides for
exemptions, which in turn would modify the spirit of
the provisions of the Rome Statute.

Venezuela is of the view that sanctions are an
important but exceptional mechanism that should be
used to resolve situations that might endanger

06-4010]
international peace and security, once those
mechanisms for the pacific settlement of disputes
provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations have been exhausted. However, our
country is concerned at the fact that, on a number of
occasions, the Council has rushed to impose sanctions
in situations that do not necessarily constitute a threat
to international peace and security. The indiscriminate
use of sanctions has had a negative impact on the
people of the countries subjected to sanctions and on
their human rights, in particular on their health and
nutritional status, as well as on the physical well-being
of women, children and the elderly.

The aim of sanctions should not be to punish the
population. Sanctions regimes should have clearly
defined objectives and should be imposed for a specific
period of time, on the basis of legally sustainable
principles, and should be lifted once their objectives
have been met. Sanctions should be imposed only after
diplomacy and negotiations fail to achieve the desired
results in a situation where a threat exists to
international peace and security. They should be
imposed in accordance with the Charter and never
preventively. Unfortunately, on a number of occasions
the Security Council has had recourse to the provisions
of Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter in too hasty a
manner, before the mechanisms provided for the
pacific settlement of disputes had been fully exhausted.
That tendency must be curbed in order to strengthen
the legitimacy of the Security Council.

Finally, Venezuela is concerned also at the fact
that the Security Council is increasingly resorting to
the practice of imposing sanctions on individuals
allegedly involved in acts that threaten international
peace and security. The problems pertaining to the
listing and delisting of names on the lists drawn up by
sanctions committees have still not been adequately
resolved, nor do we have a suitable mechanism in place
to ensure due process and appeals procedures for the
individuals included on those lists. Our country is of
the View that those steps go far beyond the provisions
set out in the Charter of the United Nations governing
the actions of the Security Council. Strictly speaking,
the sanctions mechanism was established to be applied
in cases of conflict between States, as is set out in
Article 41.
In conclusion, we would like once again to
express our appreciation for this opportunity to
exchange views and in the Security Council, and we

06-4010]
congratulate Denmark on the work it has done during
its presidency for the month of June 2006.

