Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): Since this is the first
time my delegation is addressing the Council under
Denmark's presidency, let me congratulate
President ngsj on assuming this important post. We are
confident that under her able stewardship the Council
will be very productive this month.
My delegation expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his statement
and his Special Envoy, Mr. Ian Martin, for his
informative briefing and for the work undertaken
during his recent mission to Timor-Leste.

We have been closely following the situation in
Timor-Leste. As its closest neighbour, we are very keen
for the crisis in Timor-Leste to come to an end and for
the situation to return to normalcy very soon. We are
therefore heartened to learn that the security situation
in the country is improving and that progress is being
made to address problems in that area. My Government
continues to support Timorese leaders in their efforts to
find a durable solution to the crisis. We are confident
that under their wise leadership, Timor-Leste will be
able to resume its national development on a sounder
foundation.

In this time of difficulties, Timor-Leste has
nevertheless continued to cultivate and enjoy excellent
bilateral relations with Indonesia. The rapport between

S/l'V.5457

 

the leaders of our two countries remains strong. In this
regard, President Xanana Gusmao and President Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono, will meet in Bali on 17 June to
discuss issues of common concern and interest to both
countries.

Against that background, we respect the decision
taken by the Timor-Leste leadership to use any avenue
it deems appropriate to help solve the problem in the
country. Indonesia, for its part, has been doing its best
to assist Timor-Leste, including the closure of our
common land border to prevent any incidents that
might complicate the situation. In addition, we have
dispatched aid to help alleviate the humanitarian
impact of this crisis on the Timorese people. My
Government will continue to stand ready to provide
assistance whenever needed.

In view of this current development, we believe
that the United Nations should redouble its efforts to
assist the Government of Timor-Leste in dealing with
its pressing problems, so that its democratization
process can be put back on track. While the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) certainly
needs to evaluate its programme priorities in order to
better preserve the achievements of the United Nations
in the country, it should, in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme, continue to support
the Government in the economic, social and
administrative fields. That will help restore normalcy
to the country's political, economic and social life.
Similarly, in helping Timor-Leste meet the challenges
it now faces, the international community must remain
responsive to its needs for assistance and support.

Indonesia, as a neighbour which shares a
forward-looking vision with Timor-Leste based on the
principles of peaceful coexistence, reconciliation and
mutually beneficial relations, will, for its part, continue
to assist Timor-Leste to ensure continued peace,
stability and democracy in the country.

