Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me start by addressing
to Ambassador Nelson Santos our continued pledge of
solidarity and support.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his comprehensive
presentation on the situation in Timor-Leste and Mr.
Atul Khare and his staff for their dedication in
assisting the Timorese Government.

To Ambassador Kumalo, we extend our
appreciation for his leadership in conducting the work
of the core group.

Brazil strongly condemned the attacks against
President Jose Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao on 11 February. President Lula has
conveyed his heartfelt wishes for a swift and full
recovery to President Ramos-Horta, and today I
reiterate those wishes.

The attacks on the heads of State and
Government of Timor-Leste represent an assault on the
democratic institutions of the country. Brazil rejects all
forms of violence as a method to settle political
differences and reaffirms that only through democracy
and dialogue can true reconciliation be achieved. We
are confident that the Timorese Government, with the
valuable assistance of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), will succeed in
maintaining public order and stability in the country.
The exemplary manner in which the institutions and
the people of Timor-Leste responded to the events of
11 February are praiseworthy.

The United Nations has been playing a pivotal
role in the reconstruction of Timor-Leste by providing
assistance in several key sensitive sectors, including
security. We believe that the United Nations should
continue its work in Timor-Leste as long as its
presence is required by the Timorese Government in
order to consolidate a democratic State and a self-
sustaining society. In that regard, Brazil fully agrees
with the recommendation made by the Secretary-
General that the mandate of UNMIT be extended for
one year.

In spite of the many challenges that Timor-Leste
still faces, important progress has been made in many
areas, such as strengthening democracy and human
rights. As mentioned by Mr. Guehenno and
Ambassador Nelson Santos, recent efforts conducted
by President Ramos-Horta to promote reconciliation
and ensure an inclusive participatory environment are
of crucial importance and should be pursued further.
We commend the advances made in rebuilding
Timorese institutions, especially the police and the
judiciary. UNMIT has been able to perform the
mandated task of ensuring law enforcement, while also
increasing efforts to support the training and
institutional development of the national police. As the
events of 11 February may suggest, however, further
efforts may be necessary in order to ensure general
public security.

Many pressing issues remain. The plight of the
100,000 internally displaced people that have to be
integrated into society constitutes a serious
humanitarian challenge. It also represents a political
and security concern. That issue requires immediate
attention and a coordinated effort involving national
actions as well as international support.
Brazil is fully committed to Timor-Leste's long-
term development and stability. The two countries, Brazil
and Timor-Leste, have strong ties that go beyond a
common language. With over a dozen bilateral
cooperation programmes currently in force, Brazil has
been assisting Timor-Leste in such areas as education,
justice and security. President Ramos-Horta and members
of his cabinet, including Minister Zacarias da Costa, paid
an official visit to Brazil on 30 January. On that occasion,
both heads of State reiterated the shared goals of
intensified cooperation between the two countries. One
concrete example is the planned training programme for
Timorese prosecutors; another relevant initiative is the
establishment of a working group to elaborate a draft
military penal process code and military penal code for
Timor-Leste. During President Ramos-Horta's visit,
Brazil also announced a new phase of the training course
for the military police in Timor-Leste. A third interesting
project that combines security and social development is
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. The two
Governments signed a memorandum of understanding by
which vocational training will be provided at Becora
Prison. It will help inmates to develop trade skills that
may prove important to their reintegration into society.
The establishment of a training centre for prison staff is
also envisaged.

The Brazilian Government believes that long-term
stability in Timor-Leste requires a sound and
comprehensive development programme. As underlined
by the Secretary-General, there are high expectations in
the Timorese population that solutions will be found to
numerous challenges facing the country, including
poverty, unemployment and other socio-economic
problems. Brazil is determined to be part of a vigorous
collective effort, bilaterally and through UNMIT, to assist
the Timorese in overcoming such challenges.
30
