Mrs. Persad-Bissessar (Trinidad and Tobago):
During the past two hours and 45 minutes we have
been expressing our commitment to the fight against
terrorism. However, I would ask my colleasgues to
take one moment to stand in silence as we express
our condolences to all those who have lost their lives,
property or families because of those terrorists.

Trinidad and Tobago took the decision to co-sponsor
resolution 2178 (2014) on the basis of our commitment
to assist the international community in bringing relief
to all those people in various parts of the world who
have seen the destruction of their communities, the
murder of their families, the rape of their women and
the orphaning of thousands of children at the hands of
terrorists. We recognize that no State, whether large or
small, developed or developing, is immune from the
scourge of terrorism. Many people will recall that more
than two decades ago, Trinidad and Tobago was able to
successfully combat the attempts of a terrorist group
to overthrow the democratically elected Government of
that time.

This global scourge has witnessed an unprecedented
rise in recent times. It has resulted in new levels
of barbarism that have shocked the conscience of
members of the international community. Terrorism
threatens the foundation of the rule of law and
undermines the inviolability of the right to life and the
other fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the various
national and international human rights instruments.

As a firm believer in the ability of the United
Nations to contribute to the resolution of international
problems such as terrorism, Trinidad and Tobago has
studied the text of the resolution. We find that despite
some imperfections, it provides a useful platform for
the launch of greater international cooperation in the
battle against terrorism, which is universally accepted
as a crime against humanity.

Cooperation at the global level in the fight
against terrorism is critical for small States, such
as my country. While my Government has expended
tremendous financial resources and has trained a
cadre of military and law enforcement officials in an
effort to protect our citizens and to secure our borders
and industrial installations against terrorist acts, I
am mindful of the need to strengthen our capacity to
counter violent extremism, which could undermine
our democracy and our way of life. In keeping with the
relevant provisions of this historic resolution, Trinidad
and Tobago would therefore seek to take advantage of
mechanisms for cooperation with other Member States,
whether bilaterally, multilaterally or in the context of
other arrangements, in order to improve our ability to
counter terrorism in various areas.

Her Excellency the President of Argentina

mentioned concerns about capacity. While Argentina is
a large State, we are a small nation, and many ofus may
not have the same capacity as larger States have. The
representative of Argentina said that her country did
not produce weapons - we do not either - and that it
had to buy energy. Fortunately, we have energy. We are
a very tiny nation of 1.3 million people. The capacity to
comply with such obligations therefore gives us reason
to pause.

We point out such concerns in saying that we
wholeheartedly support the resolution. We especially
pay attention to the provision that States may be able
to comply to varying degrees, depending on their
capacity. Therefore, as we commit to implementing
the resolution, we seek partnership arrangements
within the family of the United Nations for some of
the following: conducting criminal investigations or
proceedings relating to the financing or support of
terrorists acts, obtaining evidence for the prosecution
of terrorists, exchange of information to monitor the
transit of foreign terrorist fighters, and other measures
to bring to justice those intent on committing terrorism,
whether they be foreign fighters or home grown.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that
my country has already taken many legislative and
adminsitative steps in the fight against terrorism,
because we were victim to terrorist acts in 1990. We
have in place an anti-terror law. We already have border
controls with respect to the finger-printing of persons
entering the country. We have areas dealing with the
financial intelligence unit regulations and compliance
with the Financial Action Task Force, which addresses
the whole issue of the financing of terrorism, as well as
many other administrative and legislative mechanisms.
We will need the support of our partners in this United
Nations family to be able to fully comply with and
implement the resolution.

It is our hope that, in acting with one voice on this
matter, all members of the Security Council, especially
the permanent members, will show the same spirit of
unity and seek to tackle the myriad issues facing the
international community so that the promise of the
Charter of the United Nations will be fully realized
as we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
establishment of this institution.

