Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Only a few years ago Haiti was engulfed in one of its
worst crises. In an extremely short period of time in terms
of the history of a country, very significant changes have
occurred that have put an end to a difficult period and
have allowed the Haitian people to hope once again for a
better future.

We cannot fail to congratulate Haiti's authorities and
its Permanent Representative, Ambassador Lelong, on
these positive developments. The United Nations, and
particularly the Security Council, must feel gratified at
having facilitated democratic change and stability in Haiti
by establishing and maintaining one of the most
successful missions in the history of peacekeeping
operations. The United Nations has supported the people
of Haiti, their democratic will and their political decision-
making.

Problems and threats persist, however, as almost all
the speakers before me have noted. That is why today we
will be adopting this draft resolution, which Chile fully
supports.

At this time, we wish to thank all of those who have
made this United Nations presence in Haiti possible. First
of all, allow me to express our gratitude to the Secretary-
General for all his efforts, as well as those of his Special
Representative and of the entire civilian and military team
of the United Nations Support Mission in that country. As

 

a Latin American, I should like to recognize a distinguished
Venezuelan, Enrique ter Horst, and my fellow countryman,
Cristian Ossa, who just completed in Haiti a successful 25-
year career as a United Nations civil servant.

We also wish to express our gratitude to the United
States for its firm support for the process of
democratization in Haiti. The decisive political and
financial support of Canada, France and other countries has
played a crucial role in the maintenance of successive
missions in the field. Last but not least, I wish to mention
the understanding and support of the delegations of China
and the Russian Federation, as well as of others, which
have made it possible to continue the work of the United
Nations in Haiti.

As we have maintained on previous occasions, the
emerging reality which the Security Council faces, a result
of the far-reaching political changes that occurred at the
end of the 1980s, places it in the position of having to
neutralize threats to international peace and security arising
from problems within States and not between them. This
must be handled with great care, respecting the sovereignty
of States while being mindful of humanitarian needs and of
the clearly expressed aspirations of national majorities.

The Council has begun to address new situations for
which it lacks tradition and experience, since its role
historically has been linked to the handling of international
conflicts between States. To meet these new challenges, it
has become necessary to develop instruments tailored to
these new needs, which are complex and difficult, in the
field of international law among others. This is why we
have proposed - and we reiterate the need - that an
in-depth discussion be held within the general context of
the future role of the Security Council and the United
Nations in maintaining comprehensive peace and security
in these new situations.

It is obvious that our region, while grateful for the
support which the Council has given to a neighbouring
country, is very pleased to have contributed to the
restoration of peace, political stability and democratic
practices in Haiti. We highly value the enormous efforts
made by its two democratic Governments in conducting the
process of political reconciliation and economic
rehabilitation.

The countries of Latin America are well aware of the
difficulties that must be overcome to restore democracy
when people are burdened by a lack of the most basic
necessities. It is extremely difficult for a country to

 

maintain support for the political values of freedom when
concern over basic material needs dominates the minds of
its citizens. In this situation, good governance consists not
only in ensuring the legitimate establishment and exercise
of authority; good governance also entails the ability to
create jobs in order to guarantee people their daily bread,
a roof over their heads and a dignified place in society.

That is why we decidedly endorse the support that
the United Nations must continue to provide to Haiti,
even beyond the current decision. That is also why we
have participated actively in negotiating the successive
extensions of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) and of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti (UNSMIH) and have endorsed their maintenance.
We must ensure that the many efforts to consolidate
peace will pave the way for the economic and social
reconstruction of the country. It would be unfortunate if
the United Nations, by failing to give Haiti all the
attention it requires to consolidate its progress, found
itself facing a new peacekeeping operation in that country.
As has been repeatedly noted, it is essential that
United Nations action continue once peace has been
restored. The system must adequately respond to the need
for support inherent in the phase of economic recovery
and of laying the foundations for growth and sustained
development.

Experience in this regard has very often been
discouraging. Sustained financial crises affecting United
Nations agencies and programmes in the economic and
social fields prevent them from providing adequate
support for recovery in countries that have suffered
political crises. In Latin America, Central America is a
good example of this type of problem. As a result, we
often find a resurgence of conflict or a perpetuation of
underdevelopment, in which we encounter a paradigm in
which inefficiency in the management of resources is
coupled with dangerous political tensions. Indeed,
resources not invested in laying the groundwork for the
development of these countries are later spent in new
United Nations operations, at costs considerably higher
than would have been needed to consolidate the progress
already made. Somalia is a case in point.

In conclusion, I wish to insist on the advisability of
the Council's initiating a discussion on the substantive
issues which we have raised regarding new approaches to
peacekeeping operations and the consolidation of
achievements by giving effective support to development
through the appropriate organs of the system. We believe

 

that this is the most efficient way in which to meet the new
challenges before us. We offer to the people of Haiti our
respect for their democratic struggle, our solidarity in
confronting those who wish to return to the past, and our
friendship in cooperating for the human development of its
people.

