Mr. Mercado (Philippines): Allow me to begin
by taking this opportunity to express our
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. We would also like to commend
Ambassador Danforth and other members of the United
States delegation on their successful presidency in
November. Likewise, we join other delegations in
thanking Ambassador De La Sabliere for his able
leadership of the mission to Central Africa.

There is no doubt that the Council considers
developments in Central Africa very seriously. During
the past 12 years, eight of the Council's 24 missions
were to the region. The recent mission is but one
manifestation of this body's continued concern over the
situation in the region. The timing and impact of the
mission take on greater significance because the
mission came on the heels of the successful convening
of the Great Lakes Conference in Dar es Salaam.

My delegation believes that the mission and the
Conference complemented each other, and it is in that
context that we would like to highlight the following
points.

First, just as the 11 heads of State pledged to fully
support the national processes in the region, the
Security Council and the international community
should also express the same solid support, particularly
with respect to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi. We are pleased that the transitional peace
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi have been proceeding at a brisk pace. We
therefore encourage the leaders of the Transitional
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of Burundi to accelerate their efforts to prepare for
the holding of elections next year and to persevere in
their commitment to make the peace processes
irreversible.

Secondly, aware that those leaders recognize the
need to respect the fundamental principles of territorial
integrity, sovereignty, non-interference and non-
aggression, the Security Council and the international
community should continue to impress strongly on the
countries in the region that cross-border issues - such
as the problem of foreign armed combatants - must be
resolved through the available multilateral, regional
and bilateral mechanisms, in a spirit of sustained
dialogue and cooperation. The Council's position on
the current border problem in the region was clearly set
out in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2004/45)
issued yesterday.

Thirdly, mindful of the importance accorded
economic development and humanitarian and social
issues, as evidenced by the preponderance of
commitments in the Dar es Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, the Security Council should exert
its influence by urging the international community -
particularly donor countries - to extend the needed
financial and technical assistance to those countries in
order to help alleviate poverty. A case in point is in
Burundi, where all the interlocutors whom the mission
met repeatedly mentioned the direct link between
peace and development, particularly the need to
address the dire poverty in the country through the
mobilization of funds necessary for economic recovery
and national reconstruction, including relief from
external debt.

Fourthly, my delegation reiterates its view that
the elections are not the be-all and end-all of the
process and that the post-election scenario and the
preparations for activities in its aftermath are just as
important. The addressing of post-conflict
peacebuilding issues should begin as early as possible,
if not now. The region also needs assistance for its 127
million people, who are struggling to cope with raging
conflicts, repeated and continued displacement,
drought and disease, including the HIV/AIDS
pandemic.

Fifthly, acknowledging the invitation to the
United Nations to assist the member States of the
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Security
Council should be prepared to contribute its share to its
two major peacekeeping operations in the region: the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB). My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
commend MONUC and ONUB, particularly their
leaders, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General William Swing and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Carolyn McAskie, for their
constructive roles in helping the peace processes in
their respective jurisdictions.

Finally, the Great Lakes conference ended with
the setting up of follow-up mechanisms designed to
ensure that work on implementing the Dar es Salaam
Declaration continues until the second summit is held a
year from now in Kenya. We hope that, by the time the
second conference is convened and the Council once
again visits the region, the countries will have already
implemented several of the commitments contained in
the Declaration and will have taken solid steps forward
in achieving peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region.

