Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania and Slovakia
associate themselves with this statement.

First of all, we wish to commend the President of the
Security Council for scheduling this open meeting, which
will help keep the international community's attention
focused on the situation in Somalia. We hope that the
unequivocal message that emerges from today's meeting
will travel all the way to Somalia and be heard by the
leaders of the country, who bear responsibility for the
present situation of confusion and anarchy that has come to
characterize Somalia - or rather what is left of it.

The world has become a smaller place thanks to
extraordinary technological innovations that have
shortened the distance between nations and have increased
mutual understanding among peoples. Despite these
advances, Somalia seems to have taken the opposite
direction, and is slowly regressing towards the political
and social underdevelopment that we had hoped was a
thing of the past. This corner of Africa is sunk in a
seemingly never-ending political struggle whose main
ingredients are individual and clan rivalries, banditry and
the use of violence. All this occurs while the population
is abandoned to its own suffering.

Somalia today is a country without even a semblance
of central authority. The Secretary-General, in the
introduction of a recent "blue book" entitled The United
Nations and Somalia 1992-1996, draws attention to the
concept of a so-called failed State. A country that has lost
its government, he underlines, compromises its place as
a member of the international community. The lack of a
representative government prevents Somalia from, among
other things, benefitting from the funding provided for by
the Lome Convention. It makes it impossible to
implement any plan to rehabilitate industry, agriculture
and animal husbandry. It also prevents the delivery of
humanitarian assistance on a broader scale.

Almost one year ago to the day, the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II) was terminated. The
Operation cost the lives of 137 peace-keepers as well as
those of numerous relief workers. Since then the violent
deaths of international personnel have continued, leading
to a reduction in humanitarian assistance operations to a
bare minimum. However, the political situation in the
country has not changed. Against the background of
continued fighting between the warlords there is a limit to
what can be achieved by the international community. We
wish here to underline that the United Nations objectives
in Somalia were fundamentally undermined by the lack of
progress in the peace process and in national
reconciliation, and in particular by the lack of sufficient
cooperation from the Somali parties. As the Security
Council has repeatedly stated in the past, it is the people
and the leaders of Somalia who bear the ultimate
responsibility for national reconciliation and for restoring
peace. The situation seems particularly critical in the
capital, where the increase in criminal activity is
compounded by the continued closure of the port and the
airport, leading to a blockade of commercial activity.

The situation, as we have seen, is hardly reassuring,
and security conditions are only getting worse. There are

 

signs of a possible extension of the activities of armed
bands and of a wide-scale renewal of fighting. In this
context, there is great risk of a progressive worsening of the
food and health situation. Already we are receiving reports
of malnutrition, especially among children, and of a
potentially dangerous outbreak of cholera.

The European Union is deeply concerned by the spiral
of seemingly endless violence gripping Somalia. While we
fully support the appeal issued in January by the Security
Council to the Somali leaders to resume peaceful
negotiations, we reiterate the line of strict neutrality towards
the various Somali factions. The European Union believes
that Somalia will not be able to take its proper place in the
international community until a government emerges that is
truly representative of all the Somali components.

The European Union supports the continuation of the
Secretary-General's small political office for Somalia in
Nairobi. It is right that the United Nations should stand
ready, through its good offices, to help the process of
national reconciliation should an opening appear. But our
greatest concern is the humanitarian situation of the people,
which far from the television cameras has ceased to be
"newsworthy". It is our responsibility to keep the
international community's focus on the country, to prevent
Somalia from disappearing not only from the international
scene, but also from our agenda, and becoming a true no
man's land.

In this spirit we reiterate our conviction that the efforts
of the United Nations and of the international agencies to
assist the civilian population must be pursued within the
limits allowed by the unstable situation. A recent United
Nations mission confirmed the absolute need to maintain
such a commitment. For this to continue, however, it should
be possible to count on the renewed financial support of the
donors. In this respect, we strongly reiterate the appeal
already made by the Security Council to the Somali parties
and factions to open unconditionally Mogadishu's main
seaport and other transportation facilities in order to allow
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.

The European Union, which is one of the main
providers of humanitarian assistance to Somalia, intends to
pursue this path. The European Union also supports
international and regional organizations such as the
Organization of African Unity and encourages them to
continue their efforts to foster the return of peace and
stability in Somalia. As we all know, hope is the last thing
to die. Today we express our hope that our appeals for
pacification can quickly produce concrete results, and that
Somalia can finally return to living in more human and
dignified conditions.

