Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank France for
holding this very important debate, which, as the High
Commissioner reminded us, is about tolerance versus
maniacal ideology - a stark choice indeed.

I also thank the two briefers, His Beatitude
Patriarch Sako and Mrs. Dakhil, for what they told us
through their briefings. While we debate issues in a
windowless room, far from events - and there is a lot
of symbolism in that - they have breathed real life into
our consideration of ethnic and religious attacks and
abuses. And I thank them for that.

The oppression and persecution of religious
and ethnic minorities and religious eradication is, as
Minister Fabius reminded us, deplorable, wherever and
whenever, and at whosoever's hand it occurs. That is
especially apparent now, with terrorist groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, posing a direct,
complex threat to international peace and security.
Such groups show no respect for national borders,
crossing them at will and drawing support from
networks extending to the farthest ends of the earth, my
own country included. They revel in publicizing their
atrocities and inciting fear. They want us to respond
with anger and outrage, and we do just that. It is
crucial that the international community acknowledge
the threat that these groups pose and that we promote
the cause of inclusive, multicultural, multi-religious
societies. We therefore see this debate as an important
step in galvanizing global momentum towards that end,
and in addressing the causes of the conflicts on which
those groups thrive.

New Zealand is appalled at the upsurge in violence
and persecution of ethnic and religious minorities in
many parts of the world. This issue is not unique to the
Middle East or to any single religion. Violent extremist
groups find traction in times of major societal stress,
and diverse, multicultural societies worldwide are
affected. And they are diminished as a result. But we
are particularly concerned at the brutal and ongoing
atrocities in the Middle East.

As the High Commissioner told us, it is apparent
that recent atrocities perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant amounted to genocide against
Iraq's Yazidi community. The richness and diversity of
the Middle East has been a major contributor to global
civilization, and that richness and diversity must be
preserved. Some of the region's ethnic and religious
communities have traditions that go back millennia.
And just as we celebrate those traditions, it is equally
important that we acknowledge that most Middle
Eastern countries have a long history of tolerance and
of managing ethnic and religious diversity.

The current turmoil is bringing communities that
have coexisted peacefully for centuries into brutal
conflict, and it threatens irrevocable damage to the
region's rich social tapestry. Extremist groups are
exploiting instability in order to establish themselves
and to spread their brutal sectarian agenda, often
displaying considerable skills in the use of social
media. The Internet, which was initially largely a
product of open, liberal societies, has been turned back
on those same societies - the British Under Secretary
spoke earlier of the hijacking of the Internet. So, what
should be the response from affected States and from
the international community? How should we respond?

The immediate priority must be to restore
security in situations where minorities are particularly
vulnerable. That requires stable and inclusive political
solutions, and it means providing support to end the
conflicts and instability on which extremist groups
nurture their ideologies. But security-based approaches
will not succeed alone. Affected communities need to
find new, post-conflict ways to manage their diversity.
Factors such as economic, social and sectarian
discrimination, inequality, marginalization, insecurity,
and a lack of inclusive and impartial governance must
all be addressed. They are the causes: they must be
addressed. That requires strong political will and
sustained commitment at all levels of Government, as
well as inclusive post-conflict initiatives that do not
entrench existing divisions.

One of the real tests of a society is the extent to
which it accommodates minorities, so it is regrettable
that in these situations minority voices are all-too-often
sidelined, causing ever more discontent and conflict.
We need to work with communities. Violent extremism
often has its roots at the community level, and must
therefore be defeated at that same community level.
Religious, community and educational leaders all
play a central role in promoting peace, tolerance and
mutual respect. We therefore urge the United Nations
and individual Member States to continue promoting
anti-radicalization and to continue countering violent
extremism by involving those leaders in a genuinely
meaningful manner. It is they who can provide the
solutions.

New Zealand supports projects in our region that
enhance community resilience, such as community
policing, which brings together community members
and police to apply policing in ethnically diverse
environments. We join those who have endorsed the
Secretary-General's action plan, and we call for its
swift implementation.

The Security Council has an important role to play
in addressing the persecution and oppression ofreligious
and ethnic minorities by strengthening community
resilience and fostering inclusive governance and cross-
cultural dialogue. As with so much of the Council's
agenda, New Zealand stands ready to contribute to that
dialogue, and in so doing, to take up Mr. Fabius's dual
challenge to show solidarity with the persecuted and to
show a determination to fight the perpetrators of these
dreadful crimes.

