Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
today's open debate. I wish to convey my delegation's
thanks to the Secretary-General and to Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, for their
briefings. I also thank Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF. My delegation appreciates the
opportunity provided today to take the floor before
the Council.

Over the past 18 months, Yemen has experienced
the worst time in its modern history, following the coup
that was organized by the Houthi militia, in cooperation
with the former President. That period has been the
worst time for Yemeni children and their families. The
putsch forces have committed the worst crimes against
children and against humanity. Hundreds of children
have lost their lives as the result of attacks intentionally
targeting populated areas and due to attacks by snipers.
Many civilians have also been wounded. Moreover,
many people have become disabled as a result of the
attacks. Furthermore, those armed forces have targeted
children, as well as schools and hospitals and other
civilian infrastructure. We can still hear the cries of the
martyred children through the voice of Farid Shawki,
who cried out "Do not bury me!", as he was terrified
of death.

The military forces of the Houthi militias and
the republican guard forces of former President Saleh
have targeted many schools in Aden and other areas.
They are the enemies of education and science. Those
militaries have occupied the university, transformed it
into a barracks and planted landmines on the university
campus as a form of reprisal against the students, who
represent the future of Yemen. Leaders of the militias
continue to visit schools and universities to recruit
children to serve in combat. Children therefore make
up the largest number of Houthi recruits - not only
since the start of the war and the attempted coup, but
since the creation of that militia.

The letter that we sent to the Secretary-General in
response to his report (S/2016/360) reiterated that we
are ready to cooperate with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We expressed our comments on
the report, including regarding certain information
that it contained about Yemen. We believe that those
paragraphs do not go into sufficient detail, and we are
curious as to the methodology used to verify cases
included in the report. According to paragraph 2, the
report was drawn up as a result of broad consultations
among Member States. That is not the case with regard
to Yemen. We received no request to discuss the contents
of the report before its publication, in particular with
regard to the sections pertaining to Yemen. That is not
in conformity with procedures adopted by the United
Nations, in particular in connection with this type
of report.

In paragraph 165, it is stated that it was difficult
to verify information owing to the security situation
and restricted access. In that regard, I would draw the
Council's attention to the fact that - as many speakers
have noted - the accuracy of the information in the
report was not verified. It is necessary to be objective
and impartial when it is a question of numbers and
figures. The report is therefore not credible. The authors
of the report did not adopt an impartial methodology.

In paragraph 166, the report states that 183 boys
were deprived of liberty by popular committees. The
popular committees are fighting for the liberation of
Yemen. The 183 boys in question were Houthis, and
we detained them because they were combatants on
the front lines. The report states that we detained those
boys and have not freed them. Today, we reaffirm - as
we have already told the Special Representative - that
the legitimate Government is not holding any children.
We have provided statistics to the United Nations, and
we have released all the children. Furthermore, we
released all other boys who had been transferred to us
by the coalition. We are of course ready to cooperate
with the United Nations on that matter.

The Government authorities provided a secure
environment for those children in order to reintegrate
them into society following the prisoner exchange.
Unfortunately, the children were once again forced to
fight on the front lines. In that regard, I note that the
report makes no reference to the many regions and cities
that are under the control of the militias. Those cities
are nearly empty of children. That is a very foreboding
indication. It must be said that there are cities that
are empty of children, who have been recruited and
are combatants.

The authors of the report have acknowledged that
it was difficult to verify some cases, but the tone of the
report is very firm in making its arbitrary accusations,
the majority of which single out the Arab coalition.
In that light, I commend the cooperation between the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the legitimate Government of Yemen.

In paragraph 175, the authors of the report do not
say why there was no coordination with the Yemeni
Government and its representatives to find the best
ways to implement the action plan that we had adopted
together with UNICEF in May 2014. We need to work
in line with that plan.

In annex I of the report, which lists parties that
recruit children, kill or maim children, there is an
error in the part concerning Yemen with regard to
the third point, according to which Government
forces recruit children. We know, however, that the
majority of Republican Guards brigades and the special
security forces defied the legitimate Government and
supported the leaders of the putsch. They are therefore
accomplices in all the crimes that have been perpetrated
against children. Moreover, the report mentions the
First Armoured Division, but that Division no longer
exits. It was dismantled in 2014. Unfortunately, this
year's report of the Secretary-General on children in
armed conflict has been politicized. Given the very
clear evidence, the report is not objective.

To conclude, I want to reiterate that we in the
Government will work with the United Nations
through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign and
non-governmental organizations to stop the violations
committed by the putschists and armed groups and to
protect children from those criminal groups, which do
respect no national or international law. These criminal
gangs do not respect international law. The Government
has an ethical, legal and constitutional duty to
implement a strategic plan to address the psychological
impact of war on our children. Our children are the
future of our country. We in the Government therefore
are working to alleviate the suffering of children and
end those violations. We will establish a centre for the
rehabilitation of children who were recruited, forced to
fight and then released by the fascist putschist factions.
That is part of the Government's efforts to rebuild the
country and reintegrate children into a normal life and
allow them to resume their education.

Furthermore, we provide special support for
children with disabilities, and we call upon everyone to
work together to ensure that all entities that recruited
children are held accountable for their actions. Having
signed the peace plan in Kuwait on 30 June, Yemen
hopes that the international community, in particular
the Council, will play a more active role in pressuring
the putschists to accept and sign the Kuwait agreement,
lay down their arms and recognize the legitimate
Government. We hope for peace, whereas the militias
brandish slogans of death. They desire death for
everyone, whereas we fight for life. The Government
wants to strengthen peace and tolerance, while those
responsible for the putsch favour violence. Tolerance
will prevail.

