Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Vale de
Almeida and Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve of
Belgium, in his capacity as Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
their briefings.

I commend the parties concerned for their
work. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) - a multilateral agreement endorsed by the
Security Council - has the effect of international law.
It is an important achievement of multilateralism and is
of crucial importance for safeguarding the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and maintaining peace
and stability in the Middle East. The implementation of
the JCPOA is currently at a critical stage. The parties
concerned must bear in mind the overarching and long-
term goal, remain committed to resolutely upholding
and implementing resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA
and fulfilling their responsibilities and obligations.

The International Atomic Energy Agency has
verified on 15 consecutive occasions Iran's compliance
with its nuclear-related commitments and the JCPOA.
The coordination between the Council and the
procurement channel has been going well. China
appreciates Iran's efforts to implement resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA and hopes that Iran will continue
to implement it. China hopes that other parties will
effectively honour their commitments, respect Iran's
legitimate requests and take positive measures to
maintain the balance of rights and obligations under
the JCPOA. China regrets the United States withdrawal
from the JCPOA and its unilateral sanctions on Iran.
We call on the parties concerned to properly address
the difficulties related to maintaining normal economic
and trade ties with Iran.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
is an integral part in implementing resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA. In his report, the Secretary-
General calls on all parties to jointly preserve the
JCPOA, safeguard free and lawful trade with Iran,
support the procurement channel and maintain regional
stability. China views that positively. Given that, China
believes that the report should provide an objective,
balanced and complete picture of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and fully accommodate the
legitimate concerns of Iran.

The Secretariat should fulfil its functions strictly as
mandated. In the current circumstances, all parties must
address with caution Iran's missile and space-launch
issue and accurately interpret the relevant Security
Council resolutions to prevent an impact on the larger
picture, namely, the implementation of the J CPOA.

China has noted that, on many occasions, Iran
has indicated that its missile programme is of a
conventional and self-defensive nature. We encourage
Iran to engage in dialogue on an equal footing with the
parties concerned so as to jointly maintain regional
peace and stability.

China appreciates the efforts of the Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and his
team. We have taken note of the most recent report of
the Joint Commission to the Security Council on the
status of the Procurement Working Group's decisions
and on any implementation issues (see S/2019/488).
China will continue its active participation in the Joint
Commission and the Procurement Working Group.

Recently, the situation in the Middle East has
escalated, which is worrisome. China calls on the parties
concerned to remain calm and exercise restraint, resolve
disputes through dialogue and consultations and refrain
from any action that might escalate tensions. Ensuring
the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA is
not only a requirement in resolution 2231 (2015), but
also a realistic and effective way to defuse tensions in
the Middle East and resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.
We hope that the parties concerned will take concrete
measures to preserve and implement the J CPOA, in the
best interests of the international community.

China has always favoured political and diplomatic
means to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. We are
committed to consolidating the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and safeguarding international
and regional peace and stability. China has recently
engaged in close coordination and cooperation with
the parties and facilitated major new progress in the
modernization of the Arak heavy-water reactor. China
will continue to work in an objective, impartial and
responsible manner. We will work tirelessly, alongside
the international community, to uphold and implement
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA.

