Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate on piracy, which is a useful
complement to the debates focused on specific regions
that the Council has previously organized on this issue.
I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his briefing.

I associate myself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union.

The determined efforts made for several years now
to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia are beginning
to bear fruit. In that connection, the deployment of
international maritime patrols and the implementation of
best management practices have allowed for a reduction
in the number of attacks and a decrease in their success
rate. While such success is undoubtedly good news, we
must remain vigilant and committed, as more than half
of all the attacks recorded worldwide in 2012 occurred
in the Gulf of Aden, the Red Sea or off the coast of
Somalia.

Luxembourg actively contributes to European
missions in support of the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, notably through
the provision of surveillance and reconnaissance
aircraft to Operation Atalanta and a contribution to the
training mission for Somali security forces. We are also
considering a contribution to the new regional maritime
capacity-building mission - EUCAP Nestor - which,
in cooperation with Kenya, Djibouti, Seychelles,
Somalia and the United Republic of Tanzania, aims
to strengthen the capacity of the States of the Horn of
Africa to govern their territorial waters effectively and
to ensure maritime security.

While there has been a reduction in acts of piracy
off the eastern shores of the African continent, the Gulf
of Guinea has become a new high-risk zone. During
the year 2012, the number of attacks in that area,
which stretches from Nigeria past Togo to Benin, has
risen. During this year, two ships flying the flag of
Luxembourg were also attacked. I welcome the efforts
by the countries of the region with a view to adopting
a regional anti-piracy strategy in collaboration with the
African Union.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, armed robbery at sea
and the rise ofrelated illicit activities affect the stability
and security of the entire region of West Africa. They
also threaten the socioeconomic development of the
countries of the region. My country has for many years
implemented an active development cooperation policy
that is aimed, among other things, at giving economic
opportunities to coastal populations, especially young
people. We intend to continue with such efforts, which
we also consider as a contribution to the fight against
the insecurity that currently prevails in the region.

Initially, in order to respond urgently, the
international community adopted strategies to address
the effects of piracy, notably through military means.
Although, as I have just mentioned, such strategies
have allowed for a reduction in the number of attacks
and a decrease in their success rate, they have not been
able to halt the phenomenon in a sustainable manner.
I therefore welcome the emphasis put by the Indian
presidency of the Security Council in its concept note
(S/2012/814, annex) on the need for a holistic approach
to maritime safety that also tackles the root causes of
piracy.

In order to tackle the continuing threat, the United
Nations, the international community as a whole and
all the coastal States in areas affected by piracy should
adopt a global strategy that addresses the root causes,
including socioeconomic causes, so as to guarantee
stability at sea and to resolve the problems on land
in a sustainable manner. As the Secretary-General
underlined in his recent report (S/2012/783), such an
approach must combine various elements: deterrence
at sea, the strengthening of institutions that guarantee
the rule of law, the establishment of an adequate legal
framework, the development of the maritime capacities
of coastal States and support for the creation of decent
jobs and the implementation of development projects
on land. As a matter of priority, coastal States in
the areas affected by piracy must be at the centre of
efforts. No lasting progress can be made without the
full involvement of the authorities of the countries
concerned.

Luxembourg will continue to support the countries
affected by the scourge of piracy by promoting and
implementing a holistic approach that brings together
the political and security dimensions, development
cooperation and humanitarian assistance.

