Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
your wise and enlightened guidance of the work of the
Security Council during the month of January. I also
congratulate your delegation on the judicious choice of
topic for today's open debate.

In addition, I should like to express my
Government's condolences to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and to the Government of
Guatemala following the recent attack that claimed the
lives of eight peacekeeping soldiers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Dar es-Salaam Declaration clearly identified
the causes of the endemic conflicts and persistent
insecurity in the region - particularly economic
stagnation and the worsening of poverty. It also clearly
identified the dangers threatening the region, such as
the lack of a regional strategy for disarming and
repatriating foreign combatants, the illegal circulation
of small arms, the situation of refugees and displaced
persons and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Above all, it
emphasized the will of the countries concerned to face
those dangers with determination.

The Rwanda genocide in 1994, the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Gatumba massacre in Burundi in August 2004 are
examples - there is no better proof - of the
repercussions that internal crises can have on
neighbouring countries and of the need for a regional
approach to conflict prevention and settlement. We
believe that such an approach must give priority to the
root causes of conflicts and stress the promotion of
national reconciliation, economic and social
development, good governance, the rule of law and the
protection of human rights.

The successful outcome of the transition period in
Burundi and the preparations for the elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are encouraging
signs for the return of peace and stability in the region.
Credit is due primarily to the countries of the region,
which have been able to rise above their differences
and to work together on an approach that favours
dialogue, cooperation and peaceful settlement of
disputes. However, challenges must still be addressed
in order to let peace and security take root in a lasting
manner and to forever dispel the spectre of the
conflicts that have afflicted this part of the continent.
Burundi continues to face obstacles to security
with the refusal of the Forces nationales de liberation
to endorse the peace process and economic and social
constraints worsened by the pressure of returning
refugees and displaced persons. The people's support
for the Government's political programme depends
largely on the fulfilment of the promises for national
reconciliation, for the combating of impunity, for
democracy and for power-sharing.

Burundi will need assistance and support from
the international community to overcome those
difficulties and to avoid plunging once again into
instability. The case of that country could be referred
as a priority to the just-created Peacebuilding
Commission, which could constitute an excellent
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union in the peacebuilding process.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
tension prevailing in the eastern part of the country
attests to the risks threatening the peaceful conclusion
of the transition period. The presence of foreign armed
groups is a source of concern with regard to the
security of civilian populations and a source of tension
among the region's countries. The absence of State
authority throughout the territory and the lack of a
truly united, integrated and properly equipped national
army have facilitated cross-border movements of
weapons and combatants and have encouraged the
continued illegal exploitation of natural resources,
which finances weapons trafficking, in violation of the
arms embargo.

The measures established by resolution 1649
(2005) can accelerate the process of disarmament and
of repatriating foreign combatants, and regional
mechanisms such as the Tripartite Plus One Joint
Commission should help restore confidence and reduce
the tension among the countries of the region. We pay
tribute to MONUC and to the United Nations
Operation in Burundi for accomplishing their mandates
and for their efforts to re-establish confidence among
and the protection of the region's civilian populations.

Respect for national sovereignty and for the
inviolability of borders and the establishment of good-
neighbourly relations constitute the foundations for a
regional security framework that the countries of the
region must define. We hope that the objective of the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration and its action plans and
programmes - a Security, Stability and Development
Pact for the Great Lakes region - will be attained at
the second Summit, planned for Nairobi, and that it
will be adopted as the approach to peacebuilding in the
region.

Finally, we salute the role played by the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region and by other
partners, as well as the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, in organizing this
Conference. We hope to see the international
community continue and intensify its multiform aid -
particularly financial aid - to enable us to hold the
Nairobi Summit soon and to ensure the success we
seek.

