Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): First of
all, please allow me to warmly thank the Secretary-
General for accepting the request put forward by France
and six other Security Council members to brief us on
the situation in Burma. On behalf of France, I would
like to welcome the Secretary-General's personal
commitment to this priority issue.

The terrible facts are before us. As President
Macron reminded us at the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.4), ethnic cleansing is happening today
in western Burma. Nearly 500,000 Rohingyas, the
majority of whom are children and women, have fled
Burma for Bangladesh in a month's time. More than 200
villages have been completely destroyed, while others
have been set on fire so as to force people to flee and
deter them from returning. Let us not be mistaken: the
incitement to hatred and violence against the Rohingya
people in Burma in the form of public speeches and
other forms of stigmatization could lead to even worse
atrocities, if we do not immediately end it. Faced with
such a serious situation, the Security Council has the
enormous responsibility to unite and act to break the
negative spiral and urgently find a path leading towards
a peaceful and political way out. To that end, our
immediate efforts must be guided along two avenues.

Our first priority must be to end the violence. We
call on all parties to immediately halt violence directed
against civilians. We call on the Burma security
forces - as it is incumbent upon them - to ensure
the protection of all civilians without discrimination.
The Burma authorities must also end the actions of self-
proclaimed groups that are attacking the Rohingyas.

The second priority, which is inextricably
dependent upon the first, is the restoration of safe and
unhindered access for all humanitarian actors. The
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Myanmar Red Cross Society have been mobilized.
They have delivered a significant amount of assistance,
which, however, has been largely insufficient
given the scope of what is needed. It is urgent that
access be granted to United Nations agencies, the
World Food Programme, UNICEF and other major
non-governmental organizations, such as Medecins
sans Frontieres, which can provide emergency relief
in a neutral, independent and impartial manner. The
Government of Burma's initiative to organize a visit by
diplomats and humanitarian organizations in Rakhine
state is a step in the right direction. I would also like to
acknowledge the outstanding work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration, which
are urgently addressing the influx of almost 500,000
people to Bangladesh.

The significant effort made by Bangladesh, which
has welcomed almost 700,000 Rohingya, also deserves
to be commended and supported by the international
community. We encourage the Bangladeshi authorities
to provide necessary access to all humanitarian actors
according to the needs of the people.

I have just touched upon the most pressing
challenges. Three other priorities, which are inextricably
interlinked, also demand that we act because they are
critical to finding a lasting solution to the crisis.

First, once we succeed in ending the violence, we
will need to define precisely the modalities for the safe,
voluntary and lasting return of the refugees.

The second priority will be to launch a political
process as quickly as possible so as to address the
root causes of the violence, including the systematic
discrimination of the Rohingya people - who have
been denied citizenship in Burma for decades i and
the systematic violation of their rights. The final report
submitted by the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State, chaired by Mr. Kofi Annan, contains important
recommendations concerning the subject. The
commitment of the Burmese Government to implement
determinedly and immediately those recommendations
is a positive first step that must be translated into action.
France reiterates its support for the civilian Government
to pursue and consolidate the democratic transition
process initiated in 2015. France also commends the
work undertaken by countries of the region in search of
a solution to the crisis.

The denial of the Rohingya's rights for decades
has led to the radicalization of a minority among them.
Civilians must not pay for the violence committed by
an extremist group. That is why - and this is the third
challenge - we cannot ignore the massive violations
of human rights that may constitute crimes against
humanity, as was stated by the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Those responsible for crimes
should be brought to justice. For the time being, we
call on the Burmese authorities to allow full access
to all human rights monitoring bodies, in particular
the fact-finding mission established by the Human
Rights Council last March. That mission must be
allowed to visit Myanmar and conduct an independent
investigation of any violations committed, irrespective
of the perpetrators. We reiterate this appeal today to the
Burmese Government.

As France prepares to assume the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October, rest
assured, Sir, of the full attention that it will accord to
the situation in Burma. During the very first days of our
mandate, in collaboration with the United Kingdom,
we will organize an Arria Formula meeting - an open
informal meeting of the Security Council - which
will include Kofi Annan, among other key actors. That
meeting, which will be open to everyone, will not only
give a perspective of the situation on the ground for all
participants, but will also address in more detail the
recommendations of the Commission chaired by Kofi
Annan and the means to act at our disposal. Moreover,
we are continuing our work with our partners on the
Council to show its firm and collective commitment,
which France believes is crucial and urgent.

Allow me to conclude by citing the final report
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State: "The
status quo is not tenable". France will therefore remain
ready to take the initiative for the Security Council to
fully assume its responsibilities concerning this issue
that, through this meeting, we wish to make a priority
and a shared priority on which to take collective action.

