The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Myanmar, Nepal, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Viet Nam
and Yemen, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
11 June 2010 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, has been issued as
document S/2010/3 I6 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in and be inscribed on the list of speakers for he
meeting of the Security Council that will be held
on Wednesday, 16 June 2010, in connection with

5"

the item 'Children and armed conflict .

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict; Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Hilde Frafjord
Johnson, Deputy Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund; and Ms. Manju Gurung.

It is so decided.

I should like also to inform the Council that I
have received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/181, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, and
document S/2010/314, containing a letter dated 15 June
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

Let me say that it is a great honour for me, as
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, to be here
10-40745
today to preside over this special meeting of the
Security Council on this topic of particular importance
to us all. I take this opportunity to thank all members
of the Security Council for the support they have
extended to Mexico throughout its participation in the
work of the Council and particularly in the course of its
presidency this month.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Mr. Atul
Khare, Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson and Ms. Manju
Gurung.

I shall now give the floor to Ms. Coomaraswamy.


