Mr. Langeland (Norway): It is deplorable that so
many civilians suffer the consequences of armed
conflicts. Far too often, women, men, girls and boys
are directly targeted, killed, maimed or injured. We still
witness too wide an interpretation of what constitutes
legitimate military targets. The extensive use of
explosive weapons in densely populated areas and
imprecise targeting in connection with the use of
remote-controlled technologies, such as drones,
constitute grave risks to civilians.

However, over the past year we have seen
encouraging progress in efforts to enhance protection
measures in armed conflicts, such as the entry into force
of the Convention on Cluster Munitions and the recent
amendments to the Statute of the International Criminal
Court that extend individual responsibility for the use of
certain weapons and ammunition in non-international
conflicts. Those are concrete steps in the right direction.

I would now like to focus on three core challenges
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/579). The
first is compliance with international humanitarian law.
We believe that full compliance with existing
international humanitarian law is essential for
safeguarding civilians in armed conflicts. Our focus
must be on where the consequences of armed conflict
are felt, that is, on the ground. To that end, States as
well as militaries, the International Committee of the

Red Cross, non-governmental organizations and
non-State armed groups must engage in renewed efforts
to reclaim the protection of civilians. Norway supports
the Secretary-General's recommendations with regard
to the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas, including the need for further analysis and
research.

Secondly, with regard to protection by United
Nations peacekeeping operations, Norway welcomes
the publication of Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence - An Analytical Inventory of Peacekeeping
Practice. We also attach great importance to the
ongoing work to develop training modules and
scenario-based exercises to strengthen missions'
protection capacity. Norway fully supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation that specific
benchmarks should be developed for measuring
progress in the implementation of missions' mandates
to protect civilians. This is not least important in exit
strategies for peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, with regard to enhancing accountability,
the perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law must be brought to justice. Norway
firmly believes that we need to enhance the
effectiveness of accountability mechanisms. We
welcome the commitment of the Security Council to
establish a stronger protection framework for children
in armed conflict, most recently through resolution
1882 (2009).

Let me conclude by encouraging the Security
Council to invite all relevant actors to take part in a
debate on how to enhance the effectiveness of
accountability mechanisms, including the use of
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions.

