Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset, I would like to congratulate Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I also wish to welcome all the new members that have just joined the Council. I also wish to thank Special Representative Chambas for his briefing today and would like to take this opportunity to commend his efforts and those of his team in efficiently discharging their mandate in an increasingly challenging environment, as we heard from his briefing. South Africa wishes to express its full support for the role of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) in the West African region and the Sahel. We support the renewal of the mandate of that important Office, on which the Council will deliberate during the course of this month. We commend the efforts of UNOWAS to strengthen national and regional capacities for conflict resilience and to promote an environment conducive to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals in the region. That is imperative, as continued efforts to improve such capacities — in tandem with security strategies — pave the way for peace and stability. South Africaremains concerned about the continued terrorist attacks against civilians, security and defence forces, as well as peacekeepers in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and countries of the Lake Chad basin, which have resulted in many fatalities. It is disturbing that the terrorist attacks are spreading to other countries in the region that were previously not affected. We are also deeply concerned by the increase in intercommunal violence, which is increasingly becoming a security threat and exacerbating the security and humanitarian situation in West Africa and the Sahel. Effective measures need to be devised to resolve the farmer and herder disputes as well as intercommunal violence. In that context, we welcome the collaboration of UNOWAS with the Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund in supporting national and cross-border programmes to address tensions associated with conflicts related to transhumance, prevent violent extremism and empower young people and women in peacebuilding processes and conflict-prevention mechanisms. We are encouraged by the initiatives undertaken by countries in the region to improve the security situation. The decision taken by the extraordinary summit on terrorism of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), held in September 2019, is indicative of the determination and political will of African leaders to collectively address the security challenges in the region. The region’s resolute determination should be equally matched by the intensified support of the international community so as to assist in successfully implementing the stabilization strategy for countries affected by Boko Haram, the priority investment plan of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. We believe that the implementation of those plans, envisioned in the aforementioned strategies, will contribute towards addressing the challenges faced by the region. The partnership between UNOWAS and regional and subregional bodies, including the African Union, ECOWAS, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Multinational Joint Task Force and the G-5 Sahel, as well as the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, to strengthen coordination efforts towards the implementation of regional strategies is of paramount importance. The continuation of consultation processes and national dialogues to address election-related issues by countries of the region is commendable in preserving peace and stability. In that context, we encourage UNOWAS to continue to pursue collaboration with ECOWAS, its mediation missions and its good offices, especially in view of the planned elections in many countries of the region over the course of 2020. We welcome the commitment of countries in the region to implementing the women and peace and security agenda, in line with resolution 1325 (2000). We are particularly pleased with the recommendation emanating from the annual consultations of the Working Group on Women, Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel held in October 2019 regarding the organization by UNOWAS of an annual regional forum for women and young people. That recommendation resonates with the call made in resolution 2493 (2019) encouraging regional and subregional groups to consider convening meetings in the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) with the participation of Governments, relevant stakeholders and civil society to review the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. We also commend the efforts made to improve gender parity in countries of West Africa through the adoption of relevant legislation, which will increase the number of women appointed to senior positions and improve the involvement and meaningful participation of women in decision-making processes. In conclusion, we reiterate our position that a comprehensive approach that includes addressing the root causes of insecurity and instability is very important for the realization of sustainable peace in West Africa and the Sahel.
