Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, on
behalf of Palestine, I warmly congratulate you and
your friendly country, Uganda, on your presidency of
the Security Council and express our confidence that
you will ably guide the Council as it works on this
month's agenda. We also express our appreciation to
Turkey for its wise stewardship of the Council in June.

I also wish to express our appreciation for today's
monthly briefing to the Council delivered by the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco. It remains an important
barometer of the situation on the ground and of the
many challenges that we continue to confront in our
search for peace and security in the region.

In the few months since the Security Council's
most recent open debate on the situation (see S/PV.6123), there have been some encouraging
developments. In late March, the twenty-first summit
of the League of Arab States, held in Doha, Qatar,
reaffirmed the Arab Peace Initiative, which has
emerged as a key component of the regional and
international efforts to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and of the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole.
Significantly, in a testament to the genuine Arab
commitment to and readiness for peace and
coexistence, the Initiative was renewed in spite of the
deep anger, mistrust and tensions permeating the
region following the criminal Israeli military onslaught
against the Gaza Strip earlier in the year. The
opportunity provided by the Arab Peace Initiative for
the advancement of peace must be urgently seized.

Other encouraging developments have been the
reaffirmation of the international consensus on the
necessity and parameters of a peace settlement and the
reassertion of the Security Council's central role vis-a-
vis the achievement of such a settlement. These were
reflected in the Council's adoption of a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/14) on 11 May 2009 at a
ministerial meeting held under its Russian Federation
presidency (see S/PV.6123). In following up to
resolution 1850 (2008), the Council, inter alia,
reaffirmed the two-State solution, the irreversibility of
the peace process and support for an international
conference in Moscow this year on the Middle East
peace process, which, under the appropriate
circumstances, could constitute an important forum for
the resumption of peace negotiations that we all seek.

As evidenced in that debate and in other recent
deliberations on this matter, the achievement of a just
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine is a
political, security, legal, human rights, humanitarian
and moral responsibility and an imperative for the
international community that can no longer be delayed.
That, too, was the clear message conveyed in the
Quartet statement issued on 26 June 2009 in Trieste, as
well as in recent statements by the European Union,
which, inter alia, reaffirmed the Union's commitment
to the principles and the basis of the peace process and
which also bolster the overwhelming international
consensus that has existed for so long regarding a
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.

Over the past few months, we have also been
encouraged by the more active, balanced approach
being taken by the new United States Administration of
President Barack Obama towards the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and the Arab-Israeli conflict as a
whole, based on a clear commitment to the two-State
solution for peace and justice. President Obama's
speech in Cairo last month, as well as the diplomatic
efforts of his Special Envoy George Mitchell, have
renewed hopes in the vast potential of responsible, fair
United States leadership to contribute positively to the
achievement of a solution that will make peace and
security a reality for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples,
as well as for the Middle East region as a whole.

Despite those developments, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, remains grave and the peace process
remains frozen. That is because of Israel's continued
violation of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, and its rejection of the appeals
to cease its violations and instead truly pursue peace on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008)
and the principle of land for peace, underpinning all
tracks of the peace process.

In contrast, the Palestinian leadership has
consistently endeavoured to uphold its obligations
under international law, agreements reached and the
Road Map. It has made historic concessions and
repeatedly reaffirmed its commitment to the two-State
solution for peace; has made well-documented progress
in the fulfilment of its obligation to promote security
and the rule of law in the areas under the Palestinian
Authority; has strived, with the support of the
international donor community, to build the institutions
of the future Palestinian State; and has also continued
to pursue much-desired national reconciliation and
unity. All of that has been undertaken despite the
unending cycle of Israel's violations, including of its
obligations as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention, of previous agreements and of its
obligations under the Road Map.

Indeed, Israel has repeatedly undermined
confidence and progress by refusing to refrain from
illegal, destructive and unilateral measures prejudicing
the outcome of negotiations on the core final status
issues - Jerusalem, settlements, refugees, borders,
security and water. It has continued to establish facts
on the ground, creating even more obstacles with
which to contend, in addition to its relentless
oppression and humiliation of the Palestinian people,
including the perpetration of gross human rights
violations and war crimes.

Israel's credibility as a peace partner has thus
remained in serious question. That was the case with
the previous Government, which launched the Israeli
military aggression against Gaza and accelerated
settlement activities, and it is the case with the current
Government, which continues to flout the law, further
inflaming tensions and obstructing the resumption of
negotiations.

In the Gaza Strip, Israel continues to inflict vast
deprivations on the Palestinian civilian population
which it has so gravely traumatized and terrorized. The
disastrous impact of the Israeli military aggression on
Gaza's socio-economic, humanitarian and security
situation is far from being ameliorated, as Israel
continues to blockade Gaza and prevent its
reconstruction, in grave violation of international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 1860 (2009), and with total
disrespect for the repeated calls to lift its inhumane
siege and to cease forthwith its imprisonment and
collective punishment of the entire Palestinian people
in the Gaza Strip.
In that regard, we must also recall that more than
11,000 Palestinians remain captive and suffering in
Israeli jails and detention centres. Among the
unlawfully imprisoned and arbitrarily detained are
hundreds of children and women, as well as
democratically elected officials, and their numbers
continue to grow with Israel's daily arrests.

At the same time, in flagrant defiance of
international law and the international community's
demands for the cessation of all settlement activities,
Israel continues its construction of settlements and the
wall, its transfer of Israeli settlers, its land
confiscations, its home demolitions, its excavations
and its imposition of hundreds of checkpoints in the
West Bank. The current Government's zealous support
for the illegal settlement enterprise has also further
emboldened settlers, whose acts of violence and
depravity against Palestinian civilians and property
have sharply escalated.

That these illegal, provocative colonization
measures are directly aimed at creating and
entrenching massive facts on the ground in order to
alter the demography and character of the territory and
to prejudge the negotiations can no longer be denied.
Moreover, this colonization drive has been most
intense in and around East Jerusalem, the heart of the
Palestinian territory, where the lives, communities and
growth of the indigenous Palestinian inhabitants of the
city are being deliberately stunted and suffocated by
the occupying Power's aggressive pursuit of de facto
annexation.

It is widely recognized that the current situation
is abnormal, unjust and untenable. Yet, regrettably, no
real collective action has been taken in response. The
obvious question then is, what can and must be done
by us - all of us - to redress this situation?

A settlement freeze and the dismantlement of all
outposts is a priority. In the debate today, all Member
States who spoke unanimously concurred with this
request: an immediate and total settlement freeze.
Israeli colonization is destroying the contiguity,
integrity and unity of the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, thus destroying the viability of the future
Palestinian State and the prospects for realizing the
two-State solution. Attempts to minimize, belittle or
distract from the settlements issue must be rejected. All
settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth, are unlawful, unnatural and contradictory to
the principle of land for peace and the main objective
of the peace process, which is the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security on the basis of the 1967
borders.

In this connection, attempts to characterize Israeli
acceptance of the two-State solution as a concession
must also be rejected. The two-State solution not only
finds its basis in Security Council resolutions, but also
dates back to General Assembly partition resolution
181 (II) of 29 November 1947, to which Israel owes its
very existence.

At the same time, another priority is the lifting of
the Israelis' blockade of Gaza and the sustained
opening of all border crossings, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, United Nations
resolutions and the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access. The free movement of persons and goods,
including unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance, the commercial flows necessary for the
revival of the collapsed economy and the entry of
construction materials and adequate fuel supplies, are a
matter of urgency.

In this regard, we support the Secretary-General's
proposal for the immediate launch of long-overdue
United Nations projects in Gaza as a start for
reconstruction. The proposal of starting with
$93 million, made by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the United Nations Development Programme,
which was agreed upon two years ago - and the
funding is there - is the first step that should be
undertaken. The only party that does not agree with
this proposal - all of us agree, including all Council
members - is the Government of Israel. The
Secretary-General is awaiting a positive answer from
the Government of Israel in this connection.

Moreover, we reaffirm the need to pursue
accountability for Israeli war crimes against the
Palestinian people. No Member State should be
permitted to breach the law so shamefully,
systematically and unapologetically without
consequences. We thus await the report of the Human
Rights Council fact-finding mission and call for
follow-up of its findings and recommendations as well
as those of the Secretary-General's Board of Inquiry.
This is crucial for ending impunity, redressing the
searing sense of injustice among the thousands of
victims and allowing genuine healing to occur. It is
unquestionable that this is also essential for the long-
term prospects for peace, reconciliation and
coexistence.

The international community must remain active
and consistent in the efforts to advance the
international consensus vis-a-vis the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which is the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The recent encouraging developments must be seized
upon.

If faced with continued Israeli defiance, the
international community must use the political and
diplomatic tools at its disposal - foremost via the
Security Council - to collectively take the measures
necessary to bring Israel into compliance with the
Charter, international law and United Nations
resolutions, including with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Only this will create a
different environment, in which the talk of and the
efforts for peace will actually have a chance to
succeed, bringing an end to the entire 1967 Israeli
occupation of Arab lands and enabling the Palestinian
people to exercise their inalienable rights in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, which is the key to the realization of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in our region.

