Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are pleased to see you presiding over this meeting
of the Security Council, Mr. President.

We welcome His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, and the delegation that is accompanying
him. We also welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Marzudi.

We thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his briefing, and we reiterate Cuba's ongoing
support for his work, while also paying tribute to his
predecessor, Mr. Jean Arnault, for the important work
he accomplished.

Cuba is committed to the peace process in
Colombia. We have contributed for decades to the
various efforts made to that end in the country. The
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace was a historic event that
allowed the reinsertion into society of thousands of
guerrilla fighters who for more than 50 years opposed
the Colombian State. The implementation of the final
agreement signed between the Colombian State and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in its entirety is vital.

Although important progress has been made, there
have been considerable delays in the implementation of
other important components of the Agreement, including
those related to political participation, the agrarian
question, legal and legislative actions and such aspects
as the lack of security in the most vulnerable areas
and the slow process of socioeconomic reintegration
of former combatants. It is particularly worrying that
attempts are being made to modify essential aspects of
what was agreed in good faith in terms of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. It would be regrettable if years
of complex negotiations were not recognized. Failure
to comply with the agreement could jeopardize the
peaceful future that Colombia craves and deserves, and
would have a negative impact on Latin America and
the Caribbean and on the international community as
a whole, which has unreservedly supported the Final
Agreement and is following the process with hope.

We wish to express our condolences to the
Government and the people of Colombia, in particular
to the families of the victims of the 17 January attack
in Bogota. Cuba rejects and condemns all terrorist
acts, methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations. Cuba has never allowed nor will it allow
its territory to be used for the organization of terrorist
acts against any State. Cuba has strictly fulfilled its
role as guarantor in the peace process between FARC-
EP and the Colombian authorities as well as guarantor
and alternative headquarters ofthe Colombian dialogue
between the Government and the National Liberation
Army. Cuba is against terrorism and against the war in

defence ofpcaee. On the moral grounds ofhaving been
a victim of State terrorism for decades and of having
an unblemished history on the subject, we condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations whatever
its motivations.

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.
