Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I would like first of all to
thank Special Coordinator Serry for his very
informative briefing today and to acknowledge the
presence here with us of the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Ambassador Mansour, and of the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Ambassador Shalev. I also
wish to align my statement with the one that will be
delivered by France on behalf of the European Union
later on.

Italy welcomes the landmark adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008) last Tuesday. We commend the
United States and the Russian Federation for their
leadership, and we are fully aware of the importance of
the strong message of support to the negotiation
process that has come from this Council. Resolution
1850 (2008) gives a key message: the Annapolis
Process is irreversible; there is no way back. It is
absolutely essential that a comprehensive agreement be
reached in the form of a peace treaty to be
implemented without further negotiations based on the
Road Map principles.

We devoted our statement on Tuesday to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Therefore, I will not repeat
what I said on that occasion regarding the situation on
the ground. I should like only to recall our belief in the
importance of supporting and promoting a constructive
approach by all the States of the region to every track
of the peace process and to underline in this context the
great potential of the Arab League's Peace Initiative.

I will now turn to Lebanon. We are pleased with
the encouraging developments in the national
reconciliation process in Lebanon. We are aware,

however, that the country's stability is still fragile
owing to the ongoing security problems and a
substantial lack of progress in fostering reconciliation
between the Christian factions. The upcoming elections
are thus a crucial step in the process of stabilizing
Lebanese democracy. It is our hope that they will take
place in the framework of a peaceful and democratic
electoral campaign. The presence of electoral observers
could help to reduce tensions and assure the proper
conduct of both the pre-electoral phase and the
elections. Italy is ready to contribute to a possible
European mission, should one be requesting by all the
Lebanese political forces and receive unanimous
agreement from the Siniora Government.

Italy reiterates its hope that the pending territorial
issues between Israel and Lebanon will be solved
promptly. In this context, it is particularly urgent that
Israel withdraw from the northern part of the village of
Gajar, so as to end the ongoing tensions in the area and
improve Israeli-Lebanese political relations, which is a
prerequisite for constructively tackling the remaining
open issues between the two countries. We thus believe
it necessary for the plan outlined by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to be implemented
as quickly as possible. We encourage both sides to
continue cooperating with UNIFIL in the framework of
the tripartite mechanism so as to solve problems on the
ground, prevent incidents and proceed with the
demarcation of the Blue Line. Italy will continue to
contribute its contingent to UNIFIL to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
maintenance of the ceasefire. We believe that the
presence of UNIFIL remains decisive for the stability
of Lebanon and the security of Israel.

We also hope that Syria will formally recognize
Lebanon's sovereignty over the Sheba'a Farms area by
providing written confirmation in response to the
Secretary-General's request. We also hope that Syria
and Lebanon will quickly follow up on their
commitments by exchanging ambassadors and
demarking their shared borders so as to place the
newly-established relations between the two countries
on a sound footing in a manner based on mutual
respect for independence and sovereignty.
