Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this meeting. Allow me also
to thank Ms. Cheng-Hopkins for her informative
briefing and Ambassador Lucas for her presentation.

We welcome the positive measures adopted in
certain peacebuilding areas, such as the start of the
implementation process of the international civilian
capacities review, ensuring appropriate United Nations
senior leadership capacities, and strengthening
partnerships with the World Bank and other
stakeholders.

However, considerable work remains to be done
to support national efforts in building suitable
conditions for durable peace. I would like to make the
following remarks in that regard.

First, concerning United Nations senior
leadership, my delegation concurs with Ms. Cheng-
Hopkins that in certain settings evolving circumstances
on the ground may require a shift in the field
leadership profile and timely deployment of senior
leaders with adequate expertise to support
peacebuilding efforts, with special attention being duly
given to the strategic period immediately following the
end of the conflict.

Secondly, my delegation believes that
peacebuilding is collective in nature, and its success
depends largely on the clarity of the roles and
responsibilities of a wide array of local, national and
international actors. Since none of those actors can
individually conduct an overall successful
peacekeeping operation, coherence and coordination
are essential to manage the interdependence of their
roles. In that regard, we welcome the various reviews
carried out by the Secretary-General's Policy
Committee for the purpose of coherence and the efforts
to strengthen partnership and coordination between the
United Nations and the World Bank.

Furthermore, we strongly believe an integrated
peacebuilding strategy must be developed to create a
reference point for coherence. Such a strategy should
be based on impartial analysis of the root causes of the
conflict and should be subject to timely review,
according to the dynamic and evolving environment on
the ground.

Thirdly, my delegation is encouraged by the
decision to make national capacity assessment part of
the integrated missions planning process. Strong
partnership among international and national actors is
necessary to operationalize national ownership of
peacebuilding, without which peacebuilding is unlikely
to be sustainable or successful. Despite progress in this
regard, more needs to be done to enable the United
Nations to effectively support national peacebuilding
efforts. That is particularly true for certain
peacebuilding core areas such as rule of law and
security sector reform. As is well known, those areas
are fundamental for ensuring security, preventing new
eruptions of violence and effectively combating drug
trafficking and organized crime.

Fourthly, the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize
to women from Yemen and Liberia was a laudable
recognition of the difference that women can make
when they so courageously engage in rebuilding their
societies. Indeed, existing studies suggest that gender
balance not only reduces corruption but also ensures
greater transparency and responsiveness to community
needs. That is why meaningful participation of women
in decision-making institutions and mechanisms related
to peacebuilding should begin at the earliest stage of
recovery.

Efforts have been made to ensure gender
expertise in mediation and to promote the access of
women and girls to security and justice.

However, we believe that the United Nations and
the Peacebuilding Commission should provide more
systematic assistance to Governments and help them
ensure more consistent participation of women in
peace accords and donor conferences.

Gender analysis is also important and offers a
valuable tool for understanding the gender dimensions
of violence and recovery and for tailoring effective
approaches to gender issues in specific post-conflict
settings.

In conclusion, peacebuilding is often a long,
convoluted and complex undertaking. However, its
success is imperative for durable peace and for the
sustainable development of societies.

