Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to introduce the latest report of
the Secretary-General on South Sudan, issued on
17 February (S/ZOlS/llS). As always, I shall take this
opportunity to inform the Council on operational
developments since then.

As Council members know, the security situation
in South Sudan is very worrisome. Many violations of
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, signed more
than a year ago on 23 January 2014, have been reported
and confirmed, as have numerous clashes between
Government and opposition forces, in particular in
Unity and Upper Nile states. On 10 February in Unity
state, many bombings were reported in the region of
Madrassa, south-west of Bentiu. The Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) reported having opened fire
after observing the SPLA in Oppostion advance on
the city of Bentiu. Our force could not confirm this
development on the lines of defence around Bentiu.
On 13 February, the SPLA also captured at least five
members of the opposition army following clashes
between Bentiu and Guit, and those five remain in
detention.
Similarly, in Upper Nile state, the security situation
has recently been dominated by sustained exchanges of
fire between the SPLA and the armed opposition from
8 to 17 February in the Nasir region beyond the Sobat
River. There have also been reports of new clashes in
the counties of Maban, Melut and Manyo over the past
10 days. The clashes in these states clearly indicate that
the oil fields located there remain prime targets for the
forces of the military opposition.

At the same time, both sides continue to mobilize
and deploy new recruits in preparation for further
clashes, while the ongoing dry season opens up new
lines of communication and movements of troops
and equipment. On 15 February, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) was informed that
armed men, probably belonging to a Shilluk militia
allied to the Government, had forcibly recruited at
least 89 children from camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Malakal county, Upper Nile state.
Eyewitnesses reported to UNICEF that gunmen had
surrounded the entire area and searched every house
for boys older than 12 years.

Meanwhile, in Pibor county, Jonglei state, the slow
integration of Murle forces and the lack of financial
resources pledged to the Greater Pibor Administrative
Area have the potential to destabilize the agreement
of 28 March between the Cobra faction of the South
Sudan Defence Army, led by David Yau Yau, and the
Government. General Joshua Konyi was appointed
Commander of the SPLA in the region, which has also
raised tensions because Konyi, a former commissioner
of Pibor county, had worked closely with the Sudan
People's Liberation Army against the forces of David
Yau Yau in the region. We have also received reports
that the Murle community had reached an agreement
with the Lou-Nuer - which in itself would be an
unusual development - to prevent SPLA troops to
move through their territory if they were planning to
undertake operations to regions under the control of
the armed opposition. Currently, there is a great danger
that the conflict could spread in the coming months to
Pibor and Akobo counties, in Jonglei state.

Tension also mounted in the region oquuatoria, due
to the massive influx from Jonglei and Lakes states of
heavily armed Dinka nomads, with more than 250,000
head of cattle, onto their neighbors' arable land. These
movements reflect long-standing confrontations over
grazing areas south of Lakes and Jonglei states. It is
clear that this hotspots could easily turn into war zones.

Furthermore, internal political disputes within the
coalition Government in the states of Northern and
Western Bahr el-Ghazal have resulted in the somewhat
questionable disqualification of the Acting Governor
and the President of the local legislature. These tensions
could also lead to new intercommunal conflict, even
though those two states had until recently remained
relatively peaceful despite developments elsewhere in
the country.

(Spoke in English)

The volatile security environment is directly
illustrates the continued lack of political will of the
parties. The Government and opposition do not seem
to take the political negotiations seriously and appear
unwilling to make the necessary compromises. The
situation at the peace talks in Addis Ababa cannot be
described in any other way but as a serious failure on
the part of a leadership that remains focused on its
pursuit for power rather than on care of its people. The
talks are stalled over the three issues of power-sharing,
security arrangements and constitutional reforms. The
likelihood of either side softening its stance remains
low.

Council members will have noted that, on
21 January in Arusha, the parties signed an agreement
to unify the Sudan People's Liberation Movement,
following talks facilitated by Chama Cha Mapinduzi,
which is apparently the ruling party in Tanzania. On
16 February, the parties signed another document,
including a road map matrix with specific timelines, to
implement the Arusha Agreement. But, in view of the
prevailing environment and uncompromising positions
expressed by President Kiir and Mr. Machar, the actual
implementation of the matrix is very much in doubt.

Last week, on 13 February, the Government
announced that it would postpone the general and
presidential elections by two years and propose to the
National Legislature a constitutional amendment that
would extend the terms of the Office of the President
and of the National Legislature until 9 July 2017. On
19 February, the Government presented the proposed
bill for the amendment of the 2011 Transitional
Constitution to members of both houses, who had been
recalled from recess for a special sitting. Members of
both houses now have one month to look at the proposal,
following which the bill would require passage by a
two-third majority in both houses, sitting separately.
Given the majority enjoyed by the Government in the
Legislature, this proposal is likely to be adopted. This
step is a response to what was perceived as a strategy
of the opposition to call into question the legitimacy
of the Government and the President after June this
year, and to do so officially so that it would not have
to negotiate under pressure. Of course, one can only be
concerned that this two-year timeline may become yet
another incentive to defer the reaching of compromises
necessary for a peace agreement.

Lastly, I have to underline the shrinking of political
space and freedoms. That is worrying. Journalists
have been detained and harassed for criticizing the
Government. The Nation Mirror newspaper was closed
down on 3 February, after publishing an article claiming
that Government forces had abandoned a key town near
the international border with the Sudan. On 16 February,
even the United Nations Radio Miraya was threatened
with shutdown if it continued to interview opposition
leaders. Since then, Special Representative Ellen Laj
has addressed that situation in a meeting with the
Minister of Information of South Sudan, but we remain
very concerned about the general trend of shrinking
press freedom in the country. Meanwhile, opposition
political parties also continue to be prevented from
participating in the Addis Ababa peace talks.

The humanitarian situation in South Sudan is
at high risk of deteriorating further over the coming
months. We currently host 113,000 IDPs in eight sites,
and there are an additional 1.5 million displaced across
the country as well as close to 500,000 outside it. As
fighting continues, displacement is increasing. Over
the past two months alone, about 100,000 additional
people were displaced despite the fact that it has been
a period of relative calm. The number of food-insecure
civilians is expected to rise further as we approach the
lean season. About 2.5 million people are already in
emergency and crisis levels of food insecurity - almost
twice as many as in December 2013, when the crisis
started - and an additional 3.9 million people are in
a state of stress when it comes to food security. In line
with seasonal patterns, a drastic deterioration could
occur between April and July this year, when the lean
season reaches its peak. Needless to say, conflict-
affected states are most at risk because markets have
been destroyed and foods stocks have been and are
being depleted prematurely. Every effort is being made
to bring assistance to those in need. Insecurity and
harassment, especially for national humanitarian staff,
are hampering response efforts.

As I stated in my last briefing, UNMISS continues
to take every opportunity to move from protection
by location to protection by presence. The emphasis
is increasingly on conducting dynamic, integrated
patrols to enhance the protection and reassurance
of local communities and to gather vital information
to facilitate appropriate and timely responses to new
threats. Last month alone, UNMISS conducted over
5,000 patrols through South Sudan of various natures:
short-duration, long duration, dismounted, integrated
and dynamic air patrols. The vast majority of these
missions have been focused on positive and proactive
engagement with vulnerable communities outside our
bases.

We have established temporary operating bases in
key population centres as part of this strategy. For the
time being, we are looking at options for establishing
forward-operating bases in Bentiu, Malakal and Bor,
and seeking the approval of local authorities to that
end. We have prepared contingency plans in the event
of a worsening security situation. Those plans rely on
maintaining quick-reaction forces at a high level of
readiness so they can respond swiftly and robustly. All
battalions are expected to be able to exercise flexibility
so as to act as reinforcements anywhere in the country.

We now have roughly 3,500 of the 5,500 newly
authorized troops deployed, and full deployment of the
infantry and their enablers will be completed by April,
enabling the Mission to further expand its presence in
the country. Six of nine utility helicopters have been
deployed, and we are pursuing the deployment of
tactical helicopter units from Ethiopia and Rwanda.
Deployment of a Chinese battalion and additional
troops from Kenya is currently under way, and the
balance of the troops from Ghana and a riverine unit
from Bangladesh will also be deployed in the near
future, hopefully by April.

I would have to add that we have continued to
experience violations of the status-of-forces agreement
(SOFA) such as restrictions of movement, impounding
ofassets, threats to our personnel and premises, assaults,
harassment, arrests, detentions and restrictions on
imports of equipment, including, for a while, equipment
for the Chinese and Ethiopian contingents. Those seem
to be clearing, but we still have to see what will happen
on the ground. Yesterday, I circulated a fact sheet on
SOFA Violations to give the Council a breakdown of all
such events that occurred in January.

So we have a very fragile security environment
and an ongoing round of peace talks that is not very
likely to achieve more progress. I think that now more
than ever there is an urgent need to reinforce the
mediation efforts and to impose consequences on the
parties if they fail to show willingness to compromise
and continue to engage in a conflict that will result in
the further loss of innocent lives. Even more important
in that regard is the need for accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which cannot go
unpunished. Accountability is indispensable to long-
term peace and reconciliation. The culture of impunity
must end, and those responsible for keeping it going
must therefore be brought to justice. Since the peace
talks have just resumed, I would urge the Council
to perhaps look at the possibility of issuing a strong
presidential statement that would call on the parties to
immediately cease all military operations and make
the compromises necessary to reach a comprehensive
peace agreement during this round of talks or else face
the consequences.

