Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like at the outset, Sir, to congratulate
your country on its presidency of the Council for this
month. We thank the Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam and the members of his friendly delegation for
their work last month. We also wish to thank the
Chairmen of the Council Committees for their
briefings at this meeting and for their efforts to
coordinate international cooperation in combating
terrorism.

The Syrian Arab Republic became aware of the
threat posed by terrorism at an early date. It was one of
the first States to highlight, in the mid 19805, the need
to foster efforts to eradicate international terrorism and
to hold an international United Nations conference to
draw up a specific definition of the concept of
terrorism and to formulate an effective international
strategy to combat it and distinguish it from the
legitimate liberation struggle of peoples suffering
under the yoke of occupation. The right to such
struggle has been enshrined in international norms and
instruments.

My country, the Syrian Arab Republic,
emphasizes its condemnation of terrorism as an unjust,
aggressive and criminal action that targets the lives and
property of innocent people. My country calls for
action on all levels to combat international terrorism in
conformity with the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter and the provisions of
international law.

The crimes perpetrated by Israel against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories and
against Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan
are without a doubt war crimes. They are the very
definition of terrorism. They constitute a blatant form
of State terrorism and a grave violation of the
principles of human rights, international law and
resolutions of international legitimacy, including
Security Council resolutions. The Syrian Arab
Republic believes that the United Nations has a pivotal
role to the play in combating terrorism and grappling
with it internationally, and therefore fully cooperates
with the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004).
09-60696
The Syrian Arab Republic has established
complementary national committees to ensure the
optimal application of these resolutions and to achieve
the best possible cooperation with the Security
Council's Committees. This cooperation stems from
my country's keen interest in successfully
implementing resolutions of international legitimacy,
including Security Council resolutions, and from our
belief in the pressing need to cooperate with these
Committees in order to eradicate terrorism. This is
particularly true since the Syrian Arab Republic has
suffered for decades from the scourge of terrorism and
terrorist actions inflicted upon its territory, the most
recent of which was last year's military operation
against al-Qazzaz.

Once again, the Syria states that terrorism
constitutes an ongoing threat to international peace and
security. We also reiterate our commitment to the
relevant international resolutions on combating
terrorism. We are persuaded that the United Nations
has a pivotal role to play in grappling with
international terrorism and establishing international
consensus on this topic.

My country is of the view that the Committees of
the Security Council established to combat terrorism
contribute to efforts to coordinate international action
to combat terrorism. However, we must state that the
Committees show a kind of discrimination in dealing
with Member States. For instance, we notice a focus on
certain States or particular geographic groupings and
not on others. While the Committees request certain
States to submit reports on the implementation of
terrorism-related resolutions, they turn a blind eye to
other States.

The Syrian Arab Republic deploys strenuous
efforts to combat money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism. The Syrian Commission for Combating
Money-Laundering and Terrorism Financing has joined
the Egmont Group, whose units seek to verify financial
transactions in 108 States. The Group is responsible for
gathering information and reporting on financial
transactions suspected to be related to money-
laundering or terrorist financing.

Syria has attended counter-terrorism workshops,
including the Doha workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and a national workshop held in
Abu Dhabi from 28 to 30 June, organized in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs

and Crime. Syria participated in the International
Workshop for National Counter-Terrorism Focal
Points, held in Vienna - your capital, Mr. President -
on 12 and 13 October. Syria has submitted its national
report to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the
implementation of that resolution.

Syria was among the first States to sign the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) in 1968. We do not possess any nuclear
weapons, any means of their delivery or any material
that can be used for their manufacture. We also signed
a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 1992.

Meanwhile, Israel is the only party in the Middle
East that possesses a huge arsenal of nuclear weapons
and that refuses to accede to the NPT. Its facilities are
not subject to any verification. Therefore, the
accumulated negative impact of Israel's non-compliance
with the NPT reflects Israel's disrespect for resolution
1540 (2004) and its disregard for the IAEA and all
international efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament.

Finally, my country calls once again for the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East. In that connection, we wish to refer to the
draft resolution that my country submitted to the
Security Council in 2003 during our Council
membership (see S/2003/1219), calling for the
establishment of such a zone in the region.

