Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation is very pleased to see
Mr. Lloyd Axworthy, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Canada, preside over today's formal meeting of the
Security Council. We thank Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga,
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC); Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF); and Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for children and armed conflict, for the briefings
they just gave us. We appreciate the active efforts made
by the ICRC, UNICEF and the Special Representative of

 

the Secretary-General in protecting civilians in armed
conflict around the world.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
always been the concern of Governments and of bodies
such as the General Assembly. Today many regions of the
world are still plagued by armed conflict, which not only
threatens peace and security in those regions and in the
world at large but also brings untold suffering to the people
of the countries and regions involved. Civilians are
subjected to forcible displacement and violent assault.
Women and children in particular, as one of the most
vulnerable social groups, are most gravely affected in
conflict situations. This calls for the full attention of the
international community.

We believe that the ultimate way to protect civilians
in armed conflict is effectively to prevent and eliminate all
armed conflicts. The root cause of humanitarian crises must
be addressed through ethnic reconciliation, confidence-
building measures, economic development and the
maintenance of national stability.

We also believe that regardless of when and where
conflicts break out, the parties involved should be urged to
end them as soon as possible through peaceful means; to
abide strictly by the relevant international laws, including
international humanitarian law; to provide, as best they can,
protection and assistance to civilians; and to prevent and
prohibit all forms of violent assault against civilians or
attempts to impede the provision of humanitarian assistance
to civilians.

The Chinese delegation maintains that the international
community cannot afford to turn away from humanitarian
crises. However, the current tendency in international
relations to politicize humanitarian issues and interfere in a
country's internal affairs under the guise of
humanitarianism cannot but cause us concern. In a
humanitarian crisis, the wilful invocation of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations to use force, or even the
unilateral use or threat of use of force, against a sovereign
State without the authorization of the Security Council, with
no consideration given to the specific causes of the crisis,
will only complicate matters and further intensify the
conflict. In this connection, we hope that the countries and
organizations concerned will abide strictly by the principles
of international law and the Charter of the United Nations
and respect, in real earnest, the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all countries.

We call for the elimination of double standards in
the humanitarian field. The international community
should give equal attention to all incidents involving
civilian losses in armed conflict, regardless of where they
occur. In this respect, the situation in Africa has been
very troubling in recent years. In some areas of the
region, crises are escalating, while in others old conflicts
are being rekindled. Civilians, especially women and
children, are undergoing agonizing pain and sufferings.
The international community should take the necessary
steps to support the efforts of African countries and
organizations to resolve their "hot-spot" issues and to
provide meaningful and effective assistance to help keep
civilians out of harm's way.

We are of the view that in the light of the nature and
scope of the matter, it is appropriate that the question of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict be placed on
the agenda of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council for more thorough and comprehensive
discussions. We are in favour of strengthening the
Security Council's cooperation and coordination with the
General Assembly and other United Nations organs. We
support greater information exchange between the
Security Council on the one hand and the ICRC,
UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other organizations on
the other. Once the so-called division of labour is clear,
each and every organ and institutions will be able to
concentrate on its own sphere of responsibility.

The Chinese Government has always attached great
importance to the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and participated actively in deliberations on this matter in
the General Assembly and other related organs. We are in
favour of the President of the Council's issuing a
statement to demonstrate the attention the Council devotes
to this matter.

