Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to welcome
Ms. Delcy Rodriguez Gomez, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the friendly nation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, to this important meeting. We
also wish to congratulate Venezuela on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February. We shall spare no effort in our
support for Venezuela and its honourable approach to
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
would like to stress the following points.

First, only one parameter should be adopted
in upholding the rule of law at the international
level, maintaining international peace and security,
achieving development and promoting cordial
relationships between Member States. That parameter
is strict respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, at the forefront of which are respect
for the sovereignty territorial integrity of States, equal
sovereignty, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. Any
attempt to impose new concepts and terms without
consensus, and at the expense of the provisions of the
Charter that were adopted by Member States, would
undermine the cumulative legal heritage of Member
States and represent a setback.

Today, we have heard extremely worrying
statements made on behalf of permanent members of
the Security Council, which are supposed to be the
guardians of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
Those statements, calling for interventionist policies,
are a violation of the principle of sovereignty under
various pretexts that leave the door wide open to the
recurrent illegitimate military interventions against
many Member States, which increased instability and
weakened of the United Nations.

The representatives of these permanent members,
Britain and France, have forgotten the suffering that
the policies of their Governments have perpetuated
in recent decades, mainly in the Middle East. They
have forgotten the support they provided to the Israeli
occupation of the occupied Arab territories, and their
frequent use of the veto in support of that ongoing
occupation, in addition to the targeting, destruction and
occupation of Iraq and Libya, and attempts to undermine
the legitimate Government of my country, not unlike
what those countries have done in Latin America and
around the world. Such a political ideology undermines
the credibility of international law and will lead to a
repetition of grave mistakes instead of apologies for
previous bloody errors.

Secondly, the seven decades since the establishment
of the United Nations have highlighted the need for
strict adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter and to reform some working methods and
strengthen others in a manner that would allow the
United Nations to fully play its role, and to preserve
its credibility and legitimacy. Throughout its history,
the United Nations has grappled with the attempts of
influential countries to turn it into a tool for serving their
interests and policies in total disregard of the principles
of international law and the purposes of the Charter.
That has been crystal clear since the Organization's
early years. It has shown itself to be helpless in the
face of such attempts and incapable of taking adequate
measures to implement many internationally legitimate
resolutions in accordance with the Charter, particularly
those calling for an end to the Israeli occupation of
the Syrian Golan, the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and the remaining occupied lands
of southern Lebanon, and to Israel's aggression against
the Arab citizens under the yoke of occupation.

That has also been made clear through attempts to
manipulate the provisions of the Charter, use double
standards and invent new concepts and terms, aimed
at circumventing the Charter and the principles of
international law, that are not agreed on by consensus
and have been used to justify bloody military
interventions in countries that have resulted in the
fomenting of terrorism. Libya, for example, has become
a hot spot and a breeding ground for terrorism today.
Thirdly, the United Nations, having defeated
Nazism and fascism, has now once again been called on
to repeat that victory against the onslaught of terrorist
organizations such as Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and
other entities that are active in Syria and linked to
Al-Qaida, including Jaish Al-Islam, Ahrar Al-Sham,
Boko Haram, the East Turkestan Islamic Movement,
Ansar Al-Sharia, Al-Shabaab, Jamaat Al-Islamiyya
and the Caucasus Emirate, as well as many others. In
that regard, my delegation would like to reiterate that
no efforts to combat terrorism can succeed if they
run counter to the provisions of the Charter and the
principles of international law, if they are carried out
without prior coordination with the country concerned
and while some countries use terrorism as a foreign
policy tool and the State-sponsored terrorism is ignored.

In that context, we should reaffirm that the
attempts by some Member States to justify their
military intervention in Syria, on the pretext of
combating Da'esh and complying with Article 51 of
the Charter, distort those provisions of the Charter and
constitute a surreal manipulation of international law
that undermines Syrian sovereignty, thus prolonging
the life of terrorism and sheltering its sponsors. The
only effective way to combat terrorism is to establish
a legitimate, proactive international coalition with the
participation of the countries concerned, including the
Syrian Government and State.

The situation in Syria throws the unfortunate state
of the United Nations into relief. Since the earliest
days of the crisis, members of the Organization have
exploited the Security Council in order to interfere
blatantly in Syria's internal affairs. That has further
inflamed the violence and terrorism, has promoted false
claims and lies, demonized the Syrian Government
and aggravated the crisis, in addition to hindering
efforts to arrive at a peaceful settlement. All of these
are part of efforts to undermine Syria's stability,
security and national sovereignty and attempting to
change its regime by force. The Governments of the
States concerned fabricated and invented artificial
entities that they promoted as an alternative to Syria's
legitimate Government, and all of this was carried out
in the context of lies aimed atjustifying the invasion of
Syria, a State Member of the United Nations, in order to
change its regime through the use of force.

This was in addition to imposing unilateral coercive
measures depriving the Syrian people of daily needs such
as food, medicine and fuel, along with further inflaming
the situation in order to create false humanitarian
pretexts justifying military intervention - a situation
that also recalls the experience of Libya with a situation
that its entire people, indeed the whole world, is still
suffering from. All of this has occurred without any
apology, awakening of conscience or change in these
countries' disastrous and shameful policies, which have
only resulted in more bloodshed and suffering.

Matters have not stopped there. The Governments
of States Members of the Organization have gathered
mercenaries, takfiris and foreign terrorist fighters from
all over the world. They have armed and funded these
terrorist criminals and sent them to Syria and Iraq,
wrongly terming them jihadis or moderate opposition.
They have been sent to Syria in order to use our country
as a base for their terrorist entities and in order to launch
attacks from Syria on other countries around the world.
Some have thought it wise to use the term "Islamic
caliphate" as a title for Da'esh terrorists, in order to
insinuate that Da'esh terrorism is a State effort. In that
regard, I have to wonder about the commitment those
countries made, when they joined the United Nations,
to peaceful coexistence as good neighbours with other
nations. Where is their respect for the principles of
international law concerning friendly relations, as laid
down in General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) of
1970? How can we interpret the silence in the United
Nations surrounding these Governments' systematic
violations of resolutions on counter-terrorism such as
resolution 2253 (2015), 2199 (2015), 2178 (2014), 2170
(2014), 1373 (2001) and 1269 (1999)?

Over the past few days, the Turkish Government
has continued its acts of aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Turkey's armed forces intervened directly
in support of the terrorism the country sponsors. The
regime has repeatedly used mercenaries and foreign
terrorist fighters that it has introduced, in partnership
with other countries, into my country. The forces of
the Erdogan regime have used heavy artillery to bomb
areas occupied by Syrian Kurds and Syrian Arab army
sites inside Syrian territory. On top of that, dozens of
vehicles carrying machine guns and armed terrorist
mercenaries have been sent to the area of Syria around
A'zaz, besides Turkey allowing extreme terrorist
groups to transit through Turkey to Syria in support of
the Al-Nusra Front or Da'esh inside Syria. In addition
to that, the Turkish regime has given those terrorist
gangs chemical weapons that they can use against
Syrian civilians and Government forces - chemical
attacks that have been used as a pretext for indicting the
Syrian Government. Those efforts have been conducted
in tandem with calls from the Saudi regime for a
military intervention in my country, under the pretext
of combating the terrorism carried out by Da'esh, an
organization founded and sponsored by the Saudi
regime itself.

Despite everything I have just mentioned, the
Council has remained helpless, silent and unable to
put an end to the attacks and aggression, and unable
to carry out its main role, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are discussing
tragic facts, and therefore feel great sorrow for the
hundreds of Syrians killed each day while the United
Nations remains helpless and unable to hold the
perpetrators of international terrorism accountable.

The situation has reached unprecedented levels.
Indeed, carelessness has reached unprecedented levels
when Saudi Arabia is entrusted with the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, Qatar is the sponsor of the
Dialogue among Civilizations, Turkey will host the
World Humanitarian Summit and Jordan, before the
end of its mandated term as a Council member, was a
member of the "peace troika" with Saudi Arabia and

Egypt.

The Council President indicated in the concept note
(S/2016/103, annex) that the United Nations remains the
best possible option in confronting the conflicts and
mammoth challenges that are facing humankind. We
agree with that. However, the United Nations must fill
in the gaps - the enormous gaps - and undertake its
responsibilities towards its Member States, according
to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and in fulfilment of the aims of the founding fathers.

