Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of Guinea-
Bissau, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, as well as to convey
to you my sincere wishes for the success of your work.
I also wish to extend to the members of the Council our
deep gratitude for having devoted particular attention
in recent years to the situation in my country.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his enlightening report (S/2013/681) of
the reality on the ground in my country, which has just
been introduced, as well as to thank him for his tireless
commitment to the cause of Guinea-Bissau.

We pay well-deserved tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-
Bissau, Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, for the new impetus
he has brought to the transition process in my country.
We hope that we will be able to continue to count on
his long experience in support of our peacebuilding
process.

I thank Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and President of
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba,
Permanent Representative of cote d'Ivoire and
Chair of the Economic Community of African States
(ECOWAS); and Ambassador Antenio Gumende,
Permanent Representative of Mozambique and Chair
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), for their respective commitment to the
transition process under way in my country.

I speak before the Security Council at a time
when my country is heading towards the end of the
transition period started after the coup d'e'tat of April
2012. Despite efforts by our authorities, the timeline
initially established by ECOWAS, and approved by the
transitional authorities of my country, could not be met,
resulting in the postponement of the general elections
that were scheduled for 24 November.
In that context, we would like to pay tribute to
ECOWAS, whose member States were able to provide
a large part of the budget required for the elections at
the latest summit held in Dakar, on 25 October. I also
wish to express our sincere thanks to People's Republic
of China for its invaluable support, as well as to the
European Union for its financial contribution to the
process.

Guinea-Bissau duly appreciates the intentions
expressed by other bilateral partners to support the
electoral process, as that will allow us to achieve the
restoration of constitutional order in accordance with
the requirements of the international community, in
general, and particularly the desire of the people of
Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to take this opportunity to express the
deep gratitude of my country vis-a-Vis a brother country
that has made the decision to engage with the people
and the authorities of Guinea-Bissau at a particularly
time difficult. The Republic of Timor-Leste, a CPLP
member State, has taken full responsibility for the
entire process of voter registration. This is the second
time in the history of our democracy that this process
has reached out to the diaspora.

Given those conditions, and in the spirit of resolution
2048 (2012), the Transitional President issued a decree
setting a new date for the general elections - 16 March
2014. Voter registration must therefore begin in the
coming days, that is, on 1 December.

As the Council is aware, elections in Guinea-Bissau
will be but a first step in a process that should naturally
begin with the restoration of the constitutional order,
with a View to providing our country with legitimate
institutions so that, in collaboration with all our
partners, it will lead the country to peace and enable it
to face the challenges that are before us. We are fully
aware of the magnitude, and at times the complexity,
of our challenges. But our belief that Guinea-Bissau
is a viable country where everyone can live in peace
remains unassailable.

In the post-election period, we will very much
need the support of the international community,
as recommended by the Secretary-General's report
of 6 May (S/2013/262), as the challenges we face are
numerous and often complex in the our current political,
social and economic contributionext.

Reform in the defence and security sectors
remains at the top of the hierarchy of priorities for
our country. However, beyond that imperative, other
equally important challenges also lie ahead. They
include the fight against drug trafficking, ensuring
the effective functioning of the judiciary, creating
conditions conducive to the promotion of human rights
and building the capacity of the public administration
to ensure good governance, so that our country can also
aspire to develop in the manner our people so desire.
In that context, I would like to take this opportunity to
appeal to all our international partners to continue to
support Guinea-Bissau in this phase.

Guinea-Bissau is currently facing a social crisis
of unprecedented proportions owing to the sanctions
imposed by our main partners following the break
in the constitutional order that was the result of the
12 April coup. We understand those measures, but it
should be recalled that the sanctions' effects go beyond
political considerations and should rather be looked at
from a humanitarian perspective, in regard to which we
call on Guinea-Bissau's partner organizations to lift
the sanctions in order to minimize the consequences
of the crisis that the country is currently undergoing.
We welcome the initiative of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in July in making
$5 million available to the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, which has
enabled it to undertake some pre-electoral activities.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my thanks
to the members of the Security Council for their
commitment to finding solutions to the situation that
Guinea-Bissau finds itself in.

