Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for his very informative briefing. Since this was the first time I have had the pleasure of hearing him speak, I commend his fluent command of French, which makes an outstanding contribution to the linguistic diversity of our Organization, for which I thank him. His briefing once again underscores the usefulness of regular discussions regarding the Great Lakes region. The timing is relevant because, as we know, the United Nations is currently developing a new strategy for the region, as well as a new approach with regard to Burundi. Let me take this opportunity to make three points on the role of the United Nations, the regional dimension of the problem and human rights, including the universal right to high-quality education. First, Belgium welcomes the development of a new strategy for the Great Lakes region. We look forward to continuing to contribute to this actively as the process draws to a close. In that regard, allow me to thank Special Envoy Xia for its multiple and transparent consultations with various stakeholders, including my country, Belgium. This has involved several bilateral contacts, his personal participation in our Arria Formula meeting on 15 July, on illegal exploitation of natural resources, and numerous interactions with the International Contact Group. Our expectations are high. We are convinced that the new strategy will encompass all pillars of the United Nations, including sustainable development and human rights. We hope that the strategy will allow us to have an adequate and coherent United Nations footprint in the context of the gradual exit from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and an adaptation of the United Nations approach and presence in Burundi. Secondly, although there have been indications of an improvement in regional dynamics, I note that the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/951) and the Special Envoy's briefing continue to refer to multiple bilateral disputes involving several of the neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This shows the continued importance of the good offices of the Special Envoy, which also contributed to the convening of the mini-summit in Goma last week. Belgium also welcomes the continued involvement of several regional institutions, including the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development Community. I am also convinced that the Democratic Republic of the Congo's chairmanship of the African Union (AU) next year will give new impetus in this context. Regional problems require regional solutions. In this regard, Belgium and the European Union will play their role as strategic partners of both the AU and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We therefore fully support our Congolese partners in their future efforts. Thirdly and finally, despite the worrying persistence of widespread human rights violations in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, we can welcome some positive developments in this context. The recent convictions of soldiers and police officers who committed sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are important steps in the fight against impunity for human rights violations. The adoption of a new national action plan for women, peace and security is another key development towards better protection for and the equal participation of women and girls. Another welcome development is the revitalization of the regional platform for youth engagement. In this regard, let me also refer to our Arria Formula meeting of 2 October, at which we underlined the need for access to education in conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as the importance of new technologies in that regard. Closer regional cooperation in this context could, while respecting all sensitivities, also lead to the sharing of best practices in the region, and we know that UNICEF has described some of these as model practices in terms of the uses of new technologies for education, including for children and adolescents, refugees and internally displaced persons. Likewise, we welcome the ongoing demobilization efforts specifically focused on children in armed conflict. In this regard, it is essential to facilitate the access of MONUSCO and UNICEF child protection advisers to demobilization centres.
