Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their insightful briefings.

Having carefully followed the briefing by
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, with a
comprehensive overview of the conflict, allow me to
express our deep concern at not seeing the progress
envisaged under the Stockholm Agreement, signed
between the Government of Yemen and the Houthi
movement last December. I would also like to express
our concern over all the apparent complexities of the
trajectory of the conflict in recent months.

Despite that situation, on the one hand, the
delegation of Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the
ongoing joint efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Mission to
support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), the
Redeployment Coordination Committee and all United
Nations partners currently in Yemen. On the other
hand, we also recognize the level of cooperation of the
Yemeni parties to the Stockholm Agreement, which has
enabled the progress to this stage.

We welcome the successful results achieved by the
Redeployment Coordination Committee at the July and
September meetings, including the final agreement on
the technical modalities for a redeployment of forces
from the city of Hodeidah and the ports of Hodeidah,
Saleef and Ras Isa in two redeployment phases, as well
as the implementation of the tripartite ceasefire and
de-escalation mechanism, comprising liaison officers
from both sides and UNMHA.

We echo the Special Envoy's praise for the parties'
openness to new measures, including periodic meetings
in areas along the front line of the city of Al-Hudaydah
and the opening of key humanitarian corridors. But
we also agree that it is important for this openness to
translate into concrete actions on the ground, as this
would improve access to the greatly needed humanitarian
and commercial imports for Yemeni population.

On 26 August, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates issued a joint statement in which they
expressed their willingness to promote the ceasefire
agreement and facilitate constructive dialogue among
the Yemeni parties. As they are two countries from
the region, we hope that the initiative will contribute
to the efforts of the United Nations by facilitating an
environment conducive to reconciling all parties to
the conflict.

The suffering of the Yemeni population to this
day is intolerable. A recent report by a group of
United Nations human rights experts (A/HRC/42/l7)
denounces a number of possible war crimes, including
indiscriminate bombing, arbitrary killing and detention,
torture, the use of landmines, and sexual and gender-
based violence. In this regard, my delegation calls on all
parties to take all necessary measures to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights.

I cannot conclude without calling on the Yemeni
Government, the Houthi movement, armed groups in
the south and all stakeholders in Yemen to seek to free
children, women and the population in general from
this five-year-long terror. Accordingly, we hope that
Security Council members will continue to support
the Special Envoy's mediation efforts and that the
international community, and the States with an interest
and influence in Yemen, will put the necessary pressure
on all the parties to the conflict to find a sustainable
political solution.

