The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Foreign Trade of Jamaica.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi,
for their very informative briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan, at a time when the situation in the
territory clearly demands the attention of the
international community.

We all have been following the developments
carefully in recent weeks, during which time dramatic
events have taken place. The situation that has emerged
has very significant dimensions in relation to its
military, political and humanitarian aspects.

With regard to the military situation, we note this
morning's reports of the changing situation on the
ground and the withdrawal of the Taliban from Kabul.
This change in the control of the capital must not result
in further atrocities. It should be the start of a process
leading to peace and national reconciliation. The fight
for territory must be replaced by the promotion of
stability and an effort to accurately and clearly reflect
the will of the Afghan people in any new political
arrangement.

Jamaica remains committed to the search for a
lasting and comprehensive solution to the crisis in the
territory. We support the creation of a broad-based,
representative government for a democratic and stable
leadership of Afghanistan. It is important that work be
undertaken towards establishing political arrangements
that are broadly acceptable to the people of
Afghanistan.

We agree that the United Nations has an
important role to play to assist in this process. It is in
this context that we welcome the appointment of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Brahimi, the important talks he has
already engaged in with key officials in the region and
the framework for action that he has presented to the
Council today.

With winter approaching, greater urgency is now
attached to the critical humanitarian situation. Jamaica
commends the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations for their contributions
to alleviating the suffering of the people of
Afghanistan. We also commend the United Nations
Children's Fund, the World Food Programme and other
agencies over the last few weeks for their efforts to get
supplies into Afghanistan for their innovative efforts to
find alternate routes for the delivery of food, and for
their targeting of regions where the need is greatest.
The humanitarian situation will be greatly
assisted by an overall political solution. There has to be
a stable environment in which humanitarian agencies
can function effectively and have unhindered access to
those in greatest need. We wish to reiterate that the
safety and security of United Nations personnel,
including all humanitarian workers, should be
guaranteed both inside Afghanistan and in
neighbouring countries.

The influx of refugees into neighbouring
countries and their dismal conditions in refugee camps
also require our immediate attention. We support the
opening of borders in neighbouring countries for the
provision of assistance to those countries to enable
them to deal with this crisis. Special attention must be
paid to the situation of Afghan women and girls, who
have been denied access to health, education and basic
civil rights. We agree with Ambassador Brahimi that
the transition process must involve the participation of
individuals and groups, including women, who have
previously been excluded.

In closing, Jamaica would like to stress that the
political and humanitarian objectives for Afghanistan
can be accomplished only with the assistance and
cooperation of neighbouring countries and the wider
international community. It is in that context that we
welcome the meeting yesterday of the "six plus two"
group and its expressed commitment to supporting the
efforts of the Afghan people in the search for a political
solution. We also attach importance to the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Brahimi, as his efforts will be
instrumental for the establishment of political
arrangements to stabilize the situation. This is the
challenge that now confronts us.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are still a number of speakers remaining on
my list. In view of the lateness of the hour, I intend,
with the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3.30 this afternoon.

The meeting was suspended at 1.25 pm.
