Mr. Dauth (Australia): I will be very brief, but it
would be wrong for Australia not to today join with
others in thanking Mr. Guehenno and his team for the
excellent report they provided us with and in
welcoming very warmly the successful staging of the
elections for East Timor's first Constituent Assembly.
We want also to associate ourselves with others in
congratulating very warmly my friend Sergio Vieira de
Mello and his entire team at the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and all of those who were responsible for ensuring that
the election process was peaceful, transparent and fair.
We, too, would like to join others in warmly
congratulating Indonesia for the highly constructive
role that it has played before, during and after the
elections. Above all, we pay tribute to the people of
East Timor, whose overwhelming participation in the
election process demonstrated yet again their shared
determination to move towards an independent and
democratic future.

The establishment of a multi-party Constituent
Assembly in the coming weeks marks, of course, the
beginning of a new phase in the transition to
independence and we wish them well in their important
immediate task in drafting a Constitution for the new
State. The broad representation of parties in the
Constituent Assembly should help in this process and
we, like others, are particularly encouraged by the
commendable presence their of 23 women.

Australia is, of course, a close and supportive
neighbour of East Timor and we will continue to
cooperate closely with its people, their elected
representatives and the Timorese Cabinet as they work
through the coming phase of the transition.

Finally, may I say how much we look forward to
working with the Council in the coming months as it
begins to address the key decisions which will
determine the future United Nations presence in East
Timor and the assistance it will offer to the
independent East Timorese Government. Strong
ongoing support from the Council through the
provision of a sound funding base and through sound
strategic planning will be critical to ensuring a peaceful
and sustainable outcome in that new country.

