Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive and
insightful briefing. I would also like to assure him of
our full support.
As we heard last week from the representative of
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
(see S/PV.8515), the humanitarian situation in Syria is
particularly worrying. Let me stress that our actions
aimed at protecting the population and providing a
collective response to the humanitarian challenges
should be of the utmost priority. We must prevent any
military hostilities from bringing about disastrous
humanitarian consequences. This is a sine qua non for
reaching a sustainable peace agreement.

The demand for accountability for war crimes
cannot override the simultaneous responsibility to
protect civilians. In this context, all parties to the conflict
should refrain from and condemn arbitrary detention,
the taking of hostages and forced disappearances.

We must be resolute in implementing effective
measures to prevent and combat terrorism. In that
regard, we would like to encourage the parties involved
to make efforts to ensure that military escalation is
avoided at all costs, especially in north-east Syria,
where it could easily lead to the re-emergence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

I would like to underline that the only way towards
durable peace is an intra-Syrian framework political
agreement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

We hope that the coordinated efforts of Russia
and Turkey, based on their agreement on the Idlib
de-escalation zone, will help to stabilize the tense
situation in that area. We ask them to follow through
on their commitment and protect civilians as a matter
of priority.

We look forward to the establishment of the
constitutional committee. Let me underline that
the success of this undertaking requires the full and
constructive engagement of all parties to the conflict.
It can succeed only when the Syrian authorities
participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the European
Union common position on the reconstruction of Syria.
We fully support the safe return of Syrian refugees.

