Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): It is an honour for
Costa Rica to speak in its capacity as Chair of the
Human Security Network and on behalf of its
members: Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand
and Slovenia, and South Africa as an observer.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
one of the priorities of the Human Security Network.
Therefore, we would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council for the organization
of this important debate, as well as the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2010/579).

In just over 10 years since the first peacekeeping
operation with an explicit mandate for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict was deployed in Sierra
Leone, we have accumulated valuable experience and
made important progress with a view to establishing a
comprehensive framework in the Security Council
through thematic resolutions on the protection of
civilians, as well as other milestone resolutions,
including 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008), 1882
(2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894 (2009). We
have entered a new era of multidimensional
peacekeeping operations with large civilian
components, including the promotion and protection of
human rights, the facilitation of humanitarian relief,
capacity-building, the restoration of infrastructure and
services, and security sector reform.
10-64740

However, despite the increased attention of this
Council, the prevalence of civilian casualties and the
number of people affected by armed conflict are still
appalling. We are deeply concerned about attacks
against refugees and internally displaced persons
camps, as well as against humanitarian workers; the
use of sexual violence and forced displacement as
tactics of war; the prevalence of child recruitment; the
proliferation of illegal trafficking and the misuse of
small arms and light weapons; and the danger posed by
explosive weapons, landmines and other remnants of
war. We also deplore the continued targeting of
civilians in situations of armed conflict, the
indiscriminate use of force and the use of civilian
populations as human shields in those situations.

Another challenge is the role increasingly played
by private security companies in situations of armed
conflict. In this context, the Human Security Network
takes note of the recent signature of an international
code of conduct by around 60 private security
companies, according to which they undertake to
respect human rights and humanitarian law in their
operations.

The Security Council, as the principal organ for
addressing threats to international peace and security,
should respond to prevent violations of international
law and to protect civilian populations in all situations
of armed conflict without distinction. This also
includes assisting in creating the conditions conducive
to the rapid and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance while ensuring the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel.

We also recognize the importance of including
the protection of civilians as a component of
peacekeeping mandates, as well as clear guidelines and
rules of engagement, without prejudice to the primary
responsibility of the host Government to protect its
civilians. In addition, it is also necessary to address
other major constraints faced by peacekeeping
operations, such as resources, equipment, the timely
disbursement of funding, predeployment and
in-mission training.

We welcome the Secretariat's efforts in
establishing clear guidance and developing an
operational concept for peacekeeping missions on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Furthermore,
a stronger partnership on protection with troop- and
7

police-contributing countries, host Governments and
local populations should be developed.

Fostering international humanitarian law and
practices is inextricably linked with the fight against
impunity. Ending impunity for violations of
international law and human rights law should be seen
as part of a comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. The restoration and promotion of the
rule of law, security sector reform and transitional
justice mechanisms are also key areas where national
systems should be strengthened and supported by
enhanced international cooperation. The International
Criminal Court, as well as other mixed courts and
tribunals, can play an important complementary role in
prosecuting persons suspected of committing mass
atrocities.

Lastly, the Human Security Network notes with
appreciation the important work of the informal Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians, which was
established in January 2009.

