Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I apologize for
requesting the floor for a second time. I realize that it
is late, and I had not planned to ask for the floor at this
time. But I have done so mainly to respond to the
representative of the United States. I also want to add
that the continuous effort by the representative of
Israel, the occupying Power, to repeat the assertion that
Gaza is not part of the occupied Palestinian territory is
a repeated exercise in futility. Because of the lateness
of the hour, I would like only to refer him to the many
distinguished scholars and authorities in the area of
international humanitarian law from all corners of the
globe, including Israel. They have proved, without a
shadow of a doubt, that Gaza has the status of being
under the control of Israel, the occupying Power. In
that connection, I will refer to only one scholar,
Mr. John Dugard, who has articulated this point very
extensively from the point of view of international
humanitarian law.

With regard to the reference made by my
colleague from the United States to the statement of
President Abbas, we know very well what the
President's position is regarding the rockets. In my
statement, I went beyond the position of President
Abbas, referring to him twice. I said that it was to his
credit that he had succeeded in organizing a unilateral
ceasefire - that is, stopping the rockets - and that it
was Israel through its continuous incursions,
extrajudicial executions and aggression against the
Palestinians that had broken that unilateral ceasefire
twice.

However, during the past three weeks, President
Abbas has not only expressed his position that he
opposes the firing of rockets because they are used as
an excuse by Israel to continue its aggression, but has
also made many statements condemning Israel's
continuing aggression against our people in Gaza,
including the siege and the extrajudicial executions. In
fact, President Abbas wanted to declare a three-day
period of mourning after the massacre committed in
Gaza not too long ago. So, if one wants to refer to the
position of President Abbas on this issue, it should be
referred to in its totality.

Beyond that, as a member of the Arab Group, we
showed a tremendous amount of flexibility and balance
when we agreed to refer to the rockets in the draft
presidential statement, which received the support of
14 members of the Security Council two days before
last Friday. By so doing, we demonstrated that we were
willing to deal with the issue of the rockets.

Yet the main reason for the tragedy in Gaza is not
the firing of rockets. The position of our President is
well known: he is against the firing of rockets, and he
worked diligently to organize two ceasefires. The main
reason is the occupation; the main reason is the
incursions; the main reason is the starvation of
1.5 million Palestinian civilians in Gaza; the main
reason is the extrajudicial executions; the main reason
is the incarceration of 1.5 million people in a huge
prison. To use Under-Secretary-General Holmes's
expression, that is a collective punishment and a
Violation of international law. To try to reach
agreement in the Security Council without balancing
the draft, looking at only one of its aspects - the
firing of rockets - without considering all the other
issues facing the Palestinian people, is not balanced
and not fair. And that is exactly what we said.

But be that as it may, we are delighted by this
debate and by the exercise by which the 15 members of
this Council supported the initiative of the Palestinian
Authority to deal with the crossings into Gaza. That is
the concrete solution to this tragedy regarding our
people in Gaza. The borders need to be opened, people
need to get in and out, goods need to get in and out.

Therefore, this exercise of trying to punish
1.5 million Palestinian people because some people
have political positions vis-a-Vis a political party that is
powerful in Gaza is not working. We should not play
with the lives of 1.5 million civilians in Gaza. That
should be put aside to that we can concentrate on the
practical political elements that we need to face.

The most important element is to deal with
opening the borders. We thank all members of the
Council for supporting the initiative of the Palestinian
Authority to assume the responsibility at all of the
crossings from the Palestinian side. We also thank the
Quartet for that position, as well as the Arab League
ministerial meeting.

Our President is working very hard with
President Mubarak, with the Europeans, the Israelis,
the Americans and others, to find a solution to this
situation. If we succeed, and we hope that we do -
and the Council's help in this connection is very
valuable - then we can put an end to the tragedy that
the civil population in Gaza is facing.

That would not mean that we have succeeded in
putting an end to the occupation that started in 1967, as
President Bush put it clearly, but we hope that through
negotiations with the Israeli side, and with the help of
all the members of the Council, we will succeed before
the end of the year 2008 in reaching a peace treaty to
put an end to occupation and allow our Palestinian
State to be born in all of the areas that Israel occupied
in 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and with a
just, agreed-upon resolution to the refugee question on
the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

