Mr. Kolby (Norway): Let me first of all say how
pleased I am to see you, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, in this
Council. We look forward to working even closer with
you when Norway takes over as Commander of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) next month. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report.

My Government welcomes and supports the
efforts by the Special Representative and the staff of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), as well that of KFOR, to find
solutions to the problems in Kosovo and to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

We welcome the initiation of a process towards
establishing a legal framework for provisional self-
government, as outlined by Mr. Haekkerup. Norway is
of the opinion that the highest priority must be given to
establish a safe environment for the minorities, which
is a prerequisite for an acceptable solution to Kosovo's
problems. Any attempt to reach agreement on the legal
framework for elections, however well prepared, is
likely to fail if widespread violence and violations of
the human rights of minority groups in Kosovo
continue. In our view, Kosovo Albanian leaders must
take greater responsibility for actively preventing
ethnically motivated violence and combating
extremism and crime. Kosovo Serb leaders have the
same responsibility, especially in the area north of the
Ibar River.

Strengthening the judiciary and law enforcement
must be an essential and integrated part of the process
aimed at developing a legal framework for provisional
self-government in Kosovo. The lack of public trust in
the law enforcement agencies and in the judiciary
makes this an urgent task for UNMIK. We therefore
welcome the priority given by Mr. Haekkerup to this
issue.

We believe it is important that preparations for
province-wide elections have started and that elections
be held only when all necessary requirements have
been met. Premature or ill-prepared elections for a
provincial assembly risk undermining the stability we
set out to bolster. The role and functions of a provincial
assembly, including in relation to the powers retained
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
under resolution 1244 (1999), must be clarified first.
Registration of voters, including refugees and
displaced persons, must be conducted. Consultations
between UNMIK and the Yugoslav authorities are
essential in order to ensure Belgrade's political support
for moving forward in this process.

In elaborating a framework for elections, we must
ensure arrangements that facilitate the participation of
minorities and allow for their legitimate interests to be
adequately protected. To that end, it is essential that the
Kosovo Serb community be represented in the joint
Working Group. We would like to take this opportunity
to encourage Yugoslav authorities to use their influence
to ensure the participation of the Kosovo Serbs in these
important endeavours.

It is of utmost importance that the elections be
seen as meaningful. All provisions of resolution 1244
(1999) must be kept in mind, including the provision
regarding substantial autonomy for Kosovo. The most
important feature of elections is not to hold them, but
what they result in.

Norway strongly condemns the violence carried
out by armed ethnic Albanian extremists in the area
surrounding Kosovo, which have caused the death of
both Yugoslav and Macedonian soldiers. The
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries in
the region must be fully respected and supported. Any
action violating these fundamentals must be
condemned. The Council will reiterate this in the
statement to be made by the President today.
All ethnic Albanian political leaders in the region
who have not yet done so must publicly condemn such
acts of violence. We believe the Kosovo Albanian
leaders have a particular responsibility to reject
violence and promote political dialogue. We welcome
the statements made by the Government of Albania in
this regard.

It is important to recognize Macedonian security
concerns. There is a serious threat to the stability of the
country. We support the Macedonian authorities in their
legitimate efforts to restore internal peace and security.
The Government in Skopje is to be commended for
their measured response to the activities of the
extremist groups. It is essential that the security
response is proportional to the challenges on the
ground and is based on a broad domestic consensus
within Macedonia.

Norway stresses the importance of the decision
by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to allow the
phased and controlled return of Yugoslav forces to the
ground safety zone in southern Serbia. It is vital that
confidence-building measures be implemented on the
Yugoslav side aimed at creating a climate conducive to
reaching a political solution. We welcome the cease-
fire agreements signed on 12 March. It is particularly
important that armed ethnic Albanian groups comply
fully with the terms of these agreements, refrain from
provocations and engage constructively in substantial
dialogue. At the same time, we expect the Yugoslav
forces to continue their restraint also after having
entered the ground safety zone.

