The President (spoke in French): Before turning
to the item on our agenda, I would like, on behalf of all
delegations, to express the great sorrow we felt on
learning of the tragic event involving Ambassador
Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, who was the victim of a car
accident in Mexico. We all remember the contribution
that Adolfo Aguilar Zinser made to the work of the
Council as Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations from February 2002 to November
2003. He vigorously defended his country's positions
while also being a committed champion of modern
multilateralism. In him we had an excellent colleague
known for his reliability, constructive approach and
openness. In short, Adolfo Aguilar Zinser was a
talented diplomat. We shall long miss him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

Letter dated 26 May 2005 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2005/346)

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/346, which contains a letter dated 26
May 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council concerning the list of
candidates for ad litem judges to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. In
particular, the Secretary-General proposes that the
Security Council extend the deadline for nominations
for a further 30 days from the date on which it takes a
decision on the matter.

Members also have before them the draft of a
reply that I, as President of the Security Council,
propose to send to the Secretary-General in response to
the aforementioned letter.

Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that
the Security Council endorses the Secretary-General's
proposal and agrees that I should send the letter as
drafted.

It is so decided.

The reply will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2005/371.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.

