Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.

First, I would like to warmly thank today's briefers,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Gamba, UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore
and Ms. Yenny Londofio.

I would also like to thank the Swedish presidency for

having organized today's debate and for its unstinting
efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Resolution 2427 (2018), which the
Council has just adopted, provides a comprehensive
framework for child protection and children's rights,
well-being and empowerment throughout the conflict
cycle to prevent conflict and sustain peace. I must at
this stage acknowledge the indispensable role of child-
protection experts working in countries affected by
conflict, including child-protection advisers in United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions. They do
vital work in challenging environments and deserve the
full support of all States Members ofthe United Nations.

The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) sets out in
detail how children in situations of armed conflict
continue to be subjected to appalling violations of their
human rights. The report highlights the devastating
impact of a number of protracted and new crises and
plays a crucial role by providing us with verified and
impartial information on violations, collected through
the monitoring and reporting mechanism.

But the annual report also documents the progress
that has been achieved, which would not have been
possible without the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba and her team, UNICEF
and other United Nations actors, including United
Nations peacekeeping child-protection teams, and
civil society. We welcome the active role that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba has
played since her appointment last year.

By protecting children and ensuring that their
human rights are respected, we build more stable
and peaceful societies. By properly supporting
children after they have left armed forces or groups,
we make them less vulnerable to re-recruitment, help
to prevent the recurrence of conflict and support
their reintegration into communities. This requires
long-term, sustainably funded, comprehensive and
gender-sensitive reintegration programmes. We must
recognize that children are recruited by groups that
operate across borders, and design reintegration
programmes accordingly.

We cannot wait until there is peace before taking
steps to protect children, but instead integrate child
protection into peace processes. We therefore welcome
the launch of a process to compile practical guidance
on the integration of child protection issues in
peace processes.

Earlier this year we marked the eighteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, a crucial
instrument for the protection of children. I take this
opportunity to encourage all States that have not yet
done so to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol. All
EU member States have endorsed the Paris Principles
and the Paris Commitments, and I call on all States that
have not yet done so to also endorse them.

The children and armed conflict agenda is a
priority for the European Union. EU-funded projects
provide vital assistance to children in a range of
conflict situations. We support efforts to prevent the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, secure their
release and ensure their comprehensive and successful
reintegration through long-term interventions. In the
EU's new Communication on Education in Emergencies
and Protracted Crises, children associated with armed
forces and groups are specifically identified as a group
to be given priority for support in access to education.
The EU's commitment to education in emergencies is
at 8 per cent of its humanitarian aid budget in 2018 and
will increase to 10 per cent as of 2019 - far above the
global average.

The EU is also deeply concerned by the high rate
of sexual Violence against girls and boys in conflict.
In 2017, the EU allocated almost (522 million in humanitarian aid for the prevention of and response to
sexual and gender-based violence worldwide.

Girls are significantly affected by recruitment
and use by armed forces and groups, with some
estimates indicating that as many as 40 per cent of
children associated with armed forces or armed groups
are female. The EU seeks to ensure that the specific
obstacles to the education of girls in emergencies
are fully taken into account in its activities and
programming. Girls should no longer constitute the
invisible side of reintegration programmes.

