Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November and to assure you of my delegation's full
cooperation in the discharge of your duties. We are
confident that your wisdom and well-known leadership
qualities will ensure substantial progress in our work. I
should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari of Nigeria, for his exemplary
stewardship of the Council during the month of October
and applaud his delegation for a job well done.

The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia is currently
entering a crucial phase. The ongoing talks in Dayton,
Ohio, offer some hope that progress will be achieved in the
effort to arrive at a comprehensive political solution to the
conflict. The balanced approach of the draft resolution
before us today reflects the Council's sensitivity to this
reality, while it remains steadfast to the principled position
the Council has adopted regarding violations of
international humanitarian law in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia.

The Indonesian delegation shares the deep concern
expressed in the draft resolution regarding the continuing
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Republic of Croatia, as well as the potential consequences
for the peace process if this terrible and tragic situation is
not expeditiously dealt with. The draft resolution aspires to
take a comprehensive View of the crisis that addresses the
mutual obligations and responsibilities of all the warring
parties. It reiterates the demands and calls made by the
Council in previous resolutions, while taking into account
the most recent developments.

We would like to make particular reference to the
draft resolution's reaffirmation of the demand that the
Bosnian Serb party provide immediate access to
representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other international agencies to persons
displaced and to persons detained or reported missing
from Srebrenica, Zepa, and the regions of Banja Luka and
Sanski Most. Such action is deemed imperative in the
light of the continuing reports of mass murders and
atrocities committed by the Bosnian Serbs in those areas.

In addition, we would like to emphasize the demand
that all States cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal as it performs its investigative functions. To
assist in this endeavour, all parties must refrain from
destroying or tampering with evidence.

My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution now before us. We are confident that the
adoption of this draft resolution will send a clear signal to
the parties concerned regarding the Council's resolve to
put an immediate end to the tragic crisis.

The prospects of this conflict's entering another
winter, which would surely compound the suffering of the
people of this region to an extent not seen since World
War II, should provide a sombre and sobering reminder
of what is at stake. The current reality of the situation
requires nothing less than a coordinated and cooperative
response from this Council if the current opportunity for
a political settlement is to be fully taken advantage of.
We believe, therefore, that support for this draft resolution
is necessary in order to demonstrate a sense of coherence,
cooperation and resolve on the part of the Council as the
peace negotiations continue.

