Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I am
pleased to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.

The European Union (EU) ensures that the Middle
East peace process remains high on its political agenda
at a time when the region faces many other challenges.
The European Union remains fully committed to its
known positions on the parameters for a two-State
solution and to the importance of avoiding steps that
erode the viability of the two-State solution, as laid
down in the Quartet report of July 2016, including in
particular continued Israeli settlement activity, which is
illegal under international law and remains an obstacle
to peace, as reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016), and
acts of incitement and violence.

We are deeply alarmed about the sharp escalation
of violence we witnessed most recently in Gaza, which
left a large number of Palestinians dead and injured.
We underscore the absolute urgency of addressing
the gravity of the humanitarian situation in Gaza and
express our firm support to the efforts of United Nations
Special Coordinator Mladenov in that regard. Israel
must respect the right to peaceful protest and ensure
the use of proportional measures when protecting its
legitimate security interests. We urge all parties to
take immediate steps to de-escalate the situation and
to act with utmost restraint to avoid further loss of life.
Israeli security forces must refrain from the excessive
use of force against unarmed civilians. The lethal use of
force should be exercised with maximum restraint and
only as a last resort to protect life. Those leading the
protests in Gaza, including Hamas and other groups,
have a responsibility to avoid provocations and ensure
that they remain strictly non-violent. We condemn the
firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel.

We underscore the EU's clear, consolidated position
on Jerusalem as a final status issue and will continue
to respect the international consensus on Jerusalem
embodied in, inter alia, resolution 478 (1980), including
on the diplomatic representations until the final status
of Jerusalem is resolved.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the recent significant reductions of funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In an already
unstable region UNRWA must remain able to carry out
its important function.

The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year of
continuous and widespread violence, brutal violation
of international law, as well as the repeated use of
chemical weapons by the regime and Da'esh. The
Syrian regime bears the overwhelming responsibility
for that situation. The continued deliberate denial and
obstruction of humanitarian access to those in need must
stop. Unhindered, safe and sustainable humanitarian
access must be implemented, as called for most
recently in resolution 2401 (2018). The EU deplores
the repeated violations of the so-called de-escalation
areas and urges the Astana guarantors, Russia, Iran and
Turkey, to ensure a complete and durable cessation of
hostilities throughout the whole Syrian territory. The
Syrian regime and its allies have started an offensive
in the region of Dar'a, in south-western Syria, in
a de-escalation zone that the Astana guarantors
committed to safeguarding. All necessary measures to
protect civilian lives, as well as unhindered, safe and
sustainable humanitarian access must be ensured.

The EU reiterates its strong condemnation of the
repeated use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime
and by Da'esh as confirmed by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). The EU reiterates
the strong need for accountability in Syria for all war
crimes committed and in particular for the use of
chemical weapons. The use of such weapons is a war
crime and crime against humanity. In that respect, the
EU urges the Security Council to rapidly re-establish
an independent attribution mechanism to ensure
accountability for perpetrators of chemical weapons
attacks. In that regard, the EU regrets the Russian vetoes
of the renewal of the JIM. mandate in November 2017.

The EU reiterates that Syria needs apolitical solution
and a political transition in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process. We commend the
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and call for
the swift establishment of the constitutional committee,
including the full and effective participation of women
without further delay.

The EU reaffirms its extreme concern about the
continuing deterioration of the situation in Yemen.
The EU is seriously concerned about the recent
intensification of the military operations in and around
the city ofHodeidah, including the impact ofthe military
operations by the coalition on the civilian population.
The EU reiterates its strong condemnation of attacks
against civilians, urges all parties to the conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians and fully respect
international humanitarian law, including by providing
unimpeded humanitarian access and safe passage for
those who wish to escape the fighting. The EU also
calls on all parties to ensure the full and effective
functioning of Al-Hudaydah port as the lifeline for
humanitarian support and commercial access point for
essential supplies.

The EU expresses its concern about the fact that
the most recent developments risk undermining United
Nations-led efforts to resume negotiations towards
a political solution of the conflict and welcomes
the Organization's determination, as expressed
by Mr. Martin Griffiths, to move ahead with the
political process.

The EU condemns the launch of ballistic missiles
by the Houthis against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
including at civilian targets, and against vessels
transiting through the Bab Al-Mandab Strait. The EU
expresses grave concerns about the proliferation of
ballistic missiles and technology in the region as such
actions feed regional tensions.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
is a key element of the global nuclear non-proliferation
architecture, enshrined in resolution 2231 (2015) and
is essential to the security of the region and beyond. It
has been working and is delivering on its goal. As long
as Iran implements its nuclear-related commitments,
the EU will remain firmly committed to the continued
full and effective implementation of the JCPOA. The
EU deeply regrets the decision of the President of the
United States to withdraw from the JCPOA. While the
EU expresses its concerns related to ballistic missiles
and increasing tensions in the region, it reiterates the
need to address them outside the JCPOA in the relevant
formats and forums.

Finally, with respect to Libya, the EU remains fully
committed to an inclusive inter-Libyan political process,
and we express full support to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salame's efforts to achieve a
political settlement and ensure that elections take place
by the end of 2018, once the proper conditions are in
place, as outlined in Special Representative Salame's
statement to the Council on 21 May (see S/PV.8263)
and in line with the 6 June presidential statement of the
Security Council (S/PRST/2018/11), which welcomed
the momentum generated by the international
conference on Libya, which took place in Paris on
29 May.

The EU remains the main provider of humanitarian
aid and cooperation in Libya. Together with the Libyan
authorities, the United Nations and the African Union,
it is also committed to setting up a more efficient
system to manage migration, in particular to improve
migrants' living conditions in Libya and ensure they
can be repatriated should they wish to be, while meeting
international humanitarian standards.

Lastly, the EU has deployed a military mission
and a civilian mission to provide further assistance to
Libya. The EU will sustain its engagement in Libya and
continue to do its utmost to contribute to its stabilization
and national reconciliation.

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.
