Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the
Senegalese presidency for convening this importance
open debate on water, peace and security.

(spoke in English)

Water is an indispensable and strategic resource.

The inclusion of water in our Sustainable Development
Goals demonstrates the broad recognition that water is
essential for the well-being ofhumankind, food security,
poverty reduction and sustainable development. At the
same time, water can be a source of tension, instability
and conflicts. As a result of the disparity between
available water resources and the need for water, as well
as the consequences of climate change, water shortages
may affect half of the world population from now to
2050. Asia is an example, accounting for 61 per cent
of the world's population but with only 36 per cent of
available water resources. It is now the driest continent
in per capita terms.
Viet Nam shares the common concerns about the
negative impacts of the scarcity of water and unequal
water distribution on economic development and social
cohesion that may lead to domestic conflicts or conflicts
among nations. Nevertheless, water is also a catalyst
for cooperation. Viet Nam believes that transboundary
water cooperation is a good way of addressing water-
related challenges, as it ensures economic prosperity,
fosters resilience, creates trust and enhances security.
Collaborative water schemes can be a powerful measure
to prevent conflict.

We are of the view that the United Nations can
provide valuable assistance to countries that are facing
challenges in the management of water. The United
Nations can deploy preventive diplomatic efforts aimed
at promoting and supporting regional cooperation on
water management. We call on the Security Council to
play an active role in preventing water-related conflicts
by upholding international law and frameworks that
help protect water security and water infrastructure,
particularly the 1997 Convention on the Law of the
Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses.

It is also our view that developed countries need
to support developing countries in technology transfer,
capacity-building in water management and responding
to the impacts of climate change on water resources.

We support the enhancement of global water
governance. We look forward to the Budapest Water
Summit later this month. We also hope that the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace and the Group
of Friends of Water will continue the discussion on
effective measures to prevent and resolve water-
related conflicts.

Viet Nam is among the countries most vulnerable to
climate change. We suffer from both floods and severe
droughts. Viet Nam largely depends on transboundary
water resources, as 63 per cent of our water resources
come from neighbouring countries. Therefore, we
highly value international, regional and subregional

cooperation frameworks on the management and use of
transboundary water resources.

Viet Nam actively participates in water management
frameworks in our region. It is encouraging that Mekong
cooperation has been strengthened in recent years
with diverse mechanisms such as the Greater Mekong
Subregion Economic Cooperation Program, the Mekong
River Commission, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Mekong Basin Development Cooperation, the
Lower Mekong Initiative and the Summit Meeting
between Japan and the Mekong River basin countries.
The recent launch of the Lancang-Mekong Cooperation
Framework, which includes China, Cambodia, Laos,
Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam, was also a big
step towards deepening cooperation in this field. We
hope that the international community will continue
to support Mekong cooperation for peace, security and
sustainable development in the region, with full respect
for the interests of riparian countries and the balance of
economic, social and environmental dimensions.

The growing scarcity of water and water-related
insecurity worldwide demand an urgent response and
compel all of us to work together to address this issue.
Our discussion today is very timely, as it helps develop
political momentum to advance water cooperation and
prevent water-related conflicts. Only this integrative
approach will make it possible to achieve the objectives
of our transformative 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and transform water from a potential
source of conflict to a source of cooperation and peace.

