Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to express my thanks
to Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and
Deputy Permanent Representative Schoulgin Nyoni for
their detailed briefings on the situation in the Republic
of Liberia.

We in Equatorial Guinea have always closely
followed the developments in the Republic of Liberia
and now much more so as a member of the Security
Council, since we are dealing with a brotherly country
whose problems we care about and have felt as
almost our own. That is why I would like to convey
Equatorial Guinea's total commitment and support for
the pacification, stabilization and normalization of the
situation in this brotherly country. In fact, during the
Ebola crisis, my country contributed $3 million to the
three affected countries in the region.

Overall developments in Liberia have been very
positive and stable. The country has made commendable
efforts to consolidate the political and economic
development process under way, and it is important
that the international community continue to assist the
country in those efforts.

We would like to congratulate the Government
and the people of Liberia and all the actors in the
country for the civic and peaceful manner in which the
electoral process took place - beginning in October
2017, with the holding of the first round of elections
for the presidency and the House of Representatives,
and culminating successfully on 26 December 2017,
with the holding of the second round of the presidential
elections, which led to the election of His Excellency
Mr. George Weah as President.

The successful conclusion of the political process
in Liberia was also made possible by the joint work
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), whose work I commend.
Furthermore, the successful outcome of the situation
in Liberia confirms the validity and appropriateness of
regional efforts to resolve disputes.

The end of UNMIL's mandate, on 31 March, has
opened a new stage in the history of Liberia that should
serve to consolidate peace and enable this brotherly
country to optimize its undeniable economic potential.
The international community and donors must honour
their commitment to implementing the peacebuilding
plan in Liberia. The presence of the Peacebuilding
Commission is very important at this stage.

Liberia is a good example of how the goodwill,
positive attitude and sense of responsibility of the
different political actors can lead to the successful
outcome of a situation that seemed very complex. That
fact should fill the Council with hope as it continues its
efforts to restore and build peace in conflicts, complex
as they may be. Peace in Liberia is an asset for the
Council, ECOWAS, the African Union and, above all,
the people of Liberia - the primary winners in this
long crisis.

My wish is that the positive signs and developments
we see in Guinea-Bissau will follow the example of
Liberia and obtain the same results after the legislative

elections in November and the presidential elections
next year.

Finally, I wish to pay glowing and well-deserved
tribute to UNMIL for its commendable and tireless
efforts to promote peace, security and stability in this
brotherly country. We pay tribute to the UNMIL troops
who, over the course of the many years of conflict,
made the ultimate sacrifice.

