Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of the Russian Federation for
organizing this debate on a subject of remarkable
significance for international peace and security. This
debate is propitious, and the unprecedented presence of
so many Ministers in this forum serves to accentuate
the global determination for concerted action.

Today's debate is taking place against the backdrop
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa that
pose a great threat to the peace and security of the
entire region and beyond. Those conflicts have been
compounded by the activities of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and other terrorist
groups operating across the region.

Of all the conflicts in the Middle East, the most
protracted is the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The lack
of progress in the Middle East peace process is one of
the drivers of instability in that region. The current
stalemate does not offer a sustainable solution to the
question of Palestine. What is required is political
will on the part of Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
return to negotiations on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and
existing agreements between them. That is the only
path to a sustainable and peaceful resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We take this opportunity
to reaffirm our unwavering support for a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine existing side by side
in peace and security.

The lack of progress in the Middle East peace
process has in turn heightened the threat of terrorism,
especially manifested in the Middle East and North
African regions. Attacks by ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front,
Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups have claimed the
lives of thousands of civilians and displaced many
more. Those attacks have been orchestrated by violent
extremists who perpetrate acts of anarchy, insecurity
and injustice under the banner of religion. They target
women, children and other vulnerable groups. They
commit war crimes and crimes against humanity with
impunity. The brutality of those groups offends our
common humanity and demands that the international
community take decisive action to neutralize them.

In recent times, terrorist groups have also developed
a penchant for acquiring property and territory.
The emergence of ISIL and its control of territory in
Syria and Iraq have changed the political and security
landscape of the Middle East. ISIL has become a grave
threat to the unity and territorial integrity of Syria and
Iraq. Terrorist groups also threaten Libya and Yemen.
In all those cases, those groups have taken advantage of
the political and security vacuum created by conflicts
to establish themselves and advance their hideous
agenda. The need for the international community to
address those threats is today very urgent.

Another dimension of the terrorist threat is the
proliferation of foreign terrorist fighters. Studies
indicate that this is not a new phenomenon. Many
of today's foreign terrorist fighters have fought as
comrades in other developing networks in the process.
It is those networks, aided by modern information
and communication technology, that are now being
exploited to recruit new fighters.

As of 2013, it was estimated that there were over
5,000 foreign terrorist fighters in Syria alone. Reports
indicate that more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters
from over 100 countries may now be engaged in the
Middle East and North African regions alongside local
terrorist groups.

The indication today is that foreign terrorist
fighters represent a threat on several levels: first, in
their States of origin; secondly, in transit States; and,
thirdly, in the destination States. Any effort to address
this menace will require cooperation, not only among
the affected States but indeed by the entire international
community.

Ultimately, what is required to counter the terrorist
threat is enhanced cooperation in law enforcement,
intelligence sharing and capacity-building. The relevant
Security Council resolutions, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other regional
instruments already provide an adequate framework
for the necessary international cooperation. We do not
need new road maps.

We are confident that, with all States working
concertedly and with closer coordination by the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and other United Nations counter-terrorism bodies,
the challenge of terrorism in the Middle East, North
Africa and other parts of the world, which exacerbates
conflict, can be decisively addressed. We hope that this
is a beginning.

