Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French): Let me begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and
on having guided the work of this important body with
such wisdom and effectiveness during the month of
February 1995. I must also convey sincere congratulations
to Ambassador Cardenas of Argentina on having served
as last month's President with such talent and ability.

The current Chairman of the Group of Arab States,
Ambassador Olhaye, has already stated the views of that
Group on the matter before the Council. I wish, however,
to add a few thoughts.

The international community welcomed with great
joy the signature by the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and Israel, at Washington nearly two years ago, of
the Declaration of Principles, and the ensuing agreements.
It has provided ongoing, sustained support for the peace
negotiations between the two parties to help them
surmount difficulties in those negotiations. Each time they
occurred, we welcomed the regular meetings between
Palestinian and Israeli authorities on implementing the
agreements.

The parties must not turn back or slacken the efforts
they have made to date - much less allow the paralysis
of a process that has become irreversible. That is no
longer the will of Palestinians and Israelis alone; it is now
the will of the entire international community. Continuing
the peace negotiations is no longer optional; it is a firm
obligation that the parties are duty-bound to honour with
a View to bringing about the peace which we have
awaited so long.

But if they are to be successful, the negotiations
must continue in the framework of the commitments
undertaken by the parties and of a continuous,
constructive dialogue carried out in good faith. That will
make it possible to overcome the difficulties, to hasten
the process and to protect the region against the actions
of the enemies of peace.

Israeli settlements in the occupied territories,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, constitute one of the most
serious of those difficulties, which must be overcome at
all costs. We welcomed the statements by Israeli
authorities that they would no longer authorize new
settlements. We would have liked those statements to
have been implemented on the ground, which would have
bolstered trust between Palestinians and Israelis and

 

improved the chances of a positive outcome of the
negotiations on final status.

But the Palestinians, so happy one day, were deeply
disappointed the next, when they saw settlements
continuing apace - with or without authorization. They felt
frustrated because, in their eyes and in the eyes of the
world, the settlements reflect a state of mind. It was
necessary, perhaps more than ever, that statements be
unambiguous, because it was a question of the trust that
had been established, and was growing, between
Palestinians and Israelis.

This is a serious problem because it has enabled the
opponents of peace to demonstrate that there is good or bad
faith in trying to take back with one hand what is given
with the other.
Effectively stopping the policy of building settlements
in the occupied territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, is
a determining factor in this process and, like it or not, it
will facilitate or hinder future negotiations towards a final
solution of the question.

Our words, which are addressed to all sides, are
designed to be, first and foremost, words of peace and
friendship, as has always been the case.

My country has invested a great deal in the peace
process, and we cannot close our eyes to the dangers which
lurk behind the magnificent achievement begun on 13
September 1993.

There is no doubt that our optimism has been
somewhat diminished. The difficulties in implementing the
accords as concluded have been greater and more numerous
than expected.

The Palestinians continue to have hopes, but they now
want to see an end to their daily social and economic
problems. They also wish to see quick progress through the
various stages, to which they see no end. The political
settlement must also be swift; there must be no delays.

No pretext must be given to extremists of any kind to
engage in violence. The time has come to take a clear and
responsible attitude in the face of the deterioration of the
situation, which threatens the loss of the amazing
achievements for which we have waited for decades.

It must be recalled that the advent of a just and lasting
peace in Palestine hinges on respect for United Nations

 

resolutions, which are the foundation of international
legality, as well as on solid socio-economic foundations
for such peace. Improvement of the well-being of the
population in the context of mutually advantageous
cooperation will help peace take root and create
conditions of safety and security in the region. Improving
the well-being of the population and developing the
region were the primary objectives of the economic
conference held in Casablanca.

The results achieved thus far in the peace process
are by and large positive, but there is still a long road
ahead and it is strewn with obstacles. Israel and Palestine
have demonstrated such wisdom and courage that we feel
that they will be able to overcome the obstacles and, if
need be, hurry through some of the mutually agreed
stages now at risk with the passage of time.
Our hope is that Israelis and Palestinians will
continue their dialogue in order to iron out the many
thorny problems remaining and that the problem of
establishing settlements will be faced with courage and
determination. We also hope that, for our part, we will do
all in our power to remain faithful to the promise made.
So much remains to be done that we might run out of
time.

The international community must therefore
encourage the parties to demonstrate goodwill and a
constructive spirit to settle the remaining problems in
order to achieve the positive peace so eagerly awaited,
based on mutual understanding, cooperation, security,
dignity and respect for the legitimate rights of all.

The Security Council has deemed it necessary to
arrange this debate and thus remind Israel and the
Palestinians that the international community is interested
in the continuation of this process and the avoidance of
any action that will derail it.

Morocco, for its part, will spare no effort to act
accordingly.

