Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
expressing our pleasure, Mr. Minister, for having you
personally here to preside over this meeting. I would
also like to extend our warm welcome to Mr. De
Mistura and to thank him for the briefing he provided
to us today as well as for his personal engagement,
leadership and achievements in Iraq. I wish him all the
best in his future work.

Croatia welcomes the ongoing United Nations
contribution to the promotion and consolidation of
peace, stability, democracy, human rights and
development in Iraq. In view of their approaching
departures from their respective functions, I would like
to use the opportunity to express once again Croatia's
appreciation to Mr. De Mistura and his Deputy,
Mr. Shearer, for their hard work and for the dedicated
personal efforts they have invested in carrying out the
mandate of the Mission.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) continues to play a vital role in Iraq. Its
expanding engagement and presence provides valuable
support to the Iraqi Government and the people of Iraq
in addressing the remaining challenges. We salute the
efforts that the Special Representative and his team are
investing in facilitating political dialogue, notably their
good offices on the issue of disputed internal
boundaries and the status of Kirkuk. Also, we value
their role in assisting national and regional dialogue,
offering expertise on unresolved constitutional issues
and providing electoral and human rights support.
Croatia fully stands behind the messages
contained in the draft presidential statement that the
Council is about to adopt today, reaffirming its support
for UNAMI and for the people and Government of Iraq
in their efforts to rebuild a stable, secure and
democratic country.

Iraq has made remarkable progress over recent
years. The provincial election held earlier this year, the
first one to be Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned, augurs well
for the country's future. We are also encouraged by the
successful start of voter registration in Kurdistan. We
see those electoral processes as a manifestation of a
broader trend, one in which Iraqis are increasingly
taking responsibility for their own affairs. Moreover,
they have set in motion local democratic processes,
which should be channelled into the national dialogue.

We call on the leadership of Iraq to make the
most of those recent positive trends on both the
political and the security levels and to translate this
momentum into national reconciliation that will lead to
lasting peace and stability and economic and social
development. We hope that this will generate tangible
improvements that will be felt in the daily lives of
ordinary Iraqis, thus locking in the progress achieved.

National reconciliation, as Mr. De Mistura and
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/284), have
rightly emphasized, remains the most pressing
challenge. Ultimately, only a political settlement can
guarantee the irreversibility of recent positive trends
and achievements. We call upon Iraqi leaders to rise
above sectarian interests, to apply themselves to
dialogue and to search for compromise solutions,
notably on the crucial questions of hydrocarbons
legislation, constitutional review and internal
boundaries.

Croatia strongly supports UNAMI's focus on the
issues of boundaries and the status of Kirkuk,
appreciates its initiative and analytical input, and hopes
to see early progress.
We welcome the strengthening of the security
sector and the continued expansion of the authority of
Iraqi security forces throughout the country. However,
the recent wave of sectarian and terrorist violence and
increasing tensions in several areas give rise to serious
concerns. Croatia strongly condemns the recent terrorist
attacks. The extremists' agenda should not be allowed to
derail Iraq from the path of peace and democratic
transformation. This threat only underscores the urgency
of advancing the reconciliation agenda, as it is innocent
civilians who continue to bear the brunt of indiscriminate
Violence.

Croatia is apprehensive about the multifaceted
challenges facing the Government of Iraq, including
reconstruction and economic growth. As the report
rightly observes, resources should be spent in areas
that will make a lasting difference to social and
economic revival. We understand that there are still
pockets of serious humanitarian needs, and we
appreciate the Government's efforts to address the
situation of refugees, displaced persons and returnees.
Creating jobs and infrastructure is essential to bringing
about a tangible sense of progress for the people of
Iraq, together with an underlying sense of peace and
stability. We expect the Government of Iraq to build on
the recent security improvements and welcome its
efforts aimed at ensuring good governance and the rule
of law, including recent steps to combat corruption.

Regional cooperation and constructive dialogue
with Iraq's neighbours remain critical components in
long-term stabilization. Conversely, durable peace and
stability in Iraq remain critical for regional security,
which in turn is critical for international security. We
are encouraged by intensified high-level bilateral
contacts and support continued engagement by
UNAMI in promoting bilateral cooperation initiatives
as well as regional engagement.

As Iraq progressively assumes full sovereignty,
Croatia fully supports the view that it has become
necessary for the Council to re-examine the set of
obligations imposed on the country under the regime of
Saddam Hussein and to realign Iraq's international
legal standing in accordance with its new
circumstances. As the Council is about to begin the
review process in accordance with resolution 1859
(2008), we are ready to work with others towards
achieving durable solutions that will duly reflect this
new reality.
