Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): Iwish to congratulate
the new members of the Security Council and to thank
Sweden for organizing during its presidency this open
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for sharing
his views on this topic this morning and for reminding
us that conflict prevention and sustaining peace must
be a priority for each one of us.

The promise of the Charter of the United Nations
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war continues to challenge us after 71 years. The tools
and mechanisms at the disposal of Member States
and the Security Council, particularly those outlined
in Chapters VI and VII of the Charter, could better
deliver on that promise, if they were fully utilized at an
earlier stage, if they were used to encourage inclusivity,
participation and ownership among all stakeholders in
a conflict and if they were coupled with economic and
social development, which would help to sustain peace.

For the Phillipines, a country that has witnessed
armed conflicts that have spanned many generations,
the work to attain ajust and lasting peace continues. In
2014, after 40 years of conflict, the Phillipines signed
a peace agreement with the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front. The implementation of that agreement is now
the focus of our work in order to ensure that the peace
we have is durable. At the same time, peace talks have
resumed with the Communist Party of the Phillipines,
and peace negotiators are preparing for the third round
of talks later in January. The Phillipines' decades-long
quest for peace, especially in Mindanao, has taught
us many valuable lessons on conflict prevention and
sustaining peace.

Today the Government of the Phillipines is
embarking upon a new template for peace, with the
support and assistance of our international partners. It
is one where the dividends of peace are being planted
while a peace agreement is still being negotiated.
There is greater incentive to pursue and maintain peace
when parties to a conflict see the need to safeguard
the seeds of economic and social opportunities that
are growing in their communities. It is a template that
is anchored in greater inclusivity and ownership by
all stakeholders - not only among warring factions,
but also among all those affected by the conflict, who
have an equal stake and interest in its resolution. Allow
me to share some important elements of this new
peace template.

First, our peace negotiators no longer need to
wait for formal peace agreements to be signed before
embarking upon projects for stakeholders so that they
can experience and enjoy the dividends of peace.
Development projects can be implemented alongside
peace negotiations. The envisioned Mindanao
trust fund, which the United Nations Development
Programme has been invited to support, is anchored in
that belief.

Secondly, aside from formal peace tables, we have
instituted the Peoples' Peace Tables, which are open to
all stakeholders who are directly involved in conflict, as
well as those who are on the sidelines but are affected
just the same - women, indigenous peoples, youth,
local Government, civil society, traditional and folk
leaders, religious leaders, as well as representatives of
business and other sectors. The Peoples' Peace Tables
allow for broader participation by people, the building
of relationships, the strengthening of institutions, and
healing and reconciliation.

Thirdly, economic empowerment remains key to
conflict prevention. Fragile communities must benefit
from socioeconomic development programmes, which
can reduce their vulnerabilities and increase their
capacity to address conflict.

The national experience of the Phillipines in
building and sustaining peace is anchored in three
complementary strategic pillars, some of which have
been pointed out by previous speakers. The first pillar
has to do with policy reform and governance, which
addresses issues of injustice relative to land security,
natural resources, identity and human rights. The second
pillar has to do with capacity-building that strengthens
Government institutions and empowers communities.
The third pillar has to do with peace-promoting
socioeconomic interventions.

In conclusion, those pillars can easily be applied
to the work of the United Nations in addressing peace
and security challenges. Our peacebuilding and
peacekeeping initiatives should promote economic
development at all stages of the peace process, uphold
inclusivity through dialogue, and strengthen policies and
governance, all while working with local Governments
and institutions in the spirit of cooperation. Peace
can be achieved and sustained if it is founded on the
aspirations and labour of the people who seek it.

