Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on assuming the
presidency this month, and to thank you for organizing
today's open debate. Let me also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his compelling remarks
delivered this morning.

Twenty-five years ago, when the Republic of
Korea was admitted to the United Nations along with
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, both
Koreas pledged to accept and to uphold the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, as laid out in its
Charter. During the past 25 years, my country has been
a strong advocate and defender of the Charter of the
United Nations. As my President stated in her address
to the General Assembly last September,

"The values and ideals upheld by the United
Nations - global peace, the promotion of human
rights and shared prosperity - have embodied the
vision ofthe Republic of Korea itself" (A/70/PV13, p28).

Unfortunately, however, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has consistently breached that solemn
pledge. Over the past 10 years, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has conducted four nuclear tests and
six long-range missile tests. These are all in violation
of its international obligations, including under four
separate resolutions of the Security Council. The latest
show of disregard for the United Nations Charter by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea took place
in the course of the past six weeks with its nuclear test
on 6 January, followed by the launch of a long-range
ballistic missile on 7 February. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's nuclear test and missile launch are
a clear threat to international peace and security and a
blatant challenge to the international community.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is the
only country in the world that has conducted nuclear
tests in the twenty-first century; developed nuclear
weapons programmes as a signatory to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and then announced its withdrawal from both the
NPT and the International Atomic Energy Agency;
officially declared itself a nuclear-armed State in its
Constitution; and been subjected to weapons of mass
destruction-related sanctions imposed by the Security
Council.

By repeatedly violating Security Council
resolutions, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has shown contempt and disregard for the functions
and powers of the Security Council. To address such
continued violations, the Security Council expressed
its determination, through its resolution 2094 (2013),
to take further significant measures in the event of
a further launch or nuclear test by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. The Security Council also
reaffirmed that commitment in its press statement of
7 February (SC/12234), and its intent to expeditiously
adopt a new resolution with such measures in response
to such dangerous and serious violations.

In that regard, the Security Council should adopt
a robust and comprehensive resolution so as not to let
the leadership of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea make a mockery of it by continuing to develop
nuclear weapons. Ifwe go on business-as-usual vis-a-vis
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's repeated
nuclear tests and missile launches, the entire world
could fall prey to nuclear blackmail by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. An extraordinary threat
requires an extraordinary response. The Security
Council, through its tough and effective sanctions,
must make clear to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea that it will no longer tolerate its nuclear weapons
development.

Twenty-five years ago, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea solemnly pledged to comply with
its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
as a new Member. But during the past decade, the

Democratic People's Republic of Korea has persistently
violated all Security Council resolutions related to it.
That is not only a direct challenge to the authority of
the Security Council, but also a contradiction to both
the letter and spirit of the pledge it made. This breach
of obligations by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea calls into question its qualification as a Member
of the United Nations.

Once again, I assure you, Sir, that the Republic of
Korea remains faithful to all provisions of the United
Nations Charter. We express our unyielding willingness
to defend its purposes and principles as key elements
for ensuring international peace and security.

