Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Today is a sad day for
the Security Council family. The sudden and untimely
death of Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue last evening
has left us all stunned and speechless. On behalf of
Kazakhstan, I offer our sincerest condolences to the
Government, the nation and the people of Cote d'Ivoire
for having lost one of their outstanding diplomats,
whose life we honour today in the Council.

Bernard was one of us, and his loss is irreplaceable
for he exemplified all that is finest in diplomacy,
dignity and the best of humanity and compassion.
With a distinguished life dedicated to the service of
his country, he reflected an immense depth of political
acumen and wisdom that touched us deeply. His
presence on the Council gave us invaluable insights
into how a country emerging from the ravages of war
can undergo a remarkable transformation to take a seat
on the apex organ of the United Nations and contribute
to peace and security. An excellent diplomat of quiet
grace and inner strength, a true gentleman, loyal friend
and beautiful soul, he will continue to live in our hearts
and memories.

Turning now to the topic that convenes us today, I
would like to welcome Colombian Vice-President, His
Excellency Oscar Naranjo Trujillo, and Foreign Minister
Maria Holguin Cuellar to the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Special Representative Arnault for his
briefing today and for the tireless efforts of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia towards
ensuring a peaceful future for the country.

My delegation commends the leadership of
Colombia for its firm dedication and strong commitment
to the peace process, irrespective ofthe huge challenges
it faces. We also commend the United Nations role in
accompanying the peace process, including the visits
of the Secretary-General in January, the Department of
Political Affairs partners' field visit in February and
the President of the General Assembly's trip in March
to Colombia.

It has been three months since the Colombian
peace process entered its second year. During these
three months, we have observed remarkable positive
developments in the ongoing peace process. In that
context, I would like to underline the first parliamentary
elections held in Colombia last March after a historic
peace deal was achieved in 2016. According to the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2018/279), these
were the most inclusive elections in decades.

In view of the upcoming presidential elections
in Colombia, we believe that the new President and
Government will continue to show the same political
will and commitment to implementing the ongoing
peace process and putting the victims of the armed
conflict at the centre of the Colombian political
agenda. Kazakhstan highly appreciates the efforts
of the Colombian Government and former rebels of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in the overall peaceful
conduct of the elections.

We also note the launch of Colombia's transitional
justice tribunal - the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
That mechanism, together with the Commission on
Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition and the Special
Unit for the Search for Persons, is the core of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. Its role is essential to the
successful continuation of the peace process. We look
forward to the other peace-related pending legislation
being approved soon, guaranteeing the peace accord's
full implementation and securing its irreversibility for
the benefit of all Colombians.

Kazakhstan joins others in particularly
commending the signing of the landmark decree
that will formalize the land ownership of 2.5 million
Colombian farmers. That was provided in the peace
deal and the implementation of that promise opens
the door to improving the quality of life of Colombian
peasants. Moreover, given the fact that land ownership
was the root cause of the more than half-of-a-century
armed conflict, we believe that the legalization of land
titles is key to peacebuilding.

Colombia still has a complicated journey ahead in
order to achieve long-lasting peace. We need to address
the alarming trends that, inter alia, have resulted in the
killings of social and community leaders and human
rights defenders, triggered in part by a power vacuum
in the territories that were abandoned by the ex-
combatants, which is of particular concern and might
call the effective implementation of the peace process
into question.

It will therefore be crucial to strengthen the nexus
linking security and development, enhance efforts to
achieve the socioeconomic reintegration of former
FARC-EP rebels, ensure employment and adequate
living standards and promote health care and educational
and productive projects for those victims most affected
by the conflict, including women, children and ethnic
and indigenous communities. We urge the Government
of Colombia to maintain its focus on providing concrete
avenues to reintegration for former combatants in rural
communities and on preventing increases in insecurity
by expanding the State presence and State services. At
the same time, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun should also live up to its obligations and
contribute to the peace process.

We welcome the constructive and wise decision of
the Colombian Government to restart peace talks in
Quito with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN),
which were frozen in January after a spate of ELN
attacks. Kazakhstan hopes that the fifth cycle of talks,
which were resumed on 15 March, will contribute to
achieving a new bilateral ceasefire, which could pave
the way for a permanent peace agreement with the
ELN. Kazakhstan reiterates its firm commitment to
the Colombian peace process and calls on all interested
parties to do their best to foster reconciliation. From
now on, the success of the peace process will entirely
depend on the commitment ofall parties to the concept of
the peace deal, and will come to fruition only ifthey are
united in their will to eliminate conflict and effectively
live in peace. We therefore encourage all Colombians to
work hard in order to overcome challenges and facilitate
and expedite the establishment of lasting peace in the
country. Kazakhstan strongly supports the Government
of Colombia and stands ready to join multilateral and
regional efforts to accelerate the momentum of the
peace process that will ultimately bring about stability,
progress and prosperity for all Colombians.

