Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun for his briefing.

We may be entering a critical moment in the
Security Council's consideration of the Iranian nuclear
issue. For almost nine years, the Security Council has
acted in response to concerns about the nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. By applying progressively stronger
sanctions, the Council has supported international
nuclear diplomacy and has helped bring us closer to
resolving this difficult issue through negotiations.

As we meet today, negotiators from Iran and the
P5+1 countries are meeting in Vienna to finalize a
comprehensive nuclear deal. That work is hard, and
success is not guaranteed. This past spring, we made
great progress in Lausanne, Switzerland, by agreeing
to the parameters of a nuclear deal, but there is still
much work to be done. We still need to flesh out
important details and resolve some challenging issues
where there is still disagreement. Until there is a deal,
the Security Council must continue to stand behind its
previous resolutions on the Iranian nuclear issue. The
sanctions that the Council has imposed remain in force.
Member States must continue to implement them fully,
as required by Council resolutions.

Additionally, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), with the support of the Panel
of Experts, should continue efforts to improve sanctions
enforcement and provide useful advice to Member
States on questions involving sanctions implementation.
If Member States are able to share with the Committee
or the Panel evidence of sanctions violations, then we
encourage them to do so at any time, even during this
period of negotiations.

We were troubled to read in the Panel's recent
report of continuing violations of the United Nations
sanctions, such as those related to conventional arms
and illicit nuclear procurement. Iran's trafficking in
weapons, including shipments to some of the most
extreme and irresponsible actors in its region, remains
a serious threat to peace. In addition to violating
Security Council resolutions, smuggling of that kind
supports terrorism, fuels Al-Assad's violence in Syria
and further destabilizes Yemen. The United States,
working closely with partners, will continue to help
detect, disrupt and seize such shipments.

As we announced in Lausanne, ifa deal is reached,
then the Security Council would be asked to adopt a
new resolution to endorse it. That resolution would
also terminate the provisions of previous sanctions
resolutions upon verification that Iran has taken
certain nuclear steps. It would also establish ongoing
restrictions. If such a resolution were to be adopted,
the United Nations would continue to help ensure that
Member States understand their precise obligations in
the period ahead. If there is not a deal, however, then,
needless to say, the work of the Committee and Panel
Will become even more critical.

For now, however, we look with hope to Vienna. I
think I speak for all Council colleagues when I wish our
negotiators the best of luck in their endeavour.

