Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
are extremely grateful to the Secretary-General for the
report - a very full and wise report - and to the
Special Representative for his briefing. We wish to
extend a very warm welcome to him in this meeting
with the Council. He has taken on perhaps the most
complex special-representative job in Africa, and we
have the full support of his qualities in that job. It is a
great pleasure again to have Foreign Minister She
Okitundu with us in the Council, and we thank him for
his valuable comments to us this morning.

Like France, the United Kingdom endorse the
European Union (EU) statement to be made later by
Belgium, but I have a few comments to make in my
national capacity. A good deal of progress has been
made over the last four months, but we can all still see
some worrying signs just as we come up to the hardest
challenges. All the parties still have to show that they
will live up to their commitments to maintain the
ceasefire, to cooperate with United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and to press ahead on the key
issues, which to us are disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR),
the full withdrawal of foreign forces and the success of
the inter-Congolese dialogue. We also still wait for
Kisangani to be demilitarized. Entry into phase III can
be taken forward successfully only if there is progress
in these areas, and not quite enough is yet being done
by all the parties to ensure forward momentum.

The United Kingdom remains very concerned at
the continued humanitarian situation and the reported
human rights abuses in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially in the east. It remains important for
all parties to continue to give support and access to aid
agencies working in the country, to respect
international humanitarian law and civilians,
particularly women and children.

We welcome the withdrawal of Namibian and
many Ugandan troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We continue to
insist that all parties must withdraw their forces in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and with
the agreed plans.

Successful DDRRR is absolutely crucial. The
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of Rwanda have a key role in creating the
necessary environment. If this could, as the Secretary-
General suggests, lead to the establishment of a joint
coordination mechanism, that would be extremely
valuable in moving DDRRR forward, addressing
problems and providing a basis for outside support of
the process.

Another element of creating the necessary
environment is to ensure an end to all support to the
armed groups. As for Kamina, we were glad to hear
this morning from the Special Representative that a
technical team has arrived there. We hope that early
progress can be made on the DDRRR of the ex-
combatants gathered there, with full cooperation
between the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and MONUC. I would be glad to hear
further from the Special Representative what the next
steps are going to be on Kamina once he has heard
from the technical team.

Like others, we were disappointed at the
suspension of the inter-Congolese dialogue in Addis.
That dialogue has to resume again soon; we look
forward to that happening in South Africa next month,
and to the outstanding participation issues being
settled. Gaborone clearly built a positive energy, and if
that is not to be lost, all the parties have to recommit to
the process firmly and publicly. There is also room for
the political protagonists in the Congo and in the
region to do more directly among each other to build
bridges for a stable peace in the region.

The United Kingdom accepts the Secretary-
General's recommendation for entry into phase III
within the present mandate and ceiling. The proposed
deployment into Kindu will be a logical part of this,
both testing the commitment of the parties to work with
MONUC and demonstrating the United Nations
commitment to move ahead and the benefits this can
bring, particularly to the local population.

We agree with Foreign Minister She Okitundu
that with the cooperation of the parties Kindu can be a
foothold from which to start seriously tackling the
problems of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also support MONUC's intention to try to
broaden contacts with representatives of the armed
groups, including the Mayi-Mayi. The Mayi-Mayi are
not party to Lusaka, but they are very much tied in with
the prospects for peace in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and they cannot be allowed to
continue their current violent behaviour with impunity.

It is good news that the Joint Military
Commission has agreed on the final date for
co-location with MONUC. The need for greater
cooperation between elements in the field and MONUC
headquarters in Kinshasa will increase as MONUC
expands.

The United Kingdom reaffirms its strong support
for the whole MONUC team, and for Mr. Ngongi
personally. Minister She Okitundu referred this
morning to Prime Minister Blair's recent words of
determination to address Africa's conflict areas. We
will continue to be closely engaged in the pursuit of a
lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

