Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to extend a
warm welcome to you, Sir, and express our gratitude
to you for presiding over this very important debate.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, and we shall concentrate our attention on the
Palestinian question.

There is an international consensus that a settlement
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question and to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would be a decisive
development for the attainment of greater stability in
the Middle East and for the easing of tensions that are
the cause ofimmense harm to the peoples of the region.
There is also an international consensus that a two-State
solution is the only viable basis for a comprehensive
settlement to the Palestinian question and for peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.

It is our understanding that the question of Palestine
and the ensuing conflict are the main stumbling blocks
to social and political development in the Middle East
and a breeding ground for the most radical forms of
extremism and terrorism spreading through the region
and beyond. We have now reached a critical point,
and finding a solution to the Palestinian question is
an absolute necessity. The main actors in this tragedy
should be aware that what is happening in the Middle
East might shape a future of horror, since the present
already presents a very grim reality. Against such a
backdrop, we intend in this statement to address three
straightforward messages to the main actors in the
Palestinian question: the international community and
the Security Council in particular, the Palestinians and
the Israelis.

Over the years, the international community has
been called on - to no avail - to play a role in the
search for a solution to the Palestinian question, given
the impossibility of Israelis and Palestinians advancing
towards any meaningful dialogue by themselves and
without external assistance. In that sense, and following
the collapse of the United States mediation effort, we
are of the view that the Security Council, as the organ
upon which the international community has conferred
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations, should uphold its responsibilities and
apply all its political power, influence and prestige
to seeking a comprehensive solution to this painful
conflict, which is dangerously harmful to the entire
international community. It is our conviction that only
a united Security Council has the required influence
to assume a leadership role in bringing the parties
to the conflict to the negotiating table, mediate the
attainment of the necessary concessions, and provide
the guarantees needed to advance towards a political
and comprehensive solution.

International public opinion despairs over the
hesitations and lack ofpurpose that the Security Council
has demonstrated over the years on this extremely
sensitive issue. The great Powers in particular should
commit their leadership in the Security Council by
pushing the parties to the conflict and the entire
international community to uphold a solution to the
Palestinian question. We believe that the great Powers,
being invested with special privileges in the Security
Council in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, have the capacity to do so. Those privileges,
which in our view should be upheld not for mere national
interests but instead for strengthening world peace and
security, confer on the great Powers responsibilities of
leadership that should be applied in order to make a
meaningful contribution to resolving the Palestinian
question.

It is our conviction that, with the evolving situation
in the Middle East, ifthe Security Council is to remain
relevant it must assume in the Palestinian question
the statutory leadership role entrusted to it. Angola,
as a non-permanent member, is ready to support any
initiative that the Security Council might adopt in order
to ensure such leadership, and it would be our greatest
achievement if, during our mandate, the Council should
take positive steps in that direction.

The Palestinian people are the victim ofan historical
injustice, subject to being refugees and a people
under occupation. We deem the maintenance of such
a situation as totally unacceptable. The Islamic world
perceives it as collective humiliation, which breeds the
current trends of extreme radicalism and terrorism.
The Palestinian people deserve nationhood status. The
framework of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security seems possible
to achieve if the international community, and in
particular the Security Council, assumes its duty and
works to make a reality of resolutions, declarations and
the array of decisions adopted over the years on the
two-State solution.

In the event that the Security Council finally
decides to push forward the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process, the Palestinians must be prepared for difficult
choices, which include reaching real and meaningful
unity among them, making painful but unavoidable
concessions at the negotiating table, putting and end
to the culture of hatred and being politically and
psychologically prepared for reconciliation and full
recognition of the State of Israel. The maintenance
of the status quo, with the Palestinians confined to
refugee camps and subject to permanent humiliatation,
without prospects for a breakthrough for a political
settlement, can be a recipe for a disaster of unthinkable
proportions - while the regional and international
situations deteriorate dangerously.

The Security Council should make Israel understand
that the policies of occupation, settlement expansion
and collective punishment of the Palestinians are
counterproductive and raise formidable obstacles for the
launching of a peace process for the establishment of a
viable Palestinian State and for mutual understanding,
acceptance and reconciliation. Moreover, such policies
destroy the social and political fabric of Palestine, put
the Palestinians in an extremely dire situation and
pave the way for extremists who seek the worst and
are bent on sabotaging any developments towards
peace. Like the Palestinians, Israel must be prepared
to make far-reaching compromises and concessions to
the Palestinians and to the international community,
if a settlement for peace is to be achieved under the
auspices of the Security Council. It is fundamental
that the Security Council deepen dialogue with Israel,
that it gives full assurances to the parties as an honest
broker and that its members extend firm international
guarantees for Israeli and Palestinian security in a
peace settlement.

In conclusion, more than 20 years have elapsed
since the Israelis and Palestinians were near to a
comprehensive peace settlement through mutual
concessions and political will for both peoples to live
together side by side in freedom, peace and security. It
is our conviction that, by assuming a leadership role,
a united Security Council will be able once again to
put Israelis and Palestinians back on the track towards
peace and to make the decisive contribution that we
believe it can provide to the attainment of peace in
Palestine and the entire Middle East. After the collapse
of the American mediation effort, we do not foresee
another framework for negotiations. It is up to the
Security Council to step up decisive efforts and to
assume its responsibilities as the main organ in charge
of international peace and security.

