Mr. Dronjic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of December. It is nice to see an African country
presiding over the Council. I would also like to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism of the Criminal Tribunals, and
its Prosecutor, Mr. Baron Serge Brammertz, for their
reports. It seems as if Judge Meron has been a part
of the Mechanism forever, and therefore it is hard to
believe that he has just delivered his last report to the
Council. I understand why he feels relieved to complete
his mandate, and I wish him all the best in his future
endeavours. His legacy will be safe within the archives
of the Mechanism.

We join others in taking note of the progress
achieved by the Mechanism during the reporting period,
as well as the additional advances it has made with
regard to its residual functions. We also take note of the
intensive efforts to strengthen its activities and improve
its operations, procedures and working methods. It
remains crucial to provide the necessary support for
the work of the Mechanism and align together all the
elements necessary for the successful conclusion of the
its mandate within a reasonable period of time. It is of
the utmost importance to highlight that, throughout
the years, Bosnia and Herzegovina's cooperation with
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
has been steadfast and full, as stated in the reports
of the Tribunal. Accordingly, we remain committed
to contributing actively to the Mechanism's efforts to
accomplish its mission. Furthermore, we encourage
the Mechanism to continue to seek ways to maximize
the effectiveness and efficiency of its work in order to
fulfil its mandate.

We appreciate the continued support and assistance
of the Office of the Prosecutor to our national judicial
authorities in charge of prosecuting war crimes cases,
as that remains vital for us to pursue and fulfil our
commitments. We are also fully aware that the main
burden to ensure accountability for all the crimes
committed lies primarily on us. Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains committed to the fight against impunity.
The precondition for that is to have accountable and
independent judicial institutions that enjoy public
trust throughout the country. That goes not only for
prosecuting and punishing individual perpetrators
of war crimes but also for achieving reconciliation
among Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs, who are constituent
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We take note of the Prosecutor's assessments on
the progress in achieving accountability for crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia, although
national jurisdictions still face a significant backlog
of war crimes to process. In that regard, Bosnia and
Herzegovina attaches great importance to the promotion
of stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation
among prosecutors' offices. It is necessary for Member
States to fully cooperate with the Mechanism in order
for justice to be done. Likewise, judicial cooperation
in the region remains essential to ensure accountability
and bring about reconciliation. In that regard, the
cooperation between the State Prosecutor's Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office of the
War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia is
recognized as a productive example of that. Genuine
reconciliation strength lies in ourjoint efforts to deliver
justice to the many victims within our region. As noted,
the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made steady improvement in prosecuting war crimes
cases. During the reporting period it filed 16 new
indictments, and more are expected by the end of the
year. That includes indictments in complex cases. As
for the so-called category II cases, it has been noted
that they have all been processed, and trials and appeals
are under way. Overall, significant progress has been
achieved, and we remain committed to proceeding in
the same manner.

We are continuing our overall efforts to strengthen
the national justice systems at all levels. We are currently
in the process of identifying and defining further
activities necessary to advance the implementation
of our national war crimes strategy in order to bring
to justice persons responsible for war crimes. In
that regard, we also rely on the continued support of
the European Union, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
Development Programme in order to strengthen the
human and material resources of judicial institutions to
process war crimes cases in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and for general capacity-building, which is important
for the full implementation of the measures and goals
set out in our national war crimes strategy.

The fight against impunity in a complex,
multinational State such as Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a precondition for achieving reconciliation and
sustaining peace. In that regard, prosecuting war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious affiliation
of the perpetrators or victims, is of crucial importance
for long-term stability in the country and the region.
Once again, we confirm our strongest commitment
to accountability and the delivery of justice without
selectivity or hesitation.

