Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo and Mr. Rajasingham, Director of the
Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
enlightening briefings.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, I refer to
the statement made by Germany on behalf of the three
co-penholders. I will therefore limit myself to a few
brief remarks on the political situation and the situation
on the ground.

First, as the Syrian conflict enters its ninth year, we
lend our support to Special Envoy Pedersen in his efforts
to implement his five objectives, as he outlined in his
first briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.8475).
We welcome his work on the various dimensions of
resolution 2254 (2015). As I mentioned in my statement
last month, in Belgium's view, the only lasting solution
will be based on the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and the full implementation of the
resolution. We underline the role of the Special Envoy
in Sochi and support his efforts to bring together, as
soon as possible, a credible, balanced, inclusive and
representative constitutional committee that follows
clear procedures and working methods.

We note that the common denominator of the
Special Envoy's objectives is to build trust and
deepen dialogue in order to move the process forward.
However, trust among the parties to the conflict will
not be possible without looking through the lens of
justice. As a concrete measure, we call on all parties
to exercise their influence for the release of those who
have been detained arbitrarily.

The Special Envoy also indicated that the entire
Syrian population must engage and participate in efforts
to build trust and seek peace. The third Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, held in
Brussels in March, underscored the essential role of
civil society. An active civil society that is recognized
at the political level and illustrates its right to assemble
and exercise the freedom of expression constitutes the
backbone of any community. The third Conference also
placed particular emphasis on Syrian women. While
welcoming the Special Envoy's recent meeting with
the Women's Advisory Board, we stress the need for
the meaningful participation of Syrian women to the
extent of at least a 30 per-cent representation in all
decision-making bodies.

We call for a national cessation of hostilities in
order to ensure the protection of civilians. As others
before me have highlighted, Belgium is also seriously
concerned about the upsurge in violence in Idlib. It
is imperative that all parties, including the Astana
guarantors, remain fully committed to the agreement
that was signed in September. In Deir ez-Zor, the
last battle against Da'esh has just ended. But the end
of Da'esh as a terrorist organization with a territorial
base does not mean the end of the threat that that group
poses. It is essential that the international community
remain vigilant in order to avoid its resurgence.

Lastly, I would like to say a few words on
reconstruction. Belgium fully supports the European
Union's position. We will be ready to assist in
reconstruction only when a comprehensive, genuine
and inclusive political transition, negotiated by the
Syrian parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique, is
firmly under way.

