Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this emergency
meeting of the Security Council given the serious nature
of the incidents that took place on Sunday 25 November
between the Russian naval forces and Ukrainian vessels
in the Kerch Strait.

We wish also to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
her briefing.

Inaregionalreadyaffectedbyaconflictthatobservers
say has killed approximately 10,000 people since it
started in 2014, this upsurge in tension could further
exacerbate the threat of a new military confrontation
with disastrous humanitarian consequences.

My country deplores this incident, which, like those
noted in recent months, continues to contribute to the
climate of mistrust between the Russian and Ukrainian
parties and to undermine the peace efforts made by the
international community to restore peace and stability
to the region.

My country would like to take the opportunity
provided by this meeting to urge the Russian and
Ukrainian parties to show restraint in order to avert
a military escalation in the region. It urges them to
refrain from any actions that could lead to a new and
larger-scale conflict.

My delegation deplores the lack of progress in
the implementation of the Minsk agreements under
the Normandy format and urges the Russian and
Ukrainian parties to promote a peaceful settlement to
their dispute. In this regard, it expresses its support for
the observer mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and for the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination in their efforts to
de-escalate the conflict. Furthermore, my delegation
urges the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination
to play its role of supporting OSCE observers and
monitoring the ceasefire agreements in order to ensure
the effective implementation of the Minsk agreements.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Cote
d'Ivoire's support for all efforts under way to find a
negotiated political solution to the crisis in Ukraine.

My country urges all protagonists to respect their
commitments to ensuring the effective implementation
of the Minsk agreements and of resolution 2202 (2015),
which endorses them.

