Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I thank Special Representative La Lime for her comprehensive briefing on the situation in Haiti. The United States is grateful for the excellent work that she and her team have done in support of political and economic stability in Haiti. I also thank Executive Director Gilles for her briefing and support for good governance and human rights. The United States reiterates the essential role of civil society and condemns reprisals against it. In January, we observed the 10-year anniversary of the devastating earthquake that killed more than 200,000 Haitians and 102 United Nations personnel. The United States stands with the people of Haiti, not only as they continue to recover from that tragedy but also as we work together to build a better future. While today's briefing outlined intense efforts to promote dialogue, the United States remains concerned by the lack of real political progress. The United States has made clear that Haiti's leaders must come together to find an inclusive solution. Political and economic stability will follow only when Haiti's leaders set aside their differences, and both build and support Haiti's State institutions.Despite months of political gridlock and deteriorating humanitarian and economic conditions, Haiti is operating without a seated Government following the expiration of the terms of most members of Parliament. I therefore repeat that there must be dialogue, and there must be a political accord. Time is of the essence. Haiti must hold legislative elections as soon as technically feasible, ultimately forming a fully functioning Government that is responsive to the needs of its people. The Haitian people must have a voice in selecting their leaders. Furthermore, while constitutional reforms are necessary and welcome, they must not become a pretext to delay elections. We also reiterate the importance of the efforts of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the role of the good offices of Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime in bringing the parties together. But we must also stress that only Haiti's leaders, both in the Government and the opposition, can make the decisions that are necessary to break the political impasse and address the underlying drivers of instability. Many of the benchmark targets and baselines outlined in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/123) will be frozen in place as long as Haiti's political stalemate persists. Political polarization has affected governance and inhibited important decisions by the Government. We acknowledge the additional progress made by the Haitian National Police (HNP) and its increasing professionalization. However, the HNP continues to face increasing operational pressures, budget constraints and governmental inaction. As the Secretary-General's report notes, without timely and sufficient funding, the HNP cannot fulfil its public safety mandate. We continue to call for accountability for human rights abuses and corruption. In that connection, we reiterate the need for the Government of Haiti to investigate and prosecute those responsible for the La Saline and Bel Air violence. We also note with concern that key social indicators point to rising vulnerability, with food insecurity, a weak health sector and general household resilience all trending in the wrong direction. In the coming weeks, Haiti's leaders must set aside their differences. While they work to that end, the United States remains committed to the success of BINUH and, above all, to the people of Haiti as they work to address their nation's challenges.
