Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We wish
to express our warm appreciation to Ambassador Jones
Parry for his excellent introduction of the report
(S/2004/525) of the Security Council mission to West
Africa, which he headed.

After all that has been said on the subject, we will
be brief. Although, given the duration of the mission,
the objectives that we set were rather ambitious, the
challenges that the region faces fully justified the
mission. In each of the seven countries that received
the mission, we were able to see that, even if the real
state of affairs were different in each case, the origins
and consequences of the problems were for the most
part the same. We were also able to appreciate again
how important a United Nations presence in the region
is, and we took note of the agreement between the
Security Council's analysis and the analyses of the
subregional organization and the continental
organization.

We noted that the process of restoring normalcy
and peace-building in the region depends heavily on
the creation of an environment that would develop the
strong economic potential of the subregion. Moreover,
that is clear with regard to the many recommendations
made, which the report introduced by Ambassador
Jones Parry describes in detail.
Finally, the mission gave Council members an
opportunity to assess the possibilities for strengthening
cooperation among the United Nations and subregional
and continental organizations, whose resolve to
effectively promote peace and stability in the countries
of the subregion is well known. As a result of the
mission, we have an excellent harvest of information,
which should enable us to better orient our activities in
the subregion's direction.

My delegation therefore believes it is now
imperative that we set in order the priorities identified
with a view to addressing more effectively the issue of
mobilizing and rationally using financial, material and
even human resources, whose scarcity often contributes
to the failure of recommended measures. The
considerations I just outlined prove the need to ensure
systematic follow-up by the Security Council of
implementation of the mission's conclusions and of the
recommendations made in the context of the first report
of the Secretary-General on ways to combat regional
and cross-border problems in West Africa. The
Security Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention should also study the report to identify
opportunities for synergy with a view to promoting
peace and stability in the subregion.

