Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me first convey to
you, Sir, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the Council presidency, as well as my
warmest thanks to Qatar for presiding over the Council
in December.

It is indeed a great privilege for me to take the
floor as the representative of Italy at this first public
debate of the Council in 2007 to address the core
function of the Security Council. I wish therefore to
thank you, Sir, at this first debate under your
presidency, for convening this meeting. I also wish to
take this opportunity to express my warmest welcome
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom Italy
wishes all the best in his future endeavours.

I will confine myself to making a few remarks on
some relevant issues.

As to conflict prevention, the Security Council
has an important responsibility to play in that field,
together with all the other bodies of the United
Nations, first and foremost the General Assembly, and
with all other actors that operate on various levels to
prevent the outbreak of new conflicts, be they States,
international organizations, non-governmental
organizations or civil society representatives. In that
framework, we think that the Secretariat should
enhance its essential role in presenting the Council
with analyses of possible new crisis situations and we
urge from it the greatest possible cooperation in that
field.

With regard to peacekeeping, Italy believes that
the Security Council's operative decisions should also
give adequate consideration to the views of countries
which, while not members of the Council, provide
human, technical and financial resources to United
Nations missions. Actually, our View is that there is a
strong need for more regular interaction between the
Security Council, the troop-contributing countries and
the General Assembly bodies that have a voice in
peacekeeping operations, as well as the Secretariat,
whose crucial role is to ensure that the conduct of
peacekeeping operations matches effectively the
purposes for which they are established. Based on its
renewed participation in United Nations-led missions,
Italy will continue to work in close coordination with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in that
respect.

Lastly, we believe that the United Nations
essential role in peacekeeping should be enhanced
through closer cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
the European Union, the Organization of American
States, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Intergovernmental Authority on

Development, the Pacific Islands Forum and others, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Being a
strong believer in the values of the European Union,
Italy will strive to ensure that the European political
and military mechanisms interact ever more closely
with the Secretariat, in compliance with the Joint
Declaration on United Nations-European Union
Cooperation in Crisis Management, adopted in
September 2003.

On peacebuilding, the general membership and
civil society have great expectations for the
Peacebuilding Commission's role in stabilizing
countries emerging from conflicts. In our View, it is
crucial that not only the Commission, but also the
entire United Nations system, focus their strategy to
meet those expectations. A better definition of its core
issues, a task-oriented agenda, a closer partnership
with relevant countries, and the more active
involvement of all stakeholders are, in our View, the
guiding principles for that crucial subsidiary organ of
the Security Council and the General Assembly. Italy
expects the advice of an effective and authoritative
Peacebuilding Commission to be duly taken into
account by the Council, by the United Nations other
main bodies, and by the international financial
institutions to ensure a smooth transition from conflict
situation to sustainable peace and development.

With respect to terrorism, in recent years the
Security Council has adopted a series of measures to
safeguard international security, which Italy strongly
supports. Last September, the whole membership
approved the first Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We believe that the action of the Security Council and
its subsidiary bodies cannot be separated, in that field,
from the action that other United Nations bodies
perform in fulfilment of their respective mandates.

Italy intends to provide constructive inputs to the
Security Council's action in its fight against
international terrorism, working to ensure that this
challenge be perceived as a common endeavour of the
international community as a whole. We are confident
that coordination among the various initiatives already
under way in the fight against international terrorism
shall be pursued effectively in the framework of the
Global Strategy.
5
To conclude, Italy wishes to praise the Security
Council's primary role and essential, irreplaceable
action for the maintenance of international peace and
security. As members know, we also strongly believe
that effective, inclusive multilateralism is the best way
to address the threats that are rising on the international
horizon. That is why Italy seeks to further strengthen
the action of the Security Council through a
comprehensive reform that encompasses
representativeness, transparency and efficiency,
highlighting the real ownership of the decision-making
process by all the Members of the United Nations
family.

