Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
pleasure for me, Madam, to see you presiding over the
Council today. The fact that you chose this day to do so
is clear evidence of your personal commitment, and
that of your country, to ending the tragedy of children
in armed conflict.

My country wishes to associate itself with the
statement to be made by the European Union.

I should like to begin by acknowledging the work
of Mr. Otunnu. His tireless efforts, dedication and
commitment deserve praise.

The fact that we are meeting today to consider the
question of children and armed conflict bears witness
to the primary importance the Council attaches to the
problem. That is in itself both a positive and,
regrettably, negative fact. It is positive because it
demonstrates the international community's high level
of awareness of the issue. It is negative because at the
same time it is a sign that the problem persists, that we
have not be able to resolve it and that, in certain
respects, the problem has even worsened.

That is not due to a lack of legal or institutional
structures. Both exist. But, unfortunately, we have not
been able to apply them fully. Precisely for that reason,
it seems to us that the most appropriate course of
action now is to focus on how to act effectively to
achieve that implementation of existing instruments. In
that respect, we believe that we can concentrate on the
following areas.

The first is the area of action. Without doubt, the
recruitment of children into armed groups is one of the
key areas. But it is not the only one. Other aspects
should also be included, such as the killing and
maiming of children, their abduction and forced
displacement, obstacles to children's access to
humanitarian assistance and to education, and sexual
violence, in particular against girls - as noted by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund, Ms. Bellamy, whose work I applaud. The gender
perspective is essential and must never be forgotten.

Secondly, the existence of the lists is certainly an
important element. They constitute the core of a
necessary policy of deterrence and ending impunity.
However, the lists must be widely accepted in order to
be truly effective. Therefore, the criteria for the
inclusion of groups in the lists - or their exclusion -
must be studied in detail.
The third element is monitoring and reporting. As
Mr. Otunnu indicated, these activities must be carried
out, evaluated and communicated precisely and quickly
with a view to taking decisions and taking action. The
system must be strengthened at its roots, in other words
on the ground. To do so, above all, the performance of
the child protection advisers should be evaluated, and
the participation of local communities and non-
governmental organizations in the mechanism should
be encouraged from the start.

The fourth element is coordination among the
various bodies of the United Nations system. There
should be complete consistency from activities in the
field through to the level of Headquarters, where the
role of the Special Representative is essential. At the
same time, we should continue the policy of including
the question of children and armed conflict both in the
reports of the Secretary-General on specific situations
and in the mandates of peacekeeping operations.

With those elements, it should be possible to
elaborate in a fixed period of time - for example, four,
five or six months - specific plans of action that
propose concrete measures to put an end to this tragedy
of the twenty-first century.

