Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honore' for her briefing and leadership. I also thank all
the dedicated men and women serving in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
who are working with her to build a more secure and
stable Haiti.

The United States welcomes the recent progress
Haiti has made towards holding elections this year,
including the promulgation of an electoral decree on
2 March 2015, drafted by a new Electoral Council,
drawn from civil society, and that Council's subsequent
announcement of voting dates.

While we commend President Martelly's efforts
to promote an inclusive political process, including
by forming a multi-party Government, the health of
Haiti's democracy depends on restoring a functioning
legislature without further delay. That is why it is
so important that elections take place this year as
planned, and that the Government continue to use
its extraordinary decree powers solely to administer
elections and keep the State running. We also call upon
all of Haiti's political leaders and parties to participate
in elections and to ensure an atmosphere of peace so
that all eligible Haitians who wish to vote can do so
without fear for their safety.

With the electoral decree in place and election dates
set, urgent attention to preparing for and organizing
the polls is required to ensure elections that are free,
fair, credible and inclusive. Continued inclusive
political dialogue and preparations for elections that
are transparent and ensure a level playing field will
be required to sustain the generally stable security
situation that the Secretary-General has reported.

While MINUSTAH and the rest ofthe international
community, including my Government, stand ready to
support the administration of the elections, ultimately
the responsibility for ensuring their success lies with
Haitians: the Haitian Government, the Electoral
Council, the political parties and the Haitian people
themselves.

The level of support provided by MINUSTAH,
particularly its engineering battalions, for elections in
2010 and 2011 were part of the package of extraordinary
measures that the international community took to help
Haiti recover from the devastating 2010 earthquake,
not an enduring precedent for elections this year or
in the future. We join the Secretary-General's call on
the Government to ensure the Electoral Council and
other States institutions have adequate resources to
administer elections in a manner that reflects Haitians'
increased assumption of a responsibility so central to
the exercise of sovereignty. The United States will do
our part in support of that.

Successful elections will require robust international
support, of course, including from MINUSTAH. The
Mission should, without delay, catalogue the functions
played in the last elections by each of its respective
components, including the funds and programmes. It
should identify any of those critical functions that each
component will not be able to carry out in 2015, and it
should work urgently across the United Nations system
and with the Electoral Council, donors, Haitian and
international civil society actors and the Government
of Haiti to ensure that those functions are carried out
effectively during this year's elections.

MINUSTAH should also work closely with the
Electoral Council to identify any elements of Haiti's
election planning, including the number and location
of polling centres, that may make the process more
vulnerable to violence or manipulation and to develop
and implement corrective measures transparently and
in consultation with Haitian political actors. The 2015
elections will not be Haiti's last. It is important to use
each electoral cycle to improve Haiti's electoral system
and to make it more sustainable.

We note the generally stable security situation
that the Secretary-General reported. That comes amid
the continued growth and professionalization of the
Haitian National Police (HNP), to which donors and
MINUSTAH should continue to offer maximal support.

The Haitian National Police needs to continue
to grow in size and capability. But while we were in
Haiti, we heard that every trained Haitian National
Policeman or Policewomen was worth 10 international
police. Moreover, even with the reported increase in
crime and gang-related violence, Haiti's homicide rate
remains well below the regional average. Incidents of
violent unrest during the reporting period totalled only
215 events. In most of those cases, the HNP required
no operational support from any MINUSTAH forces
to manage the situation, and in only 16 per cent of
all incidents of violent unrest nationwide did the
HNP require some level of operational support for
MINUSTAH's military forces. Most of those incidents
took place in close proximity to the three locations
where the military component will be based following
MINUSTAH's reconfiguration. When support from
the military component is required elsewhere in the
country going forward, it will be available thanks to the
mobility that the reconfigured Mission will have. The
overall security situation in the six departments where
MINUSTAH military no longer reside remained stable
in the reporting period.

MINUSTAH continues to be an essential hedge
against the risk of any future deterioration in security
conditions, and the United States strongly supports a
push by the United Nations, backed by Member States,
to ensure the dispatch of an additional 300 international
police forces to Haiti, as authorized but not yet deployed.
We also support adding, without delay, medium-left
helicopters to MINUSTAH's aviation component,
which will make the Mission's forces more quickly
deployable in large numbers to any location in the
country in the event of a different scale of unrest than
we have seen thus far.

We also support the Secretary-General's call,
echoed here today by the Special Representative, to
ensure maximal visibility of MINUSTAH's forces, an
objective well served by ensuring the Mission's leaders
retain the flexibility to redistribute their forces as
necessary to respond to evolving security conditions.

The year 2015 poses extraordinary challenges
for Haiti, but also extraordinary opportunities: an
opportunity to break from past electoral cycles marred
by fraud and disenfranchisement and the violence that
both have historically engendered; an opportunity for
Haiti's political parties to put aside their differences
and cooperate to ensure elections that place Haiti's
democracy on sounder footing; an opportunity to
adopt more sustainable elections architecture; and an
opportunity for Haitians to take a giant step forward
towards sustained political stability and self-sufficiency.
As they seize those opportunities, the Government and
the people of Haiti can continue to count on the utmost
support of the United States.

