The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council unequivocally
condemns the terrorist attack in Beirut on 13 June
2007, which killed at least nine persons,
including Member of Parliament Walid Eido, and
injured several others. The Security Council
expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the families of the victims and to the people
and Government of Lebanon.

"The Security Council commends the
determination and commitment of the
Government of Lebanon to bring to justice the
perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of this and
other assassinations and underlines its
determination to support the Government of
Lebanon in its efforts to this end.

"The Security Council condemns any
attempt to destabilize Lebanon, including through
political assassination or other terrorist acts. The
Security Council reiterates its full support to the
ongoing efforts by the Government and people of
Lebanon to combat terrorism, solidify democracy
and institutions through national dialogue and
extend the authority of the Lebanese Government
throughout its territory.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
in Lebanon and the region to show restraint and a
sense of responsibility with a view to preventing
any further deterioration of the situation in
Lebanon. The Security Council urges all States,
in accordance with its resolutions 1373 (2001),
1566 (2004) and 1624 (2005), to cooperate fully
in the fight against terrorism.

"The Security Council reaffirms its previous
calls upon all parties concerned to cooperate fully
and urgently with the Security Council for the
full implementation of all relevant resolutions, in
particular those concerning the restoration of the
territorial integrity, full sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to follow closely
and report regularly to the Council on the
situation in Lebanon."

(spoke in French)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
07-38179

