Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): First of all, allow me
to thank you, Sir, for convening today's open debate on
the important subject of "Peace-building: towards a
comprehensive approach". I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his opening statement today.

This meeting is indeed very timely, as over the
next two days the Fourth High-level Meeting will take
place between the United Nations and regional
organizations, which will also reflect on this important
issue. We thank you, Sir, for your comprehensive
background document.

The Charter ofthe United Nations speaks of wars,
aggressions, disputes and conflicts essentially as
situations of belligerency involving two or more
sovereign States. In such situations, United Nations
peacekeeping operations would normally involve
deployment along the international frontiers of the
opposing sides so as to keep peace between them.
There is no scope for a larger role for a United Nations
operations in conflict situations ofthis kind.

Since the United Nations Charter was written, the
world has changed dramatically. We may not be totally
freed from situations in which two or more States use
or threaten to use force to resolve differences, but
increasingly at the United Nations, and in the Security
Council in particular, we have been dealing instead
with civil conflicts. The striking examples are Somalia,
Angola, Cambodia, Liberia, the Central African
Republic, Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Haiti, Georgia, East Timor and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The United Nations has been
drawn into all these cases, either through peacekeeping
operations or missions of other kinds, so as to stop the
fighting, to prevent genocide or to deal with massive
humanitarian situations and, in some cases, has even
provided interim administration, such as in East Timor
and Kosovo.

The Brahimi report, in our View, rightly
concludes that "peacekeepers and peace-builders are
inseparable partners" (S/2000/809, para. 28). Civil
wars usually leave populations bitterly divided. More
often than not in post-conflict situations, new political
processes need to be undertaken for the emergence of a
credible Government. Law and order need to be fully
restored to enable refugees and internally displaced
persons to return home in an atmosphere of security.
Institutions have to be built to ensure proper
governance. Human resources have to be developed
through training facilities. Infrastructures damaged
during the conflict have to be rebuilt. Above all, the
devastated economy must be relaunched. All this can
happen in a post-conflict situation only with the
massive support of the international community for
peace-building.

Following the first Security Council summit in
1992 and the subsequent publication of An Agenda for
Peace, there have been a greater interest and
engagement by the United Nations in post-conflict
peace-building operations. Through these operations,
our Organization has made a remarkable difference in
the lives of numerous citizens in Namibia, Guinea-
Bissau, Mozambique, Guatemala, El Salvador and
elsewhere.

There is no doubt that, for a peace-building
operation to be successful, it requires a comprehensive
and holistic approach. Several components are essential
to bringing about sustained peace in the aftermath of a
conflict. The need for demilitarization, control of the
illicit flow of small arms and light weapons, the
setting-up of proper democratic institutions, respect for
the rule of law, efficient civilian police, an improved
judicial system, electoral reform and respect for human
rights, along with socio-economic development, are
crucial to the restoration of peace and normalcy.

I would wish to highlight the following aspects,
which are deemed important for successful peace-
building. By destroying yesterday's weapons used in
conflicts, we would prevent their further use in future
wars. The illicit trade and mass flow of small arms and
light weapons on the African continent are only adding
fuel to an already explosive situation.

We also believe that, after the settlement of a
conflict, States should be encouraged and assisted to
establish laws and procedures for the safe and effective
collection and destruction of illegal small arms and
light weapons. By so doing, the risk of the warring
parties' turning again to the use of arms could be
mitigated. In this regard, we wish to underscore the
need for all arms embargoes to be fully respected by
the international community. The United States and the
Southern African Development Community signed a
declaration in December last year on United Nations
sanctions and restraint in sale and transfers of
conventional arms to regions of conflict in Africa. The
declaration, inter alia, calls on States to adopt and
implement national controls and measures to prevent
the flow in conflict areas in Africa of confiscated arms,
as well as those collected following the cessation of
civil and international conflicts. We consider this to be
an important step towards peace-building in African
situations.

We have seen in Mozambique weapons
exchanged for such tools as sewing machines, hoes and
construction materials that helped the rehabilitation of
former combatants. In Albania, community-based pilot
programmes provided health care, new schools and
proper infrastructure to communities in exchange for
arms and ammunition. We believe that this kind of
programme should be integrated into all peace-building
operations.

A major impediment to peace-building and
reconstruction after an internal conflict is, in many
cases, the serious problem of landmines, millions of
which remain scattered in the conflict zones. From
Mozambique to southern Lebanon, landmines are still
affecting the lives of millions of people. There can be
no infrastructural development or agricultural activities
in areas pitted with landmines. We would wish to
appeal to countries with the necessary technical
expertise and informative maps of the mined areas to
redouble their efforts in assisting demining activities.
This would indeed be a major contribution towards
peace-building.

My delegation wishes to reiterate that there can
be no durable peace without good governance, sound
democratic practices and respect for the rule of law and
transparency. Free and fair elections are one of the
important pillars that sustain democratic societies. It is
a fact that democracies rarely go to war against each
other. It is equally true that democracies have a lower
level of internal conflicts than non-democracies.

My delegation wishes to underscore the
importance of putting in place a democratically elected
Government once a peace agreement has been reached.
It is encouraging to note that the Electoral Assistance
Division of the United Nations is providing more and
more assistance to electoral processes worldwide.
Illegitimate and non-credible regimes very often carry
the seeds of instability that eventually lead to
frustration among the population, as a result of which
conflicts may arise.

Governments have a major responsibility in the
process of confidence-building. They should be
encouraged to undertake national reconciliation and to
promote unity, as well as demonstrate respect for
human rights. States should avail themselves of the
expertise of the United Nations, including through the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, in drafting
national plans of action for human rights and
strengthening their judicial institutions. There will be
no sustained peace and security if individuals continue
to live in fear of arbitrary arrest and detention.

Newly established democratic Governments
should also enlist the expertise of the International
Civil Service Commission to help build a credible,
transparent and accountable public administration.
Corruption, malpractice and distorted decision-making
not only stall economic development but also
discourage foreign investment. For this reason alone,
we ponder why several countries are still crippled in
poverty despite being endowed with rich natural
resources.

Last week we renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), and everyone expressed satisfaction at the
fact that the people of East Timor were heading
towards the achievement of their cherished goal of
independence. The role of UNTAET in training the
East Timorese to take charge of their administrative
machinery and institutions, which are the prerequisites
for a newly independent democratic nation,
demonstrates the resolve of the United Nations for a
comprehensive approach towards peace-building.

The success of a peace-building operation lies to
a great extent in the sense of security felt by citizens.
The training, reforming and restructuring of local
police forces are very important components of peace-
building. My delegation subscribes to paragraphs 39 to
41 of the Brahimi report, especially with regard to the
call for a doctrinal shift in the use of civilian police and
human right experts in complex peacekeeping
operations, with a View to strengthening the legal
institutions and improving human rights.

The rehabilitation and resettlement of the local
population after conflicts remain the central objectives
of any peace-building undertaking. Our efforts should
be focused more and more at creating the conditions
conducive to sustainable economic growth necessary
for reconstruction.

United Nations agencies, regional organizations
and non-governmental organizations are already
heavily engaged in reconstruction activities. However,
we would like to see more timely efforts applied
towards the construction of basic physical
infrastructures, proper transportation and
telecommunications, schools and public health
facilities as part of the reconstruction programmes.
Education would indeed provide the younger
generation with technical and professional training,
which is the essential foundation for the acquisition of
skills. These are important elements that would
eventually lead to job creation and consequently
enhance the quality of life ofthe people.

In conclusion, let me add that with the
designation of the Department of Political Affairs as
the focal point within the United Nations for post-
conflict peace-building, there has been better
coordination and progress in peace-building activities.
We welcome the initiative taken to invite the World
Bank to participate in the Executive Committee on
Peace and Security, which is responsible for the design
and implementation of post-conflict peace-building
initiatives within the United Nations. We must also
work towards enhancing the coordination role of the
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) within the
United Nations, since with the growing number of
conflicts, there is greater need to make peace-building
operations a high priority. Article 65 of the United
Nations Charter lays down clearly the parameters for
cooperation between the Security Council and
ECOSOC. We believe that Article 65, which so far has
been applied only once - in 1999, in favour of
Haiti- should become a Vital instrument for
comprehensive United Nations post-conflict peace-
building efforts.

Finally, peace-building enterprises can succeed
only if they are backed by the necessary financial
support. We hope that the United Nations, the
international financial institutions and the donor
community will work together concertedly to make
sure that what we are discussing today does not remain
a dead letter.

