Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to join the
other speakers in thanking Mr. Eamon Gilmore, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade of Ireland and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), for his comprehensive briefing on the
programme of work of the OSCE during the Irish
chairmanship.

Pakistan supports the role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security and their cooperation with the United
Nations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. In view of their unique understanding
of local issues, regional organizations can effectively
contribute to addressing regional challenges and to
strengthening the multilateral system.

The Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe - the predecessor organization to the OSCE -
played an important role by providing a forum for
dialogue and negotiation between the East and the West
during the cold war and in dealing with the post-cold
war transition in Europe. The OSCE continues to be
relevant to its member States on matters of security,
conflict resolution, addressing transnational tracks and
the promotion of and respect for human rights.

Lately, it has also undertaken initiatives for
dealing with post-conflict peacebuilding and economic
and environmental issues as well. The OSCE's role in
advancing the goals of peace and stability in and
around Europe, including through conventional arms
control among its members, is one of its most
acknowledged activities. Pakistan itself has been
advocating the cause of stability and peace in South
Asia through a conventional arms control approach.
Such approaches and best practices can be replicated in
other regions.

We particularly value the work of the OSCE in
the capacity-building of States. In that regard, we
appreciate the activities of the Organization in
Afghanistan in the capacity-building of the Afghan
National Police, the combating of drug trafficking and
customs and border management. Such initiatives will
help overcome the significant challenges faced by that
country.

In conclusion, we wish Ireland a very successful
chairpersonship of the OSCE. We take note of its
priorities and hope that under its stewardship the
organization will continue with its important work.
