Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council. We
hail the ideas put forth by the Secretary-General in his
statement to the Council.

The Security Council is meeting today in
exceptional circumstances, imposed by the delicate and
critical situation in the Middle East: I say "in the
Middle East", not only in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

The Council cannot meet today's Israeli actions
with silence. For Israel, it was not enough to have
besieged the Palestinian President for nearly four
months; it was not enough to have prevented him from
attending the Arab summit at Beirut: it has sent its
tanks and its special forces to attack the headquarters
and offices of the Palestinian President and in large part
to destroy them. These acts of aggression against the
symbol of resistance, the symbol of the Palestinian
State, have unmasked the true face of the present
Israeli Government. As Mr. Kofi Annan said at the
beginning of this meeting, such an act "will not bring
Israel closer to peace" (supra); it will bring the region
closer to war.

These Israeli acts, just one day after Arab kings
and other heads of State or Government offered a peace
initiative framed by Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah,
provide yet further proof of the Israeli Government's
true intentions in its ongoing attempts to kill the
Middle East peace process.

It has been more than a year since the Israeli
Government began its methodical policy of creating a
new de facto situation in the Middle East on the pretext
of security for Israel. Israel has thus escalated its
repression of the Palestinian population by blockading
them and stifling them economically, by demolishing
their homes and by occupying their cities. Even the
refugee camps have not been spared. This took place
without the Security Council adopting a single
resolution to deter Israel.

Amidst all these events and all this frustration,
the Council adopted its resolution 1397 (2002), which
is the source of some hope. Morocco was among the
first countries to welcome that resolution, in which we
could discern a glimmer of hope that new life could be
breathed into the peace process and that the cycle of
violence in the Middle East could be ended.
Subsequently, Arab kings and other heads of State or
Government met at Beirut and sent a clear message of
peace to the international community: the message was
"land for peace", putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories. Instead of responding
positively to the Arab initiative and choosing the path
of peace, Israel sent its tanks and troops to commit a
direct act of aggression targeting President Arafat.

The international community, and Arab and
Islamic countries in particular, as well as all peace-
loving peoples, look with hope to the Council to adopt
a resolution commensurate with the critical
circumstances in the Middle East. We sincerely hope
we will not be disappointed.

Everyone knows Morocco's position with regard
to the Middle East. Likewise, everyone is aware of
Morocco's efforts to establish a dialogue between the
opposing sides in that region. That position is based on
Morocco's conviction of the need to coexist and to
solve disputes through dialogue and negotiation.
Morocco has always been at the forefront of
contributing to peace in the Middle East along with all
those of good intention. But those efforts were
successful only as long as Israel gave the impression
that it wanted peace with its neighbours and that it was
ready to pay the price for peace, namely, to recognize
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people
and to withdraw from all Palestinian and Arab
territories it occupied in the wake ofthe June 1967 war,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, in particular Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

I say with all frankness that we all feel pain at
seeing innocent civilians- children and women-
fall victim to violence, whatever its source. We are all
hoping and working to put an end to such acts of
violence. The Palestinian people- the besieged and
suffocating Palestinian people, whose economy is
being blockaded and stifled- have been pushed by
the occupation and its practices into frustration and
hopelessness. Recent months have shown that violence
will not bring an end to violence and that military force
and occupation cannot destroy the will of the
Palestinian people to live and to achieve their
legitimate rights.

The international community and world public
opinion await concrete action and a courageous
initiative that reflects a genuine will to end the cycle of
violence. That must be done by the party with the
largest military force in the region, namely, Israel. The
international community is also waiting for all those of
good intention who can influence events in the region
to restore hope to the people in the region and to bring
about peace. Morocco, as always, continues to be
willing and ready to contribute very positively to that
aim.

What we expect from the Security Council is that
it demand that Israel stop its aggression immediately,
withdraw from the Palestinian territories it has
reoccupied, recommit itself to the Madrid principles
and respond positively to the most recent Arab
initiative. Finally, we should return to the negotiating
table as soon as possible and demonstrate the necessary
political will to bring about peace to the region.

