Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The
United States, too, condemns Russia's decision to grant
expedited Russian citizenship to Ukrainians living
in Russia-controlled Donbas. Through that highly
provocative action, Russia is clearly intensifying its
assault on Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Donbas is in Ukraine and the people there are
Ukrainian, regardless of the language they prefer to
speak. Conferring citizenship en masse to the citizens
of another State undermines and violates the principle
of sovereignty. Russia's actions subvert the principles
on which the Minsk agreements are based ~ that
Donbas is an integral part of Ukraine and the Ukrainian
Government must re-establish its control over
that territory.

Russia signed the Minsk agreements in 2014 and
2015, and President Poroshenko and President-elect
Zelensky have reaffirmed that those agreements are the
best vehicle for ending the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
It is unacceptable that Russia would take steps to
stymie the peace process just four days after Ukraine's
presidential elections. We welcome President-elect
Zelensky's expressed commitment to implementing the
Minsk agreements and redoubling efforts to support
Ukrainian citizens living in territories controlled
by Russia.

If Russia were truly interested in the well-being of
the Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine, it would seize
this moment to chart a new course in Russian-Ukrainian
relations and seek to work with President Poroshenko and
his successor to promote peace. Instead, Russia further
fuels a conflict that has already claimed over 13,000
lives. Despite that deeply disturbing development, we
stand ready to support the efforts of Ukraine to restore
Ukrainian Government control over all territory
within its internationally recognized borders. United
States Special Representative Kurt Volker is prepared
to engage intensively with Ukraine, Russia and our
partners here at the United Nations to de-escalate the
conflict and advance the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, including through an international security
force that would facilitate their implementation.

Once again, we affirm that our Donbas-related
sanctions will remain in place until Russia withdraws
its forces from eastern Ukraine and implements the
Minsk agreements. Our Crimea-related sanctions will
remain in place until Russia returns control of the
peninsula to Ukraine.

