Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to congratulate you, Mr. Minister, on the
outstanding way in which the delegation of Slovakia is
guiding the Security Council. In particular, I commend
you for your initiative to convene this open debate to
discuss security sector reform, which is of great
importance for the international community and for the
Council.

The tasks of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security have
been evolving and increasing in recent years. Council
action is not limited to conflicts between States, but
has extended to violent intra-State conflicts that have
international implications.

Managing a crisis requires not only putting an
end to direct confrontation, but also combating the
fundamental causes of the problem in order to prevent
relapse. Thus, new threats to international peace and
security lead us to examine a State's structure and its
relationship with its population in the post-conflict
phase.

Any State that has suffered an internal armed
conflict needs to rebuild the institutions that will
enable it to organize political life, provide security and
promote the well-being of its population. It is essential
to recover, in a democratic manner, the principle of
authority, respect for the law and a legitimate
monopoly on the use of force. Such progress must be
accompanied by protection of human rights and the
equitable administration of justice.

Security sector reform in countries that have
experienced conflict is a long-term process. It involves
broad intersectoral planning and requires participation
by all national political and social groups, which bear
primary responsibility for their own future. We
recognize that every post-conflict situation has its own
characteristics. That requires that it be addressed in a
specific manner, on a case-by-case basis.

The United Nations is called upon to play an
important part in support of these processes.
Specifically, the Peacebuilding Commission will have
to play a major role in that effort, promoting
improvements and the utilization of national capacities
and providing proposals and advice on comprehensive
post-conflict strategies. Similarly, it will have to
cooperate in the quest for assistance and international
financing, in coordination with other United Nations
organs, subregional and regional actors and other
international organizations, including financial
institutions and donor entities.

By addressing security sector reform, we have
begun a new stage linked to peacekeeping operations,
thus lending continuity to a major process in finding
lasting solutions to crises. Among the elements related
to security sector reform, my delegation wishes to
highlight the following.

First, it is essential to give priority to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants in order to pacify society and
help build a solid basis for the reconstruction of the
Government and of institutions. In that regard, we must
reiterate that it is urgent to carry out effective measures
to control the trade in and possession of weapons,
particularly small arms and light weapons. That
includes countries that are weapons producers, sellers
or brokers.

Secondly, we must give priority to the
establishment of institutions providing order and
internal security and to the appropriate training of their
personnel. The objective is to train a professional
police force, with an institutional structure, that has
clear guidelines and parameters. To be sure, that
requires a high level of political will, experience and
resources.

Thirdly, we need to consider, on a case-by-case
basis, restructuring or strengthening the armed forces
of countries emerging from internal conflict, taking
into account their reintegration into a democratic
framework and factors related to their defence
responsibilities and the requirements of national
reconstruction.

Fourthly, it must be emphasized that security
sector reform should be supplemented by attention to
social and economic factors that could trigger
insecurity, such as poverty, marginalization and
exclusion.

Finally, the Security Council must continue to
support the continuance of peace missions for as long
as necessary to consolidate reform and ensure adequate
training in the security sector in order to prevent the re-
emergence of conflicts and violence. In that way we
can facilitate the rebuilding of States that provide to

their citizens stability and conditions conducive to
inclusive development within a socially acceptable
political context.

