The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru.
Peru welcomes the adoption of resolution 2482
(2019), concerning the links between international
terrorism and organized crime. We thank the members
of the Council and the broader membership of the
Organization for their resolute support, which was
illustrated recently in the open debate held on 9 July
(see S/PV.8569).

My country has suffered from the consequences of
such links, in particular those between drug trafficking
and terrorist groups. Throughout its term as a member
of the Security Council, we have encouraged efforts
aimed at deepening understanding of the nature and
scope of the links between international terrorism
and organized crime in order to identify, prevent and
dismantle them. However, we acknowledge that both
phenomena have different root causes and independent
legal frameworks.

With today's resolution, the international
community now has a new tool to respond to that major
challenge and threat to international security, in keeping
with the obligations of States under international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and refugee law. The resolution we
have adopted today calls on States to better coordinate
efforts to strengthen the global response to such links
and on the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate to incorporate those issues in its
country analyses and assessments.

The new text also highlights the existing links
between terrorism and trafficking in drugs, weapons
and persons, as well other crimes, such as illicit
trafficking in natural resources, metals and minerals.
Resolution 2482 (2019) also highlights other aspects,
such as the need to strengthen border control, better
coordinate cross-border investigations in the case
of links between terrorism and organized crime, and
improve information-sharing within Governments,
between public and private authorities and at the
international level.

I would also like to stress the importance of
promoting good governance and combating corruption.
It is essential to strengthen anti-money-laundering and
terrorism financing policies, in accordance with the
Palermo Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and other relevant instruments.

I would like to conclude by underscoring that
technical assistance and capacity-building are critical
to achieving all those objectives. The resolution
therefore also highlights that United Nations entities, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Office and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, will continue
to provide support in that area. It also calls on the
Secretary-General to report on the subject.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at12.40p.m.
