Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I should like
to thank Mr. Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his
excellent briefing. Once again, I underline the full
support of my delegation for the way ahead that he has
outlined. I would like to focus my intervention on three
priorities for action.

The first is the national conference as a centrepiece
of the action plan. Our first political priority must be
the national conference. It provides an opportunity for
Libyans to unblock the political process and make it
truly inclusive. It also represents an opportunity to pave
the way for unified institutions and elections based on
national consensus. Unfortunately, the current stalemate
has many beneficiaries. As the Special Representative
said, we should expect attempts to spoil the process from
many sides. Therefore, the international community as
a whole must stand behind the Special Representative
and his suggested way ahead. Germany remains fully
supportive ofhis work. Ifnecessary, we need to be ready
to put pressure on those who try to derail the process.
That may include targeted sanctions, as the Council
has agreed previously. The unity of the international
community, and of the Council in particular, remains
crucial. We owe such unity to the much-suffering
Libyan people, whose patience is running thin.

Secondly, institution-building efforts are necessary
conditions for stabilization. The political process does
not happen in avacuum, and it cannot deliver in avacuum.
It simultaneously requires institution-building efforts
as a complementary second priority. In that regard,
initiatives like audits, the Joint Operations Centre and
police training are essential. We must become better at
implementing such measures swiftly, consistently and
jointly in the multilateral framework. UNSMIL should
be in the lead and initiate and coordinate specific
multilateral support efforts for Libyan institutions.
Germany stands ready to give substantial support and
commends what has already been achieved, for example,
by the Stabilization Facility for Libya. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative for his kind words
on the German Bundesbank experts who are currently
training Libyan staff at the Central Bank.

My third point touches on the urgency of economic
reform to mitigate tensions. Our third priority must
be economic reform. We call on Libyan actors to
implement economic reforms without delay, notably
on exchange rates and subsidies. The current system
favours those who do not work for the benefit of the
Libyan population. We must therefore strive to change
that system. That includes the fight against such
criminal practices as fuel smuggling and currency
fraud. In general, more transparency is needed to
mitigate tensions and create a more stable economic
environment, with better distribution of wealth.

The Special Representative underlined that the list
of remaining challenges in Libya remains long. In my
concluding remarks I will list two or three of them.

First of all, the proper representation of women, as
many speakers before me mentioned, is of absolutely
crucial importance to us. Women have to be included,
not least in the national conference but also in all
other processes that lead to democratic transition,
reconciliation and the building of national institutions.

Secondly, illicit weapon-streams from Libya have
contributed to the destabilization of large parts of the
Sahel and West Africa. We need to develop innovative
approaches to involve national actors in Libya in
introducing measures for effective small arms control.

Special Representative Salame emphasized the
importance of respecting human rights and international
humanitarian law. Germany remains concerned about
human rights violations and abuses. Germany is
especially worried by the situation in detention centres
in Libya, as recently reported by ajoint investigation by
UNSMIL and the United Nations Human Rights Office.

Thousands of migrants are systematically subjected
to starvation, beatings, burned with hot objects or
subjected to other forms of ill treatment. That has to be
addressed and changed.

Lastly, we very much welcome that UNSMIL was
mandated to assist in the protection of women and
girls from sexual and gender-based violence under the
renewed mandate of UNSMIL from September 2018. We
explicitly welcome the recent inclusion of gender-based
violence crimes as a listing criterion in the sanctions
regime, as well as the listing of six individuals for their
involvement in human trafficking.

