Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
thank New Zealand for convening today's open debate,
which is a good opportunity for delegations to once
again exchange views on the current situation the
Middle East, particularly concerning possible ways for
settling conflicts or tensions in the region.

While Ukraine has aligned itselfwith the statement
of the European Union, I would like to say a few words
in our national capacity.

Ukraine reiterates its commitment to a balanced
and impartial approach to the Middle East issue and is
willing to develop stable and constructive relations with
both Israel and Arab States. We support the idea that
the only realistic way to solve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is through an agreement between the parties
that ends all claims and fulfils the aspirations of both
sides. A lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved,
one which would see Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition.
Accordingly, we urge the parties to renew their
commitment to the two-State solution, to build trust
and resume meaningful negotiations with the aim of
achieving a comprehensive peace agreement. We also
reiterate the call on all sides not to undertake steps that
would lead further away from a negotiated solution. We
consistently support the Middle East peace process and
believe that peace in the region can be achieved only if
viable mutual concessions are made at the negotiating
table.

Ukraine also reiterates its position that an Israeli-
Palestinian peace agreement lies within the framework
of the unconditional fulfilment by the parties in the
conflict of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and other documents 4 such as the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, which remains of strategic importance for
any future comprehensive peace agreement.

Regarding the situation in Syria, Ukraine reaffirms
its commitment to the universal principles and basic
norms of international law, in particular the strict
observance of human rights, territorial integrity,
inviolability of borders and State sovereignty. We
strongly condemn the ongoing violence and systematic
violations of human rights in Syria perpetrated by
both the regime and terrorist groups. Fighting between
Government forces, non-State armed groups and
listed terrorist groups continues to result in the death,
injury and displacement of civilians, as well as the
destruction of property and infrastructure. Parties to
the conflict continue to disregard their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including for the
protection of civilians.

May 2015 was reportedly the deadliest month of
the Syrian crisis so far. We express our deep concerns
regarding the continued bloodshed and violence against
civilians in Syria, particularly that caused by military
operations of the Syrian regime in heavily populated
areas of the country. That includes the use of barrel
bombs, which is prohibited under international law.
The indiscriminate and excessive use of force by the
army against the civilian population, as well as the
intolerable violence of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) and other terrorist groups operating
on the ground, contribute to the considerable human
sufferings in Syria.

In a letter of 18 June, Ukraine, along with 70 other
countries, expressed its outrage at the never-ending
state of unchecked brutality in Syria, especially the
systematic use of barrel bombs. At the same time,
Ukraine proceeds from the fact that, according
to the Charter of the United Nations, the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security falls on the Security Council.

Ukraine remains deeply concerned about the
activities of ISIS and other associated terrorist entities
in the Middle East. The negative impact oftheir presence
in the region, their violent, extremist ideology and their
destabilizing actions must not be tolerated and should
be duly addressed by the international community. We
strongly condemn the crimes and acts of mass violence
that ISIS commits against civilians 4 including the
most vulnerable minorities, which may amount to
crimes against humanity. We hail all possible steps,
including appropriate military operations against ISIS
forces, conducted by the international coalition, aimed
at the complete removal of terrorist threats from the
region. We underscore that the fight against ISIS and
other terrorist groups that commit barbaric acts against
the people of Syria and Iraq should contribute to the
political transformation of the region.

