Mr. Heumann (Israel): Today some representatives
have exploited this forum to launch a range of baseless
accusations against my country. It is truly absurd to
hear some of the world's most oppressive tyrannies
lecture the Middle East's only true democracy about
the rule of law. In fact, while the State of Israel defends
the rule of law, our detractors defy the rules of law and
logic.

I am pleased to see that the Iranian representative is
taking full advantage of freedom of expression in this
Chamber. I suppose it is fitting, given that the Iranian
people do not enjoy this right at home. It seems to me
that he got a little carried away with the novelty and has
used this forum to spread tall tales at Israel's expense;
after all, why spoil a good story with the truth?

The truth is that in Iran women are oppressed and
minorities are prosecuted, free speech is censored and
elections are a sham. Nonetheless, Iran is as quick to
indict Israel as it is to indict its own citizens, without
just cause, due diligence or reasonable doubt.

I should also like to respond to the comments
made by the Palestinian observer. It seems as though
the Palestinian delegation is heavy on the criticism of
Israel but very light on the facts. It is quite convenient
that in his remarks, the Palestinian observer neglected
to mention the many human rights abuses by the
Palestinian Authority security apparatus operating in
the West Bank. This is to say nothing of the widespread
and appalling human rights abuses committed by the
Hamas terrorist organization in Gaza.

Out of respect for the valuable time of the Council,
I will not respond further to those baseless accusations
except to say that it is unfortunate that the Palestinian
observer insists on using this forum to incite hostilities
against Israel, while peace negotiations are currently
under way.

Finally, allow me to refer to the Saudi Arabian
delegation. I want to take this opportunity to invite the
representative of Saudi Arabia and his colleagues to
Israel to see and learn how human rights are protected
and the rule oflaw is observed, and take this lesson back
home to his own country. I am sure that he has a lot to
learn. Let me also make this offer to the representative
of Saudi Arabia: if he cannot cover his trip to Israel
with petrodollars, I am sure that the Government of
Israel will cover it.

