Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank
Ms. Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.

I will focus on three points: first, our support
for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW); secondly, accountability; and
thirdly, political developments.

First, I will address our support for the OPCW and
the establishment of the attribution mechanism. We
thank the Secretary-General for the sixty-first OPCW
report (S/2018/971, annex), and we support the objective
and professional work of OPCW Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic.

It remains unacceptable that, almost five years
after Syria joined the Chemical Weapons Convention,
its declaration can still not be verified as accurate and
complete. The Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates
the importance of the outcome of the fourth special
session of the Conference of the States Parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention on 27 June. An
overwhelming majority of member States reconfirmed
and strengthened the standard against the use of
chemical weapons by deciding on the establishment
of an attribution mechanism. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands therefore praises the Director-General of
the OPCW for his commitment to implementing that
decision expeditiously.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands expresses great
concern about the obstructive attitude of the Russian
Federation during the recent budget discussions in the
OPCW. By frustrating the discussions on the OPCW
budget for 2019, the Russian Federation is trying to
delay the legitimate establishment of the attribution
mechanism. It also puts the overall functioning of the
OPCW at risk. We call on the Russian Federation to
engage constructively and to demonstrate support for
the solemn purpose of the OPCW - and that purpose
is to eradicate chemical weapons worldwide under a
United Nations mandate.

Secondly, I turn to the need for accountability.
Syrians deserve justice. Impunity for chemical weapons
use cannot be allowed. Accountability for chemical
weapons used in Syria is neither optional nor negotiable.
The use of chemical weapons is never permitted by
anyone under any circumstance. Therefore, upholding
the international non-proliferation regime is crucial.
That norm has been endangered by the Syrian regime.
We look forward to the final report on the attack in
Douma on 7 April to be published before the end of
the year.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the memorandum of understanding on cooperation
between the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. The possibility for the
OPCW to share information with the Mechanism can
make an important contribution to combating impunity
in Syria. It is therefore an important first step towards
accountability. We remain convinced that a referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is by far the best option. It is the best way
to achieve accountability for the most serious crimes
that have taken place in Syria. As long as the Council
is prevented from referring the situation in Syria to the
ICC, we will continue our efforts for accountability
elsewhere - in the OPCW, the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism, the commission of inquiry
and the International Partnership against Impunity for
the Use of Chemical Weapons.

We emphasize that the archiving for the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Joint
Investigative Mechanism's is done on the basis of
the applicable United Nations rules and procedures,
as Ms. Nakamitsu shared with us during a previous
meeting on chemical weapons in Syria (see S/PV.8174).
A letter from the Office for Disarmament Affairs or
the Secretary-General has no added value, and for
that reason we cannot support the Russian request for
a letter.

Thirdly, I will speak on political developments.
We welcome the reduced level of violence in Idlib after
the Turkish-Russian memorandum of understanding.
We are concerned, however, by the recent statement of
the Syrian representative here in the Council that "[we
will] fully recover Idlib when we deem it necessary"
(S/PV8383, p. 15). An escalation of violence in Idlib by
the regime would lead to a humanitarian catastrophe. It
would reconfirm that the regime in no way prioritizes
protecting the Syrian people. Citizens in Idlib deserve
protection. A military confrontation will undermine
lasting stability and peace.

We call on Turkey and Russia to involve the United
Nations in the implementation of the humanitarian
side of the memorandum of understanding. We must
not allow ourselves to miss the Window of opportunity
offered by the situation in Idlib for the actual convening
of the constitutional committee. It should be used as
the starting point of a broader, sustainable political
process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). The
Kingdom of the Netherlands pleads for the convening
of the constitutional committee as soon as possible,
before the end of the year and before the departure
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. We call on all
parties, particularly the Syrian regime, to cooperate
constructively with the United Nations to prevent
further delays in the political process.

In conclusion, with reference to the statement
delivered earlier by our Russian colleague on the White
Helmets, we reconfirm our point of view that the White
Helmets are brave humanitarian workers. They have
been attacked on the ground by the Syrian regime while
engaging in purely humanitarian efforts, and those
attacks are unacceptable.

