Mr. Danforth (United States of America): Since
he appointed me as special envoy more than three years
ago, I have had numerous discussions with President
Bush on the subject of the Sudan. Yesterday afternoon
he phoned me to ask that I convey his strongly held
views on the resolution just adopted by the Security
Council. He said that Darfur is a catastrophe that the
Council should address on an urgent basis. He
underscored the importance of the expanded mission of
the African Union, which he asked us to support by this
resolution and logistically. He asked that the
international community fulfil its commitments to
humanitarian assistance for the people of Darfur. He
said that, in the long run, security in Darfur will
depend on successful peace talks in Abuja and on the
expeditious completion of the Naivasha negotiations.
In short, President Bush asked me to convey his strong
support for what we are doing this afternoon.

The resolution has a threefold purpose. First, it
throws the full weight of the Council behind the
African Union in undertaking an increased mission in
Darfur. It calls on the international community fully to
support the African Union and the efforts of President
Obasanjo. Secondly, it calls for the completion, on an
urgent basis, of the Naivasha and Abuja negotiations,
as essential to creating a peaceful, prosperous and
united Sudan. Thirdly, it calls on the international
community to fulfil urgently its pledges of
humanitarian assistance to the people of Darfur.

We are acting today because the Government of
the Sudan has failed to fully comply with our earlier
resolution 1556 (2004), adopted on 30 July. Today's
resolution demands that the Government of the Sudan
meet in practice its verbal commitment to accept an
increased number of African Union monitors. The
resolution also states that if the Government of the
Sudan continues to persecute its people and does not
cooperate fully with the African Union, the Council
will, indeed, have to consider sanctions against it and
against individuals responsible for the disaster.

The resolution is the product of a negotiating
process. It reflects the wishes of some delegations to
recognize that the Government of the Sudan has met
some of its commitments with regard to access for
humanitarian assistance. But no one should be under
the slightest illusion as to why the Government of the
Sudan met even that commitment. It did so because of
intense pressure from the international community, and
it did so with great reluctance and after long delays that
thwarted an early, effective humanitarian response.

The crisis in Darfur is uniquely grave in two
respects. First, it is the largest humanitarian disaster in
the world today, having claimed more than 50,000
lives, having displaced more than 1.2 million people
and having resulted in the rape and humiliation of
hundreds of thousands more. More than 2.2 million
people have been victimized in one way or another by
the actions of the Sudanese Government. And I note
with concern that a recent report by the United Nations
Children's Fund warns that the humanitarian crisis will
likely worsen in the coming weeks.

Secondly, the disaster in Darfur is entirely man-
made. Unlike natural disasters, such as hurricanes and
droughts, the tragedy in Darfur was entirely avoidable.
It was fabricated by a Government - intent on
revenge, intent on persecution, intent on breaking the
spirit of an entire people - as an over-reaction to a
rebellion.

Since the Security Council adopted resolution
1556 (2004) on 30 July, the violence in Darfur has
continued. The Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Pronk, reported that armed militias
continue to threaten civilians. Mr. Pronk reported that
during the second half of August, militias attacked
villages in the Yassin area, killing more than 50 people.
He reported that some villages were attacked three or
four times. Some were looted, others completely
destroyed. He also described reports of regular attacks
on villages in western Darfur, including Nertiti and
Masteri. He reported continuing allegations of theft and
sexual attacks throughout the region. He noted that the
Government had denied humanitarian workers access
to the Kalma camp, and he criticized the Government
for refusing to identify the perpetrators of those crimes
by name. Finally, Mr. Pronk discussed the deeply
rooted fear of the people of Darfur towards the
Government of the Sudan and its police forces. With
more than 400 villages destroyed to date, such fears are
more than justified.

Norwegian State Secretary Helgesen visited
Sudan and Chad from 2 to 6 September and came to
similar conclusions. Members of the African Union
Ceasefire Commission informed him that Sudanese
helicopters and bombers had been involved in several
recent attacks on villages in Darfur. On one occasion,
the Norwegian delegation witnessed an armed
Sudanese Government Mi-24 helicopter take off from
Al Fasher. Later, the delegation received reports that
the helicopter had likely been involved in an attack on
a village.

Mr. Pronk's conclusions and those of
Mr. Helgesen are consistent with the results of a recent
survey taken by the United States State Department. In
compiling its data, State Department officials
interviewed 1,136 randomly selected refugees in 19
locations in eastern Chad. Sixty-one per cent had
witnessed the killing of a family member. Four fifths
had witnessed the destruction of their homes. Over and
over again, the interviewers heard the same story.
Government aircraft start the attacks by bombing
villages. Government soldiers arrive in trucks,
followed by Janjaweed on horseback. They surround
and then enter the villages, guns blazing. They shoot
and bomb fleeing villagers. They loot and destroy the
villages, often shouting racial epithets and curses as
they proceed with their acts of destruction. They leave
behind them nothing but devastation and death. And,
importantly, nine in ten of the refugees said that they
had witnessed no rebel activity in the areas so
mercilessly attacked by the Government and the
Janjaweed.

These are indiscriminate acts of violence and
terror. Secretary of State Powell recently told Congress
that this evidence leads the United States to conclude
that the Government of the Sudan may be condoning
and perpetrating genocide. In that light, we expect the
Government of the Sudan immediately to facilitate an
increased African Union presence in Darfur and to
comply with the other provisions of today's resolution.

We note the letter from the Sudan's Permanent
Representative promising his Government's full
cooperation with the African Union. We note further
that previous promises of the Government of the Sudan
have been made on paper but not honoured in practice.
The Government of the Sudan has the responsibility to
end the tragedy in Darfur. We expect it to do so.

