Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): More than seven
months have passed since the Security Council first acted
upon the issue at hand by adopting resolution 1044 (1996),
calling upon the Government of Sudan, inter alia, to
comply with the requests of the Organization of African
Unity to extradite the three suspects wanted in connection
with the assassination attempt on the life of President
Mubarak of Egypt and to desist from supporting terrorist
activities. Nearly four months ago the Council acted under
Chapter VII of the Charter to reiterate its demands by
adopting resolution 1054 (1996).
My delegation regrets the lack of progress in the
implementation of paragraph 1 of Security Council
resolution 1054 (1996). We believe that the Sudanese
Government can and should meet the demands of the
Security Council. When it comes to paragraph 1 (b) of
resolution 1054 (1996), we note that some positive steps
have been taken by the Government of Sudan. We welcome
the Sudanese Government's condemnation of terrorism and
its commitment to ensure that no terrorist activities are
tolerated in Sudanese territory. We believe that Sudan's
declared commitments should be backed up by further
concrete actions.

We believe that the purpose of the draft resolution
before us is to send a clear message to Sudan that there
is no substitute for compliance with the Council's
demands. It contains no forceful measures to be
implemented immediately. However, the measures
specified in paragraph 3 of the draft resolution to be
adopted represent a clear warning of what could follow if,
and only if, the Government of Sudan fails to comply
with the demands reiterated in paragraph 1 within 90
days. The central merit of this phased approach is that
Sudan's compliance within the next 90 days obviates
altogether the need to actually implement paragraph 3.
We appeal to Sudan to make the best use of the
additional grace period allowed under the draft resolution
to comply fully and promptly with the demands of the
Security Council.

With these remarks, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

