Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I wish, at the outset, to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for your
very valuable background note (S/2002/ 1179) on the
topic under discussion. We also warmly welcome the
presence of Ministers for Foreign Affairs from Central
African States.

It is indeed very regrettable that a series of armed
conflicts have ravaged the Central African region,
some of which have endured for several years and all
of which have had dire humanitarian, social, economic,
security and political consequences. It is high time that
the region, and the African continent in general,
enjoyed peace and security.

Over the years, the Security Council has devoted
much attention to the settlement of disputes in the
Central African region. The Council has established
five peacekeeping or peacemaking missions in the
region, out of the 12 missions in the African continent
as a whole. If that demonstrates anything, it is the
special attention paid by the Security Council to the
settlement of disputes in that region and to the
establishment of peace and security therein. The
Central African region deserves the attention devoted
to it by the United Nations system generally, and by the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council in particular. I also salute the very important
role played by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
through his own efforts and those of his personal
envoys and representatives.

Syria welcomed the establishment of the African
Union and the fact that some of its organs have begun
to function. We are confident that the Union will
pursue the efforts initiated by its predecessor, the
Organization of African Unity, to find permanent
solutions to the varied problems of the continent.

In addition to regional efforts, efforts are also
being undertaken at the subregional level. But such
efforts have often suffered from a lack of resources,
escalating conflicts and the fact that some of the
economic groups established among African States
have not been able to address those problems. In that
regard, Syria considers that we need to strengthen and
enhance the capabilities of the African States, the
African Union and its recently established organs so
that they can address, resolve and manage these crises
and achieve collective security.

The establishment of the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa (COPAX) reflects the urgent
need for cooperation with the United Nations for
conflict prevention, settlement and management in
Central Africa, for dealing with post-conflict situations
and disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement, and for supporting progress towards the
maintenance of peace.

Experience has shown that conflicts in the States
of Central Africa need to be dealt with in a more
comprehensive manner not limited to the particular
country concerned, but rather always taking into
account the surrounding climate, because of the close
ties between neighbouring countries, which bear on the
root causes of conflicts and on their settlement.

Syria welcomes the high-level visits made by
leaders of countries of the region to neighbouring
States to settle disputes peacefully and to restore
mutual confidence and good relations in a spirit of
friendship and good neighbourliness, in full accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the
Constitutive Act of the African Union. These include
the recent visit of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Bujumbura,
Burundi, which yielded very positive results for both
countries.

We also welcome the agreements recently signed
between several States of the region, all of which augur
a peaceful solution for conflicts. These include the
recent Pretoria Agreement on the Great Lakes region,
which reaffirmed earlier fundamental agreements such
as those signed at Lusaka, Sun City and Pretoria. The
Republic of South Africa and Tanzania played a very
important role in organizing and bringing together the
parties to the conflict, in facilitating the agreements
among them and in implementing those agreements.

We also welcome the Luanda agreement between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda of 6
September 2002, which will lead to the withdrawal of
Ugandan forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to cooperation and normalization of
relations between the two countries. We also welcome
the summit conferences held among heads of State of
the region, such as the regional summit on Burundi,
held in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, on 7 October 2002.
That was a first step towards a comprehensive ceasefire
agreement that would include all the parties and was a
step towards implementing the Arusha Agreement.

We also welcome the summit of the Economic
and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC),
which was held in Libreville, Gabon, on 2 October
2002, to examine the situation between the Central
African Republic and Chad. A few days ago, the
Security Council welcomed (see S/PRST/2002/28) that
summit and its outcome, and supported its decisions,
particularly that concerning the deployment in the
Central African Republic of an International
Observation Force composed of 300 to 350 troops from
the Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Cameroon and Mali. That is an extremely important
subregional effort, to which African States are
contributing in order to maintain peace and security in
the area.
That new force will continue the tasks begun by
its predecessor from the Community of Sahelo-Saharan
States, which too has become an African force pursuant
to a decision of the conflict settlement committee
meeting at the ministerial level, which was endorsed at
the African Union summit held in Durban, South
Africa.

The forces have played a very important role in
maintaining peace and stability in the Central African
Republic. The Sahelian-Saharan Community has
exerted tremendous efforts to achieve national
reconciliation among all the parties.

We would like to mention here the efforts of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which recently received the
President of Chad, Mr. Idriss Deby, and the President
of the Central African Republic, Mr. Ange-Felix
Patasse, in its capacity as the current Chairman of the
Sahelian-Saharan Community. It is also making the
necessary international contacts, with a view to
withdrawing the Sahelian-Saharan Community forces
and to enabling the new force to work to maintain
peace and security; to protect the democratically
elected President and State institutions; to deal with the
political and economic problems facing the Central
African Republic; and to extend the necessary financial
support, of which they are in dire need and which is
one of the most important elements of stability in the
region.

Syria believes that the international community
should make it possible for African States to deploy
multinational African forces in the States of the region
in order to settle African disputes, as happened recently
in the Central African Republic, and that it should also
encourage and support African initiatives to settle
disputes in that continent.

We are in favour of finding effective solutions by
addressing the real causes of conflicts in the region,
and we believe also that the recommendations of the
Working Group on the Causes of Conflict should be
taken into consideration. We would like to commend
the efforts of Ambassador Koonjul, Chairman of the
Working Group, in this respect.

We must also go beyond narrow solutions and
embrace more comprehensive ones, in cooperation with
other bodies of the United Nations system such as the
Economic and Social Council. It is also very important
not to overlook the role of international organizations,
donor countries and donor organizations, as well as the
importance of the assistance given by the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund and the Bretton
Woods institutions for the reconstruction of the
economies of the States of the region, so that the
peoples of the region can enjoy the dividends of peace,
encourage confidence-building and bring about
sustainable peace and development.

To achieve this objective, we must ensure an
early resolution of local conflicts and support regional
economic integration, encourage regional trade and put
an end to commercial operations run by criminal
elements that wish to exploit the wealth of the
countries concerned. This will pave the way for
legitimate and transparent forms of trade, which will
supplant the illegal exploitation of the natural resources
and wealth of some of those States.

We support the provision of assistance to the
States of Central Africa to give them the means to
manage and settle their own disputes and so that they
can play an important role in African integration, in
accordance with their strategic geographical position,
and so that they can shape their own destiny, free of the
control and hegemony of other countries.

In conclusion, I should like to thank all the
facilitators, who have undertaken tremendous efforts
with a View to achieving agreement among the
countries concerned and the various groups within
those States, and I should like also to acknowledge the
efforts of the States of the region and of their leaders,
who have spared no personal effort to achieve national
reconciliation.

