Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank all our briefers this morning. Let me take
this chance to commend President Mohamud for his
leadership. Under his guidance, we have witnessed
progress in Somalia that was once thought impossible.
He has spearheaded Somalia's return to the international
community. As he just stated, Somalia has turned the
corner and there is no turning back. I join others in
welcoming him to the Security Council. I also warmly
welcome Special Representative Keating on his first
address in the Chamber in his new role.

Tomorrow will mark the first anniversary of
the Al-Shabaab attack against the United Nations
compound in Puntland. Six people were killed that
day; four were UNICEF staff. Their lives were cruelly
cut short because they dared to help to build a better
Somalia, one of peace, one free from polio, one where
all children could receive an education. As we mourn
and remember our colleagues and all the victims of
terrorism in Somalia, let us reaffirm our commitment
today to the future that they dared to build.
Since Prime Minister Cameron hosted the London
Conference on Somalia in 2012, the British commitment
has involved the reopening of our Embassy, an
increase in our development assistance and now the
deployment of personnel to the United Nations. That
commitment will only be strengthen in the years ahead.
Such commitments have never been more vital. This
is a crucial year for Somalia's future prosperity and
stability. For me, it comes down to three things, namely,
elections, security and partnership.

First, the election process in August will be a
landmark moment in Somalia's political development.
The electoral process needs to be transparent, to deliver
on time and to be inclusive. Such an electoral process
will cement Somalia's positive trajectory to democracy.
There can be no place at the table for any group or
individual who seeks to deliberately undermine the
process. I welcome the decision on an electoral process
and the recent agreement on an implementation plan
by the National Leaders Forum. It is important now to
translate that into action. The United Nations and the
international community stand ready to support the
process, and in doing so we commit to help Somalia
to reach that most vital of goals, that is, one-person/
one-vote elections in 2020.

But no country can develop successfully if it leaves
half its population behind, and we therefore welcome
the commitment to reserve 30 per cent of the seats in
both Houses for women. That is not a women's issue;
it is a peace issue. Engaging women at all levels of
decision-making is absolutely crucial to development
and stability.

The second top issue is security. One of the most
sacred responsibilities of any State is to protect its
citizens. We have seen the Federal Government in
Somalia take welcome steps towards that goal in its
high-level partnership commitments on security sector
reform and the agreement to a national security policy
with the interim regional administrations. I urge the
Government to continue those efforts. For them to
succeed, security sector reform and the development
of the Somali National Army and police force need to
be fully coordinated with donors. They also need to be
accountable and transparent.

In the meantime, the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) of course remains a critical enabler
to progress. I would like to commend the bravery ofthe
AMISOM. men and women and to offer my condolences
for the losses suffered by troop-contributing countries.
History will show the immense contribution made by
AMISOM. to peace in Somalia. The commitments at
the recent summit in Djibouti to an early resumption
of offensive operations against Al-Shabaab is very
welcome. Better coordination and command and control
will be essential to success. The United Kingdom
stands ready to assist where we can, and that is why we
are deploying British military personnel to the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, some ofwhom have
just arrived in Somalia.

My final point concerns partnership. The year
2016 is the final one for the current Somali Compact.
The Compact has provided a crucial framework for
partnership between the international community and
Somalia. We now need to build on that and to agree
on a compact type of agreement for 2017 and beyond,
which should strengthen the links between Somalia's
political, security and development tracks and reaffirm
the principles and shared values that bind us together.
A central element of the agreement will be the Somalia
national development plan, and we welcome the
progress made in developing it.

As Somalia works towards these three
priorities - elections, security, partnership - the
commitments of the international community, including
the Security Council, remain essential. But as my
Deputy saw first-hand when he visited Mogadishu last
week, it is clear that any international commitment
will be met with equal if not more dedication by the
people living and working in Somalia. Whether they
are representatives of the Federal Government, civil
society or AMISOM, they all continue to serve bravely
with an undiminished commitment to a stable, secure
and prosperous Somalia.

When the history books are written, let them say
that 2016 was a truly decisive year, a year when Somali's
fragile gains were consolidated and strengthened by the
most representative and democratic electoral process
in a generation. In achieving that goal, President
Mohamud, you will have the resolute support of the
Security Council.

