Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I would like to join
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in welcoming the initiative of the French presidency
to hold this meeting devoted to the fight against drug
trafficking in the Sahel and West Africa.

West Africa, which has made remarkable progress
on the road to stabilization since the fratricidal
conflicts of the 19905 and the crises that followed, is
now dealing with a combination of growing security
threats. The various types of transnational organized
crime, particularly drug trafficking, maritime piracy
and terrorism, are scourges that reinforce one another
in an environment of fragile State institutions and
splintered societies. In the Sahel, and Mali in particular,
the consequences have already been felt. For several
years now, thanks to its technical expertise, UNODC
has tabulated the continued gains that drug trafficking
has made in West Africa and the Sahel.

When I started my job, in 2008, I discovered the
extent of the problem and at the same time realized how
poor the level of awareness of it was at the levels both
of Government and civil society. At the time, we were
concerned about the fact that West Africa was one of
the principal transit routes for cocaine travelling from
Latin America to Europe. But UNODC was already
worried about the risk of increased drug consumption
in West Africa. That prediction has unfortunately come
true, since, as the Secretary-General just emphasized,
drug consumption is now a genuine threat in West
Africa.

(spoke in English)

Against that background, I am pleased to note that
in recent years, mobilization against the threat posed
by drug trafficking and organized crime has increased,
thanks to the combined efforts of all stakeholders. The
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA),
together with UNODC, has supported the efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) leading to the adoption by ECOWAS
in 2008 of a regional plan of action on organized
crime and illicit drug rrafficking and abuse, recently
extended to the end of 2014. In 2009, in order to support
the plan of action's swift implementation, and jointly
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
INTERPOL, we also launched the West Africa Coast
Initiative (WACI), which so far is responsible for
establishing three transnational crime units in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau, with concrete results
at various levels. The most recent meeting of the WACI
policy committee, which I co-chaired with ECOWAS in
Abidjan on 29 October, with the participation of Under-
Secretary-General Fedotov, showed renewed resolve on
the part of Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea to establish their
own transnational crime units.

In addition, and in line with its mandate, UNOWA
has worked closely with other United Nations entities
to provide support to the development of subregional
strategies to combat cross-border security threats,
including illicit drug trafficking. One example is the
mobilization of the Gulf of Guinea countries to work
towards a regional strategy on piracy and crime at sea,
leading in June to the Yaounde Summit of Central and
West African Heads of State and Government.

Drug trafficking, as was stressed earlier today, is
also the focus of the second goal, that of security, of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In that regard, I would like to commend the ECOWAS
leadership, especially President Alassane Ouattara
and Ambassador Kadre Ouedraogo, President of the
ECOWAS Commission, for their commitment to
enhancing the regional organization's contribution
to efforts aimed at preventing and fighting drug
trafficking and organized crime, including through the
activation of the ECOWAS plan of action on organized
crime and illicit drug trafficking and abuse. I also want
to commend the European Union and other bilateral
donor partners for their support for the implementation
process of the plan of action.

I would like to take this opportunity to encourage
West African civil society to take an active part
in efforts aimed at preventing and combating drug
trafficking and organized crime, taking a cue from
the West African Drugs Commission, established by
the Kofi Annan Foundation in January. UNOWA will
continue to work closely with UNODC and ECOWAS
to advocate for effective regional initiatives and focus
the attention of West African leaders and civil society
on the threat posed by drug trafficking and organized
crime. In that regard, I want to encourage efforts
aimed at promoting effective cooperation among the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel and between
them and international partners, as well as at improving
coordination among donors supporting those efforts,
and I would like to acknowledge the work of the Group
of Eight Plus Group of Experts in that area.

(spoke in French)

I would like to reiterate the commitment of the
United Nations Office for West Africa to contributing
to the collective efforts to prevent and combat organized
crime and drug trafficking.

