Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Egypt for organizing today's debate on
such a topical issue and for its dynamic and successful
presidency of the Security Council in the month of
August. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Youssef Mahmoud and Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal for their informative briefings.

For more than two years now, the United Nations
has been at a turning point in its existence: exciting
discussions are taking place everywhere, new concepts
are emerging and focusing the attention of the Member
States, and innovative initiatives aimed at streamlining,
optimizing and improving the performance of the
Organization are increasingly taking shape. Those
lively debates show that Member States are aware of
the urgent need to reform the work of the Organization
in order to make sure that it is at the level of addressing
the complex and inextricable challenges that we see
proliferating day in and day out. In fact, we can say
that, after decades of effort and sacrifice on the part
of the international community to bring peace to the
four corners of the globe, it is obvious now that a major
challenge for peace is precisely that it has a very short-
lived resilience to tensions and destabilizing trends
in still-fragile countries. That was confirmed by the
three recent reviews on peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security.

This conclusion is therefore clear and obvious:
the efforts made by the United Nations to establish,
maintain and consolidate peace will be in vain if the
sought-after peace is not sustained. And the share of
responsibility assumed by United Nations actors in
cases oflack ofpeace resilience is very real, as reflected
in the report on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture (see S/2015/490). The fragmentation that
exists among various United Nations organs involved
in the pursuit of peace and the narrow prism through
which peacebuilding has been viewed so far are
examples of this, to name but two forms of dysfunction.

We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts to rectify the lack of interaction among United
Nations bodies. In that regard, there is no need to
recall that sustaining peace, which includes conflict
prevention, gives new impetus to the work of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. The threats to
peace are increasingly multidimensional and constantly
changing. Therefore, United Nations organs are
constantly being called upon to adapt in order to better
respond to new challenges to peace in a timely manner.

The spearhead of United Nations efforts to restore
peace in fragile and conflict-ridden countries are the
peacekeeping operations, which, over the years and
through the efforts and sacrifices of their members,
embody the irreversible commitment of the international
community to protecting suffering populations. When
they have clear, realistic and achievable mandates and
the necessary political support, peacekeeping operations
are one of the most flexible and best-adapted tools that
the United Nations has for meeting the challenges to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The reverse is also true, however. When mandates
are not adapted to situations on the ground, they can
have mixed results and endanger both the populations
to be protected and the contingents in the field.
As the main weak link in this broad continuum of
peace that runs from prevention, conflict resolution
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term
development, peacekeeping missions are the main
interested parties in the new global strategy promoted
by the Secretary-General to achieve the desired goal of
sustaining peace. In that regard, I would like to make
the following remarks.

It is key to make sure that the capabilities of
peacekeeping missions are in line with the mandate
and needs of the theatre of operations. Assuming that
there is no standard or pre-established formula for
every situation, each mission has to be considered in
its particular political and security context. Changing
criteria, such as the geographical diversity of a mission
and its development over time, can provide it with
a certain margin of manoeuvre without incurring
additional costs. Putting together an operation is not an
end in and of itself, nor is it the only solution possible.
It is important to make sure that efforts to stabilize and
peacefully settle conflicts are undertaken at the same
time as military operations deployed to protect civilians.

We have to recall that, even if their cost does not
reach even the level of 0.5 per cent of world military
expenditure, the crucial role played by peacebuilding
operations in the establishment of lasting peace is
undeniable. We therefore have to pay greater attention
to peacebuilding not only in countries emerging from
conflict but also in countries that are still fragile. We
need to make sure that efforts be brought together
in order to restore peace, build peace and ultimately
sustain peace.

