Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (5/2003/944) and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Sharma
for his briefing.

Over the past six months, the security situation in
Timor-Leste has improved. Great strides have been
made towards the country's economic and social
development. Its external relations have also made
steady progress. The overall situation is indeed
encouraging. We congratulate the Government and
people of Timor-Leste for their achievements and
appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Sharma and the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). At the same, we can only cherish even
more deeply the memory of Mr. Vieira de Mello, who
made an outstanding contribution to Timor-Leste.

As a fledgling State, Timor-Leste is still faced
with numerous difficulties and challenges in various
areas, such as ensuring national security and
maintaining and promoting economic and social
development. Improving Timor-Leste's capacity in
public administration, establishing and completing its
justice system and building the police and national
defence forces are tasks that especially require long-
term efforts. The United Nations and the international
community should continue to provide support to
Timor-Leste to help the country ultimately achieve
total self-reliance. We reiterate our support for the
work of UNMISET. We hope that UNMISET will make
full use of the remaining time of its mandate and will
continue to make positive efforts for the nation-
building of Timor-Leste. Moreover, we support the
Secretary-General's proposal. We believe that the
international community should begin considering the
transitional arrangement to follow the end of the
UNMISET mandate.

We encourage UNMISET and the United Nations
bodies concerned to carry out close consultations with
the Government of Timor-Leste, and on the basis of an
assessment of the conditions of the country, to submit
in a timely manner specific recommendations regarding
the post-UNMISET period. At present, there is a trend
of gradual decline in the foreign aid provided to Timor-
Leste, which has affected the dynamism of the
country's economic growth. We call on the donor
countries, the United Nations system and international
financial institutions to maintain their levels of
assistance to Timor-Leste to ensure that Timor-Leste
will embark on the path of sustainable development.

China has always supported the people of Timor-
Leste in their cause of independence and nation-
building. We support the work of UNMISET. We will
commit ourselves to the development of economic and
trade cooperation with Timor-Leste in areas such as gas
and oil development, agriculture and fisheries. We will
continue to provide assistance for the economic
reconstruction of Timor-Leste within the limits of our
capabilities.

