Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this debate on Afghanistan. I also wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his informative briefing
and his tireless efforts, as well as those of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Let me further express my appreciation to all the
briefers for their remarks, as well as to Ambassador
Adela Raz of Afghanistan for her valuable input.

Achieving sustainable peace in Afghanistan is a
long-cherished desire not only of the Afghan people but
of the whole international community. An Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process is crucial, and Japan
supports the determination and efforts of the Afghan
Government towards its realization.

We also commend the dedication of Afghanistan's
international partners to that end, including Germany
and Qatar, for their efforts in bringing to fruition the
intra-Afghan peace dialogue in July; United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation
Zalmay Khalilzad for his negotiations with the Taliban;
and the United States, Russia, China and Pakistan for
convening the four-party meeting on the Afghan peace
process, held in Beijing on 10 and 11 July. Japan hopes
that those endeavours will eventually lead to an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace process, and we would like
to continue our cooperation with international partners
to help achieve peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.

With the presidential elections coming up at
the end of this month, Japan welcomes the news that
relevant preparations are on track, including the full
voter-registration process that took place in Ghazni
province, where the 2018 parliamentary elections were
not held owing to political tensions and insecurity. It
is important that the people of Afghanistan be able to
cast their vote and decide their own future. UNAMA
plays a critical role in the electoral process, and
Japan commends and supports the efforts made by
Mr. Yamamoto and his team.

The participation ofAfghan women is fundamental
in both the peace and electoral processes. Japan
welcomes the recent visit to Afghanistan by Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and lauds her
clear focus on women,peace and security.

Meanwhile, Japan expresses its deep concern
about, and strong condemnation of, the continuing
terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, which are and aimed at
disrupting the peace efforts and electoral preparations.
We stress that the only way to end the conflict in
Afghanistan is by a peaceful settlement achieved
through dialogue.

Japan remains committed to supporting a self-reliant
and stable Afghanistan. We are steadily implementing
the $96 million in assistance that we committed to in
March, and, later this year, we intend to provide further
support to Afghanistan in its efforts in education, in
particular its efforts to increase the adult literacy rate.

