Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Special Representative Ibn Chambas,
Executive Secretary Barbut, Executive Director
Laborde and Ms. Ibrahim for their briefings today. I
should also like to give a special thanks to Spain and
Egypt for drawing the Security Council's attention to
the urgent need to focus on the effects of the changing
climate on security in the Sahel region.

Some Council members have pushed back on the
appropriateness of having this discussion in this forum.
Skepticism about the relationship between climate
change and security is not new, but skepticism does not
make the facts any less serious or urgent. Climate change
is not just about whether glaciers remain majestic or
polar bears survive. Climate change is an aggravating
factor, among other political, socioeconomic and
security considerations, that exacerbates underlying
tensions, undermines governance, contributes to
resource conflicts and negatively impacts development.

As Secretary of State John Kerry said last year,
this is not about Bambi. This is about people and it is
about poverty. While no conflict is caused solely by
climate, to ignore the interplay between security and
climate change - and there are few places where that
interplay is felt more acutely than the Sahel - is to
ignore fundamental realities. From Mauritania and
Mali to the Lake Chad Basin to the Horn of Africa,
we see the complex challenges exacerbated by climate
change on peace, stability and security. Unpredictable
rainfall, higher temperatures, frequent droughts
and natural disasters in the Sahel have augmented
existing destabilizing pressures from terrorism to
trafficking, and exacerbated the problems ofpopulation
displacement and weak governance. Put simply, climate
change is indeed a threat multiplier.

The Boko Haram crisis in the Lake Chad Basin
region starkly illustrates the interplay between climate
change and security. According to a recent World Food
Programme study, over the past half-century Lake Chad
has receded drastically due to various environmental
pressures, which has increased competition and conflict
over already scarce resources, such as arable land and

water, and degraded regional food security and quality
of life.
Simultaneously, Boko Haram's barbaric terrorist
campaign, now entering its seventh year, has greatly
exacerbated the existing food insecurity faced by the
population of the Lake Chad Basin region. The Boko
Haram crisis has disrupted farming and trade and cut
off communities from the means they require to subsist
and to survive. Today, an estimated 4.2 million people
are in need of emergency food assistance in the Lake
Chad Basin region and 2.6 million are displaced within
Nigeria and the neighbouring countries. Meanwhile,
this humanitarian crisis has been but a blip on the screen
of the international community, drawing only sporadic
attention and a woefully insufficient response. Indeed,
Emergency Relief Coordinator Stephen O'Brien this
week referred to the crisis in the Lake Chad Basin
region, where poverty and desertification have been
compounded by Boko Haram violence, as the world's
"most neglected, underreported, underfunded and
least addressed".

Military intelligence and law enforcement that
protect human rights norms are vital to combating
terrorism. In that regard, we applaud the important
territorial advances made by the Governments of
Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and Cameroon to roll back some
of Boko Haram's safe havens in the Lake Chad Basin
region. However, only a truly comprehensive strategy
that mobilizes a broad range of stakeholders, including
development and humanitarian actors, can address the
conditions conducive to terrorism and the scars left in
its wake. The United States is encouraged that, under
Nigeria President Buhari's leadership, last week's
Regional Security Summit committed to carrying
out a sustained, comprehensive approach against
Boko Haram that couples rights-respecting security
operations with civilian efforts to restore stability and
promote governance and economic development to
break the cycle of violence in all countries where Boko
Haram is active.

The United Nations system, including the Special
Representatives for West Africa and the Sahel and
Central Africa, should continue to assist the Lake
Chad Basin region to implement such a comprehensive
strategy. In addition, the United Nations needs to
mainstream preventing violent extremism and counter-
terrorism issues throughout its core work on peace and
security and sustainable development so that it can help
Member States, including in the broader Sahel region,
to deliver in those crucial areas. We also encourage the
United Nations system and its partners to make further
progress towards the effective implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which
was first endorsed by the Council in 2013 and should
now be re-evaluated and updated so that it can better
assist Governments of the region to mitigate against
compound threats, including climate change.

Let us be clear. No one is suggesting that Boko
Haram was caused by climate change. It most certainly
was not. But the devastation wrought by environmental
degradation and challenges like severe drought and the
scarcity of resources that come along with it can spark
a kind of poverty and political volatility that are the
oxygen of discontent and drivers of instability, if left
unchecked. Recognizing that reality does not require
us to be any less relentless in our pursuit of terrorists
like Boko Haram or Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.
We will not be. It just allows us to be more effective in
doing so.

As our discussion here today illustrates,
complex and interrrelated governance, security and
humanitarian challenges, exacerbated by the effects
of climate change across the Sahel region, require
urgent and fresh thinking and action. We encourage
the leaders of the Sahel to continue to deepen their
cooperation, including through the Group of Five Sahel
and the Nouakchott Process, by coming to agreement
on a shared vision of the region's threats and the
efforts needed to address them, including improving
the sustainable management of natural resources and
effective, inclusive governance that both combats
terrorism and addresses the conditions conducive to it.

