Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Belgium for the quarterly report that
he has just shared with us. There are several elements
in it that my delegation would like to highlight.

Failures to fulfil the obligations under the
resolutions in question were pointed out to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), and it had to respond. That shows that we all,
as Member States that are bound by those obligations,
must redouble our vigilance with a view to
implementation. That is the case in particular with
regard to respect for the prohibition on purchasing,
transferring or procuring arms from Iran in any
manner.

That also applies to the obligation of States under
paragraph 6 of resolution 1737 (2006) to

"take the necessary measures to prevent the
provision to Iran of any... financial assistance,
investment, brokering or other services, and the
transfer of financial resources or services, related

to the supply of the prohibited goods and
technology".

That obligation is clear and unconditional and
applies to all States Members without exception. The
Council spelled that out further in its resolutions,
whether by imposing sanctions on Bank Sepah or by
mentioning the particular type of vigilance required
with regard to Bank Melli and Bank Saderat,

The States Members are responsible for their own
national legislations to implement those obligations.
One thing is clear - those obligations are binding and
every State must agree conscientiously to implement
them. In the Committee and outside, we have heard
from many States Members, international financial
institutions and private enterprises that would like to
obtain more information on how to implement financial
vigilance. That concern is understandable. The effect
on a reputation and the consequences of violating those
obligations by financing those proliferation activities
that the Council is ordering Iran to suspend would be
disastrous. That is why, together with the missions of
the United States and the United Kingdom, we took the
initiative of circulating a list of Iranian businesses that
require particular vigilance.

I should also like to thank the mission of the
United States for its expert briefings in the Committee
on Iranian breaches of those financial requirements.
My country, and I believe the Committee as a whole, is
at the service of any delegation that would like
information and clarification on how best to meet its
obligations.

Six months after the adoption of resolution 1803
(2008), Iran is clearly in violation of the rules set out
by the Security Council - rules that are simple and
easy for everyone to understand. Iran continues to
develop a nuclear programme that it set up
clandestinely, in violation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and that
the Security Council has asked it to suspend. Iran
continues not to cooperate with International Atomic
Energy Agency in clarifying the scope and nature of its
activities. In particular, it has refused to reply to the
Agency on the very clear signs of the militarization of
the programme. Finally, Iran refuses to negotiate in
good faith with the European Union 3+3, which have
made some generous proposals, and last July in
Geneva, in the presence of the Political Director of the
United States, offered Iran a path back to dialogue.

That is a serious situation, weakening the entire

NPT. If Iran continues to elude the scope of

international law and at the same time to reject any

type of dialogue, it will suffer increasing isolation, as
the Council has pledged.

