Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of
Germany.

The excellent briefing by State Secretary
Dahlgren on the results of the Stockholm Process, the
comprehensive statement by Assistant Secretary-
General Turk and the ensuing interventions of Council
members have, in our view, achieved two important
goals. First, they have contributed to a more
transparent discussion within the Security Council on
pressing sanctions issues. Secondly, they have
highlighted the important input by the Stockholm
Process to the debate on how to strengthen the capacity
of the United Nations system and of Member States to
implement targeted sanctions.

As State Secretary Dahlgren has pointed out, the
Stockholm Process focused, inter alia, on identifying
measures to enhance planning, monitoring and
coordination among sanctions committees and
monitoring bodies. The development of monitoring
mechanisms, with a view to increasing transparency
and efficiency, is indeed key to the success of any
sanctions regime. The mechanism can furnish the
sanctions committee with additional information about
the violations of sanctions, as well as their direct and
collateral impact. As former chairman of the UNITA
sanctions Committee, Ambassador Ryan recently
pointed out that its very existence sent a strong
warning that the Committee had an additional arm that
would systematically and constantly monitor sanctions
violations and the violators. The mechanism thus deters
those engaged in sanctions busting and at the same
time serves as an early warning instrument against
disproportional collateral damage.

In this regard, sanctions - meaning measures to
be taken against sanction-busting States or
individuals- deserve more attention. Here, we see
more room for further deliberations. On the other hand,
the Security Council also has a responsibility under
human rights aspects. Therefore, exemptions and
exceptions for certain humanitarian needs should be
carefully taken into consideration in order to minimize
the humanitarian impact. In doing this, the credibility
and legitimacy of a United Nations sanctions regime
would be even greater.

We believe that the suggestions of the Stockholm
Process for the two following areas deserve particular
attention: first, common guidelines for the monitoring
of sanctions, and secondly, strategies to counter
sanctions evasion and to maintain the accuracy of
sanctions, including their adequate assessment.

I should like to conclude by underlining that the
Interlaken, Bonn-Berlin and Stockholm processes have
contributed to making sanctions more targeted, credible
and efficient. The valuable and continued support of
the Secretariat in these efforts has been of crucial
importance. However, sanctions are tools, not political
aims in themselves. They are no substitute for political
concepts. The success of a sanctions regime requires a
comprehensive approach that considers targeted
sanctions as part of a broader coordinated political and
diplomatic strategy. This depends on the political will
of the actors. The more efficiently, objectively and
transparently sanctions regimes are conceived and
implemented, the better they can serve as sharp and
appropriate instruments under Chapter VII, thus
enabling the Security Council to avoid the ultimate use
of military force.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Hans
Dahlgren, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, to respond to comments and questions raised
during the debate.

