Mr. Adom (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
the Chinese presidency for convening this meeting.
My delegation also thanks Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for her comprehensive
briefing on the issue of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic. In addition, my country
commends Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, for his tireless efforts with regard
to the Syrian issue.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the Syrian authorities'
cooperation with the relevant bodies of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
which led to the destruction of 27 chemical-weapon
production facilities declared by Damascus. In that
regard, my country commends the Syrian Arab
Republic for its efforts and encourages it to cooperate
further with a view to addressing the concerns raised
by the OPCW in the report to the Secretary-General
(S/2018/971, annex). Cote d'Ivoire also notes with
satisfaction the visit made by the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in September to
collect additional information and conduct interviews
concerning the 2017 incidents, including in Kharbit
Masasnah; Qalib Al-Thawr, in Al-Salamiyah; Yarmouk,
in Damascus, and Al-Balil, in Souran. My delegation
would like to see the analysis of the data collected by
the Fact-finding Mission help identify those who used
chemical weapons in the areas just mentioned with a
view to bringing them before the competent courts.

My country welcomed the 17 September signing
by the Russian Federation and Turkey of the agreement
establishing a demilitarized zone in Idlib governorate.
That agreement helped to prevent the much-feared
armed confrontation among the warring parties, thereby
avoiding the risk ofthe use of chemical weapons and ofa
humanitarian catastrophe. Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges
all parties to play a decisive role in the implementation
of the provisions of that agreement, particularly those
relating to the withdrawal of heavy weapons and
combatants from the demilitarized zone.

The steadfast position ofCote d'Ivoire is that the use
of chemical weapons, both in times of war and peace,
constitutes a grave human rights violation regardless
of who uses them. The Council therefore has the
imperative duty to respond collectively and firmly to
those reprehensible acts, together as one. It is therefore
regrettable that the institutional vacuum resulting from
the failure to renew the mandate of the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in November
2017 is responsible for the inability to determine the
facts concerning the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and to bring the perpetrators before the competent
international tribunals. My country therefore welcomed
the mandate conferred upon the OPCW at the fourth
special session of the Conference of the States Parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention, held from
26 to 27 June 2018 in The Hague, thereby enabling
it to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators of
chemical-weapon attacks.

Cote d'Ivoire stresses once again that the use
of chemical weapons, whatever the circumstances,
remains unacceptable both in terms of international law
and the values that make up our collective conscience.

In conclusion, my country calls on the parties to
the conflict in Syria to prioritize finding a political
settlement to the current crisis through inclusive
dialogue and in accordance with the relevant provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015).

