Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Prince
Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein and the President of the Cote
d'Ivoire chapter of the West Africa Action Network on
Small Arms, Mr. Karamoko Diakite, for their briefings.
We also appreciate the initiative of the Lithuanian
presidency in organizing this debate and in preparing
the concept note (S/2015/306).

Chile promotes disarmament in all its forms and
calls for an effective fight against the illicit trafficking
in arms and ammunition while framing such efforts
against the backdrop of a View on the human perspective
that is comprehensive and manifold and considers the
well-being of people to be the ultimate goal of such
efforts.

We support the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
We urge Member States to advance its implementation
by adopting legally binding instruments on marking,
tracing and illicit brokering. The Arms Trade Treaty
deserves special mention. Chile has signed the Treaty
and will soon to ratify it.

Our main concern is the impact of these weapons
on civilians in conflict zones. We must not forget that in
conflict situations the majority of deaths are the result
of the use of small arms and light weapons. In turn,
such weapons constitute a serious threat to peace and
stability in pre- and post-conflict societies. Moreover,
such weapons facilitate a broad range of human rights
violations, including murder, mutilation, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, enforced disappearance,
torture and forced recruitment of children by armed
groups. More violations and abuses of human rights
are committed with small arms and light weapons than
with any other weapon. The uncontrolled accumulation
and proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition have severe implications for human
development, peace and sustainable economic growth.
Armed violence erodes the social fabric, gives rise to
legal uncertainty, increases crime, produces political
instability and creates a climate of impunity.

This issue cuts across all issues on the agenda of
the Council. Therefore, the diversion of weapons to
non-State actors or unauthorized users -which are often
linked to terrorist groups and their support networks
and recruit and use children - the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, among other things, negatively impact
civilian populations in all regions. We therefore believe
it to be a priority to strengthen existing mechanisms
to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
Traceability is part of the whole system of exchange
of goods worldwide, and these weapons cannot be
excluded from registration mechanisms. In that context,
we call upon States to fulfil their responsibilities to
protect their populations against the devastating effects
of the illicit trade in small arms. We also emphasize the
role of the international community in that effort. We
believe that the work of the Security Council could be
enhanced by a frequent dialogue on the impact of the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons on
international security, based on the 2014 Arms Trade
Treaty.

The draft resolution being developed by the
Lithuanian presidency sets out clear progress since the
Council's previous resolution on the matter, namely,
resolution 2117 (2003). Nonetheless, we believe that
it is important to recognize the impact of the illicit
transfer of small arms and ammunition to non-State
actors and unauthorized groups, an issue that must
be addressed given the harmful effects it can have
through the actions of non-State actors, which now
cross international borders and have a major impact on
the civilian populations of the affected regions and on
international peace and security.

In conclusion, we believe that the Council cannot
remain oblivious to the serious consequences that illicit
trafficking and unregulated trade in small arms and
light weapons have for civilian populations, including
children and women. While we commend the convening
of this meeting, therefore, we believe it is vital that the
Council continue to follow the issue very closely.

