Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia fully endorses the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Peru on behalf of the Rio
Group. We also thank the Ambassador of the Kingdom
of Spain, Inocencio Arias, for the submission of his
first report as chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) of the Security Council.

While we recognize the progress made in the
programme of work of the CTC during its eighth
programme of work, the Government of Colombia has
decided to speak in this open debate of the Security
Council because it considers that the Committee and
the Council must engage in other initiatives related to
this issue.

Some of those were raised before the Council on
6 May by the President of the Government of Spain,
Jose Maria Aznar. We would like to highlight first of
all the fact that all types of terrorism, in whatever form
or manifestation they may appear, constitute a single
phenomenon, and that all of them, whether domestic or
international, must be rejected and fought to the same
degree and with the same resolve. Things cannot be
otherwise, for this phenomenon is a challenge to the
democratic principles of respect for life and the
fundamental freedoms of the human being, so deeply
cherished by our peoples and by this Organization.

Furthermore, every type of terrorism can become
a threat to international peace and security. Let us not
forget that the assassination of Archduke Franz
Ferdinand - an act of domestic terrorism carried out
for internal policy reasons within the Austro-Hungarian
Empire - was the spark that ignited the First World
War.

Another initiative that deserves serious
consideration is the possibility for the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Security Council to draw
up a general list of international terrorist organizations
worldwide, similar to the one kept by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) for Al
Qaeda and the Taliban. We do not believe that a formal
definition of terrorism is a prerequisite to devise such a
list; indeed, such a definition has not been achieved in
more than 30 years.

Whoever carries out criminal acts for political
purposes, intended or calculated to provoke a state of
terror in the general public", as stated in General
Assembly resolution 49/60, is a terrorist, whatever his
or her motivation. We must once and for all relieve the
topic of terrorism of its political connotations, so as to
be able to combat it throughout the world for what it is:
a serious crime against life and the freedom of
individuals, and a grave threat to civilization.

Finally, although resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1456 (2003) enabled the Security Council to express its
concern about the close linkage between terrorism,
organized transnational crime, the use and trafficking
of illicit drugs, money laundering and traffic of illegal
weapons, the Council and the Committee must deepen
their consideration of these linkages. This is essential if
we bear in mind that the controls imposed by resolution
1373 (2001) on the financing of terrorist acts must be
successful, for terrorists will increasingly have
recourse to these types of crimes in order to fund their
activities.

Acts of terrorism must be characterized not only
by where they are committed or by their global or
national scope, but also in terms of the origin of the
phenomena behind them and that of the funds that are
used. It has been proved that the international financial
networks used by terrorists are similar to those that
underpin trafficking in illegal drugs and illegal
weapons. That is why Colombia stresses the urgent
need to take a direct approach to combating terrorism
and related crime on the basis of the principle of shared
responsibility.

In reiterating our support for the work being
carried out by the Council and its Counter-terrorism
Committee in fighting this universal scourge, I should
like to reiterate our appeal to the international
community to cooperate with respect to the legislative
and political activities required under resolution 1373
(2001) in order successfully to combat terrorism. In
this field of international cooperation, the United
Nations has the capacity, the experience and the moral
authority to assist all regions of the world affected by
the scourge of terrorism.

