Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017), on sanctions
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We understand the need to halt Pyongyang's missile
and nuclear programme, which is unacceptable to us.
We share the feeling of neighbouring States in the
region. The ballistic missiles launched without warning
from North Korea pose a major risk to marine and air
transit in the region, as well as to the lives of ordinary
civilians. We call on the North Korean Government to
end the banned programmes and to return to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
oversight of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
We also call on that country to join the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

All must understand that progress towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula will be
difficult so long as the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea perceives a direct threat to its own security.
For that is how the North Koreans view the build-up in
military activity in the region, which takes on the forms
of frequent wide-ranging exercises and manoeuvres by
the United States and allies as they deploy strategic
bombers, naval forces and aircraft carriers to the
region. Another destabilizing factor in the region is
the scaling up in the Republic Korea of the American
Terminal High Altitude Area Defence missile defence
system. We have repeatedly noted that this not only
constitutes an irritant, but also undermines the overall
military balance in the region and calls into question
the security of neighbouring States. We hope that the
assurances provided by the Secretary of State of the
United States were sincere, and that the United States
is not seeking to dismantle the existing situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea or to
forcibly unite the peninsula or intervene militarily in
the country.

We are concerned that the paragraph we proposed
for the resolution did not receive support. Potential
military misadventures on either side are liable to spell
disaster for regional and global stability. We stress that
the additional restrictive measures imposed through the
resolution against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea cannot be an end in themselves. They need to
be a tool to engage the country in constructive talks.
It is not possible to settle the Korean issue through
sanctions and pressure being brought to bear on
Pyongyang alone. The resolution must be a part of a
political strategy, which is yet to be crafted and agreed
on, and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
must be engaged in this.

Sanctions must not be used for the economic
asphyxiation of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea or to deliberately worsen the humanitarian
situation. This applies in particular to illegal, unilateral
restrictions that strike civilian sectors, which are
unrelated to the missile and nuclear programmes of
the country. Such sanctions may lead to the significant
deterioration of the living conditions of the North
Korean people - incidentally, as United Nations
humanitarian agencies are warning about. Experience
shows the destructiveness of unilateral measures when
sanctions, instead of diplomatic tools, are used as a
universal means of settling such issues.

It is clear that in order to normalize the situation
on the Korean peninsula, we need a comprehensive
approach that includes an end to the missile and nuclear
tests of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the
rejection of a reinforced military infrastructure, and
the reduction of the scale of exercises and manoeuvres.
There is a need to create trust among States in the region.
We must abandon the obsolete, ineffective algorithms
for addressing the nuclear problem in the Korean
peninsula, and we must address this issue through
unique creative approaches. Isolation and pressure need
to be replaced by dialogue and negotiations, and that is
the thrust of the Russian and Chinese dual suspension
and parallel progress proposal.

We recall that our countries have drafted a joint
road map that prevents the threat or use of force and
proposes a comprehensive solution to all problems
on the peninsula, including the nuclear one, through
political and diplomatic means, without precondition,
and through political talks and the resumption of Six-
Party Talks. These ideas warrant attention as they
represent a possible starting point to break the deadlock
and resume negotiations. We must find ways to engage
in dialogue with the leadership of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and to prompt meaningful
dialogue on the nuclear and missile issues. Once again
we would like to draw attention to the joint Russo-
Chinese statement on the settlement of the situation on
the Korean peninsula, dated 4 July.

We should like to draw attention to some contentious
issues in the resolution. Of course Pyongyang is
violating the sanctions against it, but it is not providing
the components of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors. There is no direct link between the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and official
Pyongyang actions. This reference in the context of
sanctions must be ended. This is counterproductive for
the resolution itself above all.

More than ever before, it is important to jointly
seek a political solution to the range of issues plaguing
the Korean peninsula. Following the adoption of the
resolution today, the pressure of sanctions has been
exhausted. We stand ready to work collectively here.
At the same time, the United Nations must step up
efforts to deliver humanitarian assistance to the people
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The
relevant exemptions, provided for in the resolution at
our insistence, enable us to further address this.

