Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his very valuable
briefing and his great efforts to help the Somali people
solve their problems and restore peace in the country. I
would also like to thank Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
for his comprehensive briefing on the Union's position
on this issue. I would also like to welcome Mr. Omaar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, and thank him
for his statement.

My country is very concerned about the use of
force and violence to overthrow the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) in Somalia at a time when
the Government has tirelessly sought to reach out to
the armed opposition groups and convince them to
renounce violence and participate in the Government.
It has held consultations with the leaders of tribes,
sheikhs and religious leaders, and made tangible
progress in the transition process. Its actions have been
welcomed by the Somali people.

The international community should step up its
financial and political support for the Government of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed so that it can
extend its authority over the entire territory of the
country. We also welcome the commitment of the
Government of the Somali President to establish a
broad-based administration in accordance with the
agreement signed with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a and
some elements of Hizbul Islam.

We express our concern over reports of the
presence of foreign elements in the armed opposition
groups. These elements are seeking to further their own
objectives and agendas, and their presence will prolong
the conflict in the country.

We call on the international community to
respond to the appeals launched by the African Union
at its meeting in Sirte early this month for the
implementation of the commitments undertaken at the
Doha conference, and by the International Contact
Group at its meetings in Brussels and Rome for support
to the Somali Government. We call on States that are
able to do so to support and promote the African Union
Mission in Somalia through the Trust Fund and to
support African States that are willing to provide

troops so that the Mission can reach its authorized
strength of 8,000 as quickly as possible.

I must point out here that the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi are to be commended for the
unflagging sacrifices they have made to bring security
and peace to the Somali people. We hope that they will
accelerate the process to transform the African Union
Mission in Somalia into a United Nations Mission in
Somalia.

With respect to piracy off the Somali coast, we
would like to express our gratitude to the States
Members of the United Nations and the regional
organizations that have undertaken to protect ships and
helped the World Food Programme, the United Nations
and humanitarian institutions and agencies to provide
humanitarian assistance to those in need. At the same
time, we believe that addressing the issue of piracy in
the long term will require a comprehensive approach
that seeks to end the conflict, restore stability, support
the ability of the Somali Government to extend its
authority over the entire territory, including its coasts,
and exploit and protect sustainable sources of income,
particularly living marine resources, which for many
years have been exposed to plunder by foreign
companies through illegal fishing in Somali territorial
waters.

At the humanitarian level, we note that
intensifying acts of violence over the past three months
have led to the very serious deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. At least 250 civilians have been
killed, hundreds injured and 204,000 displaced from
the capital, Mogadishu. The number of persons
emigrating to Yemen or otherwise becoming refugees
during the first quarter of this year rose by 30 per cent
compared to the first quarter of last year.

We call on all States to continue to support
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction priority
programmes. In this context, we recall that the World
Food Programme still needs $136 million to feed more
than 3 million individuals in all parts of Somalia. We
hope that the international community will provide the
necessary contributions to that end. In that connection,
we commend the efforts of those providing
humanitarian assistance, who are carrying out their
responsibilities in an environment increasingly fraught
with risk.

Finally, we are very concerned at the information
contained in the report regarding the recruitment of

children younger than 18 and their use in armed
confrontations. We call on those responsible to put an
end to that practice and to permit those children to
return to their families as soon as possible.

