Mr. Holmes: First of all, allow me to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Madam President, and the
Government of Nigeria for convening this high-level
open debate.

I will reflect not only on some recent
developments, but also briefly on those of my almost
three and a half years as Emergency Relief
Coordinator. I will also cover five specific issues:
engaging non-State actors, humanitarian access, the
harmful effect of explosive weapons, protection in
peacekeeping missions, and accountability.

The decade since the Security Council first
focused on the protection of civilians has seen
significant development of the normative framework.
The Security Council has played an important role in
expanding the weight of international jurisprudence on
the conduct of hostilities; on the regulation of small
arms, light weapons, mines and explosive remnants of
war; on the displacement of civilian populations; on
assistance to conflict-affected populations, including
humanitarian access and the safety and security of
humanitarian workers; on accountability for violations
of the law; and on the protection of especially
vulnerable groups, such as women and children.
But, as I have asked before, the key question is
whether these positive developments have actually
improved the condition of civilians in armed conflict,
or have normative advances merely widened the gap
between international rules and reality on the ground,
or created a new gap and called further into question
the relevance of the law and the credibility of Security
Council pronouncements?

Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6216),
there have been two important institutional
developments that should bear fruit. Following the
adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), the first ever
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Margot Wallstrom, was
appointed. Should anyone doubt the need for urgent
attention to the problem, according to the United
Nations Population Fund, 15,275 rapes - the vast
majority by armed men were reported in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2009. And we
know how few of the real number of rapes are
reported. The director of the Panzi Hospital of Bukavu,
Dr. Mukwege, told me recently that the problem of
violent rape was worse than ever. The Council needs to
continue to insist on comprehensive strategies to help
put an end to sexual violence in armed conflict.

 

More recently, in May, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy, briefed a United
Nations sanctions committee for the first time on the
unlawful recruitment of children into armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council has not often launched targeted measures
against identified perpetrators responsible for grave
violations against children. Doing so in the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would be an
important signal in a region where impunity is so
prevalent.

Other mechanisms have helped to improve the
quality of information available to the Security
Council. For example, the Security Council's informal
expert group on the protection of civilians has been
briefed 14 times since its inception in 2009.
Nevertheless, I fear that all too little has changed for
the better on the ground in recent years. Civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts, especially in the internal conflicts that are
now the norm, and they are increasingly targeted by
combatants and armed elements.
10-43853

In 2009 alone, there were thousands of civilian
conflict deaths, from Gaza to Sri Lanka to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Pakistan,
Afghanistan and Somalia, and elsewhere too; and
untold numbers of other casualties, including physical
and psychological injury to men, women and children,
as well as the destruction of their social, economic and
cultural ties and institutions.

This year does not look, so far, much better.
According to official reports, 275 people were killed
by the violence that broke out on 10 June in southern
Kyrgyzstan, although the real death toll may be much
higher, and the ethnic element involved is very
worrying. In Somalia, in the past three months, just
two of the main hospitals in Mogadishu have admitted
over 1,384 war casualties, of whom 328 were children
under 15.

Displacement through conflict is also getting
worse. In 2009, 6.8 million people were displaced
within their own country by conflict, more than at any
point since the mid-19905. Some 1.8 million alone
were in Pakistan, although many have since returned,
but the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Somalia, the Philippines and Colombia also
experienced large-scale new displacements. In
Colombia, the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) is estimated by the Government to have
increased in 2009 by 146,000. An alarming total of
27.1 million - the highest ever - were internally
displaced globally at the end of last year as a result of
conflict.

Again, this year so far is also depressing. An
upsurge in violence in Darfur has displaced 116,000
more people in the first half of the year. Another
90,000 people fled their homes in the southern Sudan
over the same period as insecurity mounted in the run-
up to the referendum in early 2011. In Kyrgyzstan,
375,000 people were forced to flee their homes.

Equally worrying, new displacements continue to
far outnumber returns and the reintegration of IDPs.
Durable solutions are woefully missing for millions in
protracted displacement situations, increasing both
despair and reliance on humanitarian assistance. In this
context, the Kampala Convention adopted by the
African Union last October was a significant
milestone. IDP hosting states must now apply the
Convention on the ground to protect and assist IDPs. I
also urge that, as part of the search for durable
10-43853

solutions and in the wider context of peace
negotiations in places like Darfur, issues of land and
property be given higher priority. The High
Commissioner for Refugees also reported recently that
there remained 15.2 million refugees around the world
in 2009, many of them in protracted situations, and that
2009 was the worst year for voluntary repatriations in
two decades.

In my last briefing (see S/PV.6216), I noted that
every armed conflict in the world today involves the
participation of one or more non-State armed groups.
So it is clear that enhancing the protection of civilians
and reducing human suffering must, in part, be
achieved by engaging with them over access and aid
delivery and also by trying to influence their conduct
and improve their compliance with humanitarian and
human rights law.

This is not just theory. Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
has engaged with armed groups to address their
recruitment and use of children and has used action
plans signed by such groups to bring the practice to an
end. UNICEF and the World Health Organization have
been able to immunize millions of children by
obtaining support for "days of tranquility" from parties
to conflict, including, notably, the Taliban in
Afghanistan. In Gaza, engaging the de facto authorities
is indispensable in order to provide assistance to the
people in need, address growing human rights and
protection concerns, and guarantee the security of aid
workers. These contacts do not in any way legitimize
either the goals or the conduct of armed groups, but
they do show that engagement by humanitarian actors
with such groups can genuinely improve the treatment
of civilians.

I call once again on the Council and on Member
States more widely to respect and promote this
engagement and not to discourage it through, for
example, donor practices which, however well
intentioned, in reality criminalize contacts or the
unintended provision of goods in ways which limit
humanitarian assistance.

Constraints on humanitarian access remain a
major problem. For example, the World Food
Programme has been driven out of large parts of South
Central Somalia by Al-Shabaab violence and threats; in
North-East Democratic Republic of the Congo and
southern Central African Republic, lack of
5
infrastructure and violent attacks by parties to conflict
and criminal groups prevent humanitarians from
reaching many victims of atrocities perpetrated by the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). In many parts of
Afghanistan and Pakistan, humanitarian actors cannot
operate because of hostilities and insecurity.

Violent attacks on humanitarian personnel and
assets - whether politically or economically
motivated - are the biggest threat. Over 100
humanitarian workers were killed in 2008 and 2009; at
least 30 have been killed while carrying out their work
so far this year. Over 200 have been kidnapped and
injured in the past four years.

Criminally-motivated attacks on humanitarian
actors as soft targets, and in the context of wider
lawlessness, remain a particular challenge in places
such as Darfur, Chad and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. On other fronts, the mechanisms to
streamline bureaucratic requirements in Darfur and
enhance access, jointly agreed with the Government of
the Sudan, urgently need to be reinvigorated. In Gaza,
a year and half after operation Cast Lead and three
years after it was first instituted, the blockade is still in
place, despite recent welcome steps to ease it.

States legitimately demand that international
humanitarian action be fully coordinated with the
appropriate domestic authorities. But I urge all affected
States to use close cooperation with humanitarian
actors to facilitate and expedite humanitarian aid to all
who need it, and not slow it down or block it, or try to
make artificial distinctions between the provision of
goods and services and equally essential protection
work designed to prevent abuses and save lives.

Explosive weapons are of particular concern in
the protection of civilians where their use is inherently
indiscriminate. A landmine does not know whether the
person who steps on it is a combatant or civilian. For
example, in Colombia at least 50 per cent of the
territory has been declared affected by mines, and the
country has one of the highest rates of landmine
victims in the world. Like unexploded cluster
munitions, landmines remain active long after the
conflict has ended or moved on, creating deadly risks
to civilians.

But the use of "ordinary" explosive weapons in
populated areas also repeatedly causes unacceptably
high levels of harm to civilians. From air strikes and
artillery attacks in Afghanistan, Somalia, Yemen and

Gaza to rockets launched at Israeli civilian areas by
Palestinian militants and car bombs and suicide attacks
in Pakistan or Iraq, the use of explosive weapons and
explosives has resulted in severe civilian suffering. The
threefold increase in drone attacks in Afghanistan and
Pakistan over the past year is of concern, given the
inevitable risk of unintended civilian casualties.

In Afghanistan, suicide and improvised explosive
device attacks by armed groups now cause more
civilian casualties than any other tactic, representing
44 per cent of the total civilian casualties in 2009, or
1,054 people killed. Aerial attacks from international
military operations also caused 359 civilian deaths.
Suicide bombings elsewhere are also increasing and of
increasing concern since the victims are so often
civilians, with the attack on the Sufi temple in Lahore
only one recent, horrific example. I worry that we have
become so inured to such horrors that the international
community now scarcely notices these events.

More research is needed on the harm caused by
explosive weapons in areas where civilians are present.
However, there is already enough tragic experience to
encourage serious reflection on the military use of such
weapons in such circumstances when measured against
the enormous human suffering they cause. I urge the
Council to begin a dialogue on ways to tackle this
emerging issue.

The planned withdrawal of thousands of United
Nations peacekeepers from Chad and potentially from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has brought the
issue of the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations into the forefront of Security Council
deliberations. This part of my statement includes input
from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO).

In Chad, it is critical that the Government fully
assume its protection of civilian responsibilities and
benchmarks outlined in resolution 1923 (2010). We
wait to see whether the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad in the East of the country will expose refugees,
IDPs and the local population, as well as humanitarian
actors, to new security threats. We are meanwhile
working with the Government to help turn its promises
into reality.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
humanitarian situation in the Kivu provinces remains
alarming. In Orientale province, between December

2009 and April this year, close to 500 people were
killed by the LRA and 400 abducted, of whom 168
were children. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) plays a vital role in providing
security and logistical support for humanitarians, and
any drawdown can only heighten concerns both for
humanitarians and for the populations they seek to
serve.

While it is welcome that countries are determined
to shoulder their sovereign responsibilities, including
protecting civilians, I would strongly encourage the
drawdown of United Nations peacekeeping missions to
be made contingent on the attainment of clear
protection benchmarks endorsed by the Security
Council.

The publication in January 2010 of an
independent study commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO
outlined in detail the steps needed to translate Security
Council peacekeeping mandates into effective action
on the ground to protect civilians. We are making
steady progress in addressing a number of the gaps
identified. DPKO and the Department of Field Support
(DFS) have developed an operational concept, in
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries and other stakeholders, to bring conceptual
clarity to the protection of civilians in the United
Nations peacekeeping context.

Comprehensive protection strategies have been
developed for MONUSCO, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan, and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, while the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and hopefully other
peacekeeping missions are not far behind. DPKO and
DFS have also begun to develop protection of civilians
training standards for United Nations peacekeepers,
and are outlining the resource and capability
requirements for implementing protection of civilians
mandates. We count on the support of the Member
States throughout these processes.

There can, of course, be tensions between
military operations supported by peacekeeping
missions and the protection of civilians. Military
operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
against the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda and the LRA have often sadly been

accompanied by serious humanitarian consequences.
The MONUSCO conditionality policy has drawn
attention to the challenges to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation when it is mandated to protect
civilians while supporting a party to an armed conflict
that is prone to abusive conduct. Measures to prevent
the United Nations from being tainted by such abuses
must also fully take into account the need for effective
protection of civilians by influencing the forces
concerned. This is a difficult balance to strike.

And, while I am extremely worried by reports
from Somalia about the number of civilians being
killed and injured by both Government forces and
armed groups like Al-Shabaab, I am also concerned
that in its response to attacks on it, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) - whose mandate is
authorized by the Council and whose operations are
financially supported by the United Nations - is not
taking sufficient notice of the basic principles of
distinction between combatants and civilians and
proportionality in the use of force. The challenges to
AMISOM. are immense and its role commendable.
However, more needs to be done to prevent harm to
civilians and to ensure the proper investigation of
alleged violations.

The final theme I would like to address is once
again that of accountability. Prevention is always better
than cure, and I believe in the power of deterrence. The
conduct of parties to conflict is inevitably affected by
their sense of susceptibility to punishment and
accountability to their victims, and by clear signals that
impunity will not be tolerated. The danger here is that
the normative framework has outpaced the enforcement
will and capacity of the international community, so I
urge the Council to take a robust approach to
accountability. National justice systems must remain
the first line of defence, but when they prove unable or
unwilling to bring perpetrators to justice and provide
remedies to victims, the international community must
explore alternative means.

I welcome the commission of inquiry launched by
the Secretary-General for crimes committed during
violence in Guinea last September. And I welcome the
panel set up by the Secretary-General to advise him on
accountability for violations of humanitarian and
human rights law in Sri Lanka, especially in the last
stages of the conflict in that country, and the
mechanism recently set up by the Government of Sri
Lanka itself.
Meanwhile, the calls for an inquiry into recent
events in southern Kyrgyzstan are also hard to ignore.
The point is that this scrutiny needs to become the
norm. Actual and would-be violators need to
understand that they have nowhere to hide. Politics
must not always win out where powerful States or
vocal States with powerful protection are involved.

The Security Council has important powers in
this regard. It can include accountability and remedies
within benchmarks for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping mission mandates. It can impose
sanctions. It can establish international tribunals, and it
has choices concerning the nature of its cooperation
with the International Criminal Court. It needs to show
that it is serious, and not selective, about this power.
One idea is for a permanent mechanism to be
established somewhere in the United Nations system to
conduct inquiries on serious allegations more or less
automatically, which would prevent calls for
investigations from being politicized from the start.

The world has changed in the 10 years since the
Security Council first focused on the protection of
civilians in a thematic manner, and even in my three
and a half years as Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Positive normative developments contrast with a
deteriorating reality on the ground and call into
question the efficacy of the law and the credibility of
the institutions that struggle to uphold it. So I urge the
Security Council to work with Member States to craft
new solutions to the changing nature of protection of
civilian concerns. These new solutions must embrace
an expansive vision of protection that extends beyond
the immediate concerns of the battlefield. They must
look to prevention as well as to mitigation. Only by
focusing on consistency, credibility and a long-term
approach can we hope to reduce the current gap
between norms and reality.

