Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Zannier, for his briefing. We appreciate the efforts
he and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have made in
safeguarding peace and security in Kosovo and the
Balkans region.

We listened carefully to the statement by His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Jeremie. We also listened carefully to Mr. Hyseni's
statement.
Over the last three months the security situation
in Kosovo has in general been calm, but tensions
remain in some areas, particularly in northern
Mitrovica, where a series of incidents occurred. China

is concerned about these developments. At the same
time, we are pleased to see that under UNMIK's
mediation, Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs have
reached initial settlements on issues that include
construction of houses. We hope that all parties will
continue to exercise restraint, enhance their dialogue
and refrain from any rhetoric or actions that may
jeopardize peace and stability.

We have taken note of the gradual increase in the
number of voluntary returns of members of minority
communities in 2009. However, the number still lags
behind that of the same period in 2008. We appeal to
UNMIK to intensify its mediation efforts to improve
relations among ethnic communities. We urge parties
concerned to continue to create and coordinate
enabling conditions for voluntary returns of members
of minority communities.

China believes that all parties must adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council.
They must also respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of countries, including Serbia. China has
always maintained that the best way to resolve the
issue of Kosovo is for the Serbian and Kosovar parties
to arrive at a mutually acceptable settlement plan
through negotiations.

The situation in Kosovo has undergone changes,
but the basis for the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) remains the same. China has taken note of the
references in the report (S/2009/300) of the Secretary-
General to the accelerated reconfiguration and
drawdown of UNMIK to bring its functions in line with
the new situation. We believe that the changes in
UNMIK are of a technical nature. They must not
involve the status of Kosovo or change the United
Nations position of neutrality. The issue of Kosovo
remains an important item on the Council's agenda.
UNMIK must continue to maintain close
communication with the parties concerned, as well as
to play a key and constructive role in duly settling the
issue of Kosovo.

We understand the desire of the European Union
to play a role in safeguarding peace and stability in the
Balkan region. We note that the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has pledged to
abide by resolution 1244 (1999) and that it recently
submitted another report on its activities. We hope that
EULEX will continue to operate under the overall
authority of the United Nations and within the status-
neutral framework of resolution 1244 (1999), support
the work of UNMIK and play an active role in
safeguarding peace and stability in the region.

