Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation
appreciates the initiative of the Japanese presidency in
organizing this important debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. It is a most timely initiative. I also wish
to extend, on behalf of my delegation, our warmest
greetings to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan
and the other Ministers who are with us here today for
this important meeting.

Sri Lanka associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The United Nations, as we all know, was
established in the hope that it would contribute to the
collective effort to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. We can all take pride in the fact
that, in the 65 years since then, the world as a whole
has not been at war. However, in the same period,
intra-State and inter-State conflicts have become
widespread. Therefore, our collective efforts to bring
conflicts to an end and to prevent the recurrence of
conflicts in post-conflict contexts cannot cease.

The Peacebuilding Commission was conceived
with an awareness of the characteristics of successful
peacebuilding efforts. We must nevertheless not ignore
the lessons of the other home-grown strategies that
countries have successfully implemented to achieve
and consolidate peace. There are many instances in
which strategies developed on the basis of national
experience have succeeded much better than those
prescribed in hallowed academic institutions. We must
accept that all peacebuilding efforts are unique, as the
nature and context of individual conflicts are different.
There must be no one-size-fits-all principle applied in
supporting the specific situation of any given country.
Any tendency to impose predetermined solutions for
achieving peace and reconciliation must be resisted,
however much we are attached to them.

We recognize that the international community
has a responsibility to ensure that post-conflict
situations do not relapse into conflict and to encourage
and facilitate national efforts to achieve lasting peace.
We need to listen to national Governments and
communities, which understand better what a country's
and a people's priorities are. Peacebuilding must
squarely be a nationally owned process, and peace
must come from within and not from the outside. Our
own experience has shown that some in the
international community expect benchmarks to be
achieved according to artificial timelines and feel that
external pressure could help speed up a process,
disregarding complex domestic sensitivities and
ground realities. Quite often, the progress made is
ignored when it is not consistent with external
prescriptions, and there is a constant focus only on
what remains to be achieved. This approach has
resulted quite often in the rejection of external
interference and confusion in the domestic processes,
thereby weakening the influence of the international
community.

In many situations, time can heal many wounds,
provided it is augmented by necessary confidence-
building measures. Quite often, a great deal of
emphasis is placed on political reconciliation alone,
without the realization that the economic
empowerment of people needs to be given equal
priority. Poverty, unemployment, unequal opportunities
and an ensuing sense of grievance have often led to the
radicalization of communities and provided the base of
support for armed conflict. Whilst these social issues
may manifest themselves as ethno-national or religious
conflicts, the core grievance may very possibly be a
sense of marginalization, especially economic.

Peacebuilding is a multidimensional task that
requires a comprehensive approach. The immediate
needs of people in post-conflict societies include
rehabilitation, resettlement, basic services, safety and
security, the rebuilding of basic infrastructure,
economic opportunities through employment and the
regaining of lost livelihoods. Unless economic
opportunities are provided, no amount of political
facilitation or punitive measures will bring peace. One
classic definition of peace is the normalization of the
life of the people. No peacebuilding can be successful
without winning the hearts and minds of the people.
Economic recovery must take place in parallel with the
strengthening of democratic processes, the rule of law
and human rights. The international community has a
significant role to play in assisting with the economic
recovery phase in post-conflict scenarios.

Considerable focus needs to be placed on healing
the wounds and achieving reconciliation among
peoples in countries where conflicts have divided
communities for decades. Those who shout from the
rooftops for justice or revenge against the alleged
perpetrators of crimes come from a certain socio-
cultural milieu where revenge is seen as a healer. In
our part of the world, a culture going back millennia
dictates that mercy must be shown by the victor.
Mercy, forgiveness and a need to come to terms with
the past, however bitter it may have been, on a morally
acceptable basis, in order to advance the cause of
reconciliation and long-term stability are key to our
cultural experience. As the Bard so aptly wrote of the
quality of mercy "is twice blest. It blesseth him that
gives and him that takes". Forgiveness, rather than
punishment and revenge, is the major influence in our
context. Therefore, we need to recognize the different
approaches to addressing the ways conflicts last and
can be resolved, and once again agree that there is no
one-size-fits-all formula.
Our own experience has shown us that we must
allow democratic processes to be established for the
people to elect their leaders and to allow the people
who have lived through years of conflict to come
forward and take the initiative in rebuilding their
communities and deciding their political future, rather
than having solutions based on a judgmental
assessment of their aspirations imposed upon them.
Those who have been through long-running conflicts
often take a very different approach to how they would
want to shape their future, and, very often, old ideas
that gave rise to the conflicts in the first place no
longer remain a priority for these communities.
Therefore, political solutions in post-conflict societies,
in our experience, should not precede the firm
establishment of democratic processes and proper
consultation.

Post-conflict peacebuilding also requires
considerable financial resources, and, in many
countries emerging from conflict, one of the major
challenges is finding the resources to consolidate
peace. Very often, support from the donor community
is conditional upon our accepting its formulas for
peacebuilding. We believe that the Peacebuilding Fund
could be a channel through which national processes
can be supported on their own merits.

We hope that our candid views on post-conflict
peace building strategies based on our own experience
may contribute to the ongoing dialogue on how best to
sustain and achieve durable peace. Sri Lanka fully
supports the major review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture being conducted under the
auspices of the General Assembly, and we hope this
debate may contribute to that review.

