Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Thank
you, Madam President, and I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing.

We are deeply concerned by the deteriorating
situation in Jerusalem, especially over the past two
weeks. We are living in a time of tremendous turmoil
in the Middle East. It is a time that requires brave
leadership; a time that requires hard choices - choices
that advance peace, choices that advance stability,
choices that advance security. This is a time that calls
for responsible decisions by leaders and people of
both sides, as well as the international community, to
advance the goals of security and peace.

The current situation is only made more difficult
by actions that pollute the atmosphere for peace and
further undermine trust on both sides. We continue to
urge all to refrain from actions, including settlement
activity and unhelpful rhetoric by either side, that will
only further escalate tensions.

The deterioration of the situation in Jerusalem, at
a time when so many are eager for signs of progress
towards peace, is deeply troubling. It is hard to
imagine sites more sensitive than those in Jerusalem,
and today we are very concerned by recent tensions
surrounding the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif. It
is absolutely critical that all sides exercise restraint,
refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric, and
preserve the historical status quo on the Temple Mount/
Haram al-Sharif in word and in practice. That is why
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu's recent statements
expressing his commitment to maintain the status quo
there and not to make any changes at the site are so
important. We welcome the Prime Minister's comments.
The continued commitment ofIsraelis, Palestinians
and Jordanians to preserving the historic status quo
at the holy site is critical. Any decisions or actions to
change it would be both provocative and dangerous. We
urge the leaders of all three parties to exercise decisive
leadership and work cooperatively together to lower
tensions and discourage violence, alleviate restrictions
on Muslim worshipers and reinvigorate long-standing
coordination mechanisms and relationships that have
served over the decades to preserve the historic status
quo as it pertains to religious observance and access
to the site. Those arrangements are essential for
maintaining calm at this important and holy site.

Israel's recently announced plans to advance a
project to construct more than 1,000 housing units
in East Jerusalem are deeply concerning. Beyond
those recent developments, we have also seen reports
that Israeli authorities met today and discussed the
approval of dozens of projects aimed to expand
settlement infrastructure in the West Bank, including
water projects, electricity grid expansion and road
construction, along with the so-called legalization of
outposts the Israeli Government itself considers illegal.

The United States is deeply concerned by those
developments. We urge all parties to refrain from
provocative actions, including settlement activity
by Israeli authorities. Settlement activity will only
further escalate tensions at a time that is already tense
enough. The United States views settlement activity as
illegitimate. And we have made unambiguously clear
our opposition to unilateral steps that may prejudge
the future of Jerusalem, just as we have made clear our
opposition to any unilateral attempts to make end runs
around the hard work of negotiations.

Against that backdrop, the cycle of violence
continues. The attack at the Jerusalem tram stop
last week that killed a young baby who was a United
States citizen was unconscionable. We condemn it in
the strongest possible terms. We express our deepest
condolences to the family of the child who was killed
and the second victim, who succumbed to her wounds.
We also express our sympathies to those injured in the
attack and hope for their full recovery.

The United States also expresses its deepest
condolences to the family of the 14-year-old American
citizen who was killed by Israeli Defense Forces during
the clashes in Silwad on 24 October. We have called
on the Israeli authorities to conduct an expeditious and
transparent investigation into that incident and we expect
them to do so. In that especially fraught environment,
it is critical that all parties restore calm and that hard
choices are made to de-escalate tensions and re-engage
in the hard work of negotiations. Unilateral actions and
short cuts are no substitute for the difficult work that
peace will require.

Our goal must be to lay the groundwork for a
negotiated agreement that will lead to two States living
side by side in peace and security. As we have said
before, the two-State solution is the only viable way
forward and negotiations are the means by which the
conflict will ultimately be resolved. If the parties are
willing and committed to go down that path - in both
words and in deeds - then we stand ready to support
them every step of the way.

