The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of Israel
and Qatar, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Peleg (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Al-Khalifa
(Qatar) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 21 March 1997 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/ 1997/242 and reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council invite
Dr. Nasser AI-Kidwa, Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, to participate in the
current meeting of the Security Council with regard to
the situation in the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and with previous practice in this regard.

There being on objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa

(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to the request contained in
a letter dated 19 March 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/1997/235. Members of the Council have before them
document S/ 1997/241, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Egypt and Qatar.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/233, which contains the
text of a letter dated 18 March 1997 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/ 1997/241)
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


