Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your leadership of the Security
Council this month. I would like to thank and
commend your predecessor for his prudent
management of work in the Council last month. I
would also like to thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator, Mr. Michael Williams, for his briefing
and for his tireless efforts.

Jordan aligns itself with the statements by Yemen,
our fraternal country, on behalf of the Arab Group, by
Pakistan on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, and by Cuba on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

Today's meeting is special for two reasons. First,
it anticipates the atmosphere of high-level diplomatic
activity on the margins of the sixty-second session of
the General Assembly, and secondly, we View it as part
of the international momentum generated through the
Arab Peace Initiative and the initiative of the President
of the United States, George Bush, for convening an
international conference on peace in the Middle East.
This meeting thus is a unique opportunity to call upon
the international community to intensify its efforts to
reactivate the peace process and put it back on the right
track.

As we try to establish security and peace
worldwide, we should not lose sight of the fact that the
Palestinian question remains at the heart of the Middle
East conflict. Without a just solution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, the region would inevitably revert
07-49288
to violence and extremism that would have grave
repercussions in the region and elsewhere. Thus, a fair,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region remains
our single option.

That option has to be seen in the context of a
comprehensive conceptual solution that directly tackles
the fundamental final status issues; it should not be
limited to dealing with matters of the daily running of
the occupied territories. It must have a predetermined
and acceptable timetable that can be adhered to,
conforms to resolutions of international legitimacy and
leads to the creation of an independent, viable and
geographically contiguous State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The Arab Peace Initiative is an historic
opportunity to bring about a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of this conflict. It provides a good
basis for the peace we are striving for. This initiative
has established a balanced approach, with concrete
ideas and arguments that can be followed through, and
it proves beyond doubt the total Arab commitment to
reaching a settlement, putting an end to conflict,
providing collective security guarantees for all
countries in the region, including Israel, and to leading
to the establishment of the State of Palestine.

International parties have a pivotal role in
moving the peace process forward, and that entails a
political and moral responsibility to help settle the
conflict in proportion to their international standing
and ability to influence international policy. In Jordan,
we expect these parties to be a strategic driving force
that shapes events, and we expect them to take
advantage of the historic opportunity provided by the
forthcoming international conference.

In this regard, we would like to reiterate our
support for the initiative of United States President
George Bush for the holding an international peace
conference. We consider it a step in the right direction.
We would also like to welcome the positive elements
of this initiative, looking into ways to re-launch the
Palestinian-Israeli peace process in accordance with
the two-State formula and reaching an agreement on
final status issues, including those of Jerusalem and the
refugees. In the meantime, we emphasize the
importance of a work plan and a clear timetable to
guarantee that this meeting can be a success and have
the potential to launch the political process with clearly
defined directions and outcomes.
3
We also stress the importance of the role of the
Quartet in the coming stage, and we attach special
importance to the meeting it will hold with the Arab
Group on the margins of the sixty-second session of
the General Assembly. Jordan takes this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Tony Blair as the
Quartet's Special Envoy. The Jordanian Government is
pleased to express its readiness to work with him in
close coordination and cooperation.

Jordan is rather optimistic about the outcome of
recent meetings between President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert. Meanwhile, assent and complete
support of Palestinian legitimacy as embodied by the
Palestinian Authority and its President, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas. We urge the international community to give all
necessary aid to President Abbas and the Palestinian
people in their efforts to create a democratic political
system, strengthen the Palestinian national institutions
and make them responsible and transparent, including
security institutions, in order to develop good
governance so as to meet the aspirations and needs of
the Palestinian people and maintain their unity. We also
hope that all Palestinian factions will put their house in
order and unite, giving priority to the common interests
of the Palestinian people.

The link between economy and security is
irrefutable; it is an integrated circle. In Jordan, we
harbour some concern about the lack of minimum
social and economic conditions necessary for a
reasonable degree of security, be it in the West Bank or
Gaza. As part of the efforts made by Jordan to help
improve the living conditions of the Palestinian people,
our Government has provided emergency aid, and in
the last few days has sent convoys with medicine to
Gaza and Jerusalem hospitals, where there is a great
shortage of basic drugs and medical supplies.

In particular, we are concerned with the
humanitarian situation of the people in Gaza. We call
upon the international community to participate by
offering support for the Palestinian Authority, giving
humanitarian aid to all Palestinians, helping to improve
their living conditions, reviving their economy, helping
to create an environment favourable for investment,
and promoting a free and flourishing economy.
Evidently, such measures are no alternative to a
political process with real peace negotiations leading to
definite political outcomes.
As we approach the convening of an international
conference on peace in the Middle East, with hope
generated by the Arab Initiative, we feel the need to
generate mutual confidence between the parties to the
conflict. We call upon the Israeli Government to lift the
blockade on the Palestinian people, transfer Palestinian
taxes and customs duty, release more Palestinian
prisoners and put an end to all practices violating the
rights of the Palestinian people, putting an end,
furthermore, to all forms of occupation, especially
through restriction of movement, security closures and
all colonization activity.

Moreover, the Jordanian Government reaffirms
its position regarding the illegality of the separation
wall, demolition activities, and excavations threatening
sacred areas.

The Middle East is moving towards a critical
moment. We should all seize this hour of momentum
and build on it in our search for peace.

