Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour of
Peru's presidency, Mr. President, let me thank you in
Spanish: Muchas gracias, Senor Presidente. I also
extend my warm thanks to the Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Thomas
Markram, for his briefing.

This year, we are celebrating the hundredth
anniversary of the end of the First World War. The
ensuing ban against the use of chemical weapons
raised the hope of the world for an end to the
horrors of chemical warfare. Sadly, 100 years later,
chemical-weapon attacks have been taking place in
Syria, reportedly at least 85 times. In that context today,
Iwill make three points: first, Syria's failure to comply
with the Chemical Weapons Convention; secondly, the
commemoration of the sarin attack at Khan Shaykhun;
and thirdly, accountability.

As to my first point, Syria's failure to comply with
the Chemical Weapons Convention, this month 21
years ago, the Chemical Weapons Convention entered
into force. It was the first disarmament agreement to
provide for the elimination of an entire category of
weapons of mass destruction under universally applied
international control. It was a great achievement.

Almost five years ago, Syria joined the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Syria promised to destroy
and abandon its chemical weapons programme. Yet,
month after month, we hear that the Syrian regime's
declaration cannot be considered complete or accurate.
Until that declaration is complete, Syria is simply not
complying with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention. We are deeply concerned - and
we remain deeply concerned - about this fact, and
we reiterate our call upon the Syrian regime to extend
its full and timely cooperation to the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in
The Hague.
As to my second point, the commemoration of the
sarin attack at Khan Shaykhun, today we commemorate
the horrendous sarin attack by the regime against
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017, as Thomas Markram
highlighted in his briefing. The conclusions of the
United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM), mandated by the Security Council itself, were
clear - the Al-Assad regime carried out the heinous
4 April attack, killing approximately 100 innocent
Syrian civilians, including many children, and injuring
hundreds more. The report also determined that Da'esh
was responsible for using the chemical weapon sulfur
mustard in attacks on 15 and 16 September 2016 in Um-
Housh, Syria.

Sadly, that was not the last time that we received
reports that chemical weapons were used in Syria.
Dozens of instances are currently being investigated
by the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The use of chemical weapons should never go
unpunished. Impunity erodes the important prohibition
of the use of chemical weapons.

That brings me to my third point: accountability.
All members of the Security Council regularly stress
the need for accountability for perpetrators who use
chemical weapons. Yet the Security Council has not
been able to move forward for months due to the use
of veto by a permanent member of the Council. The
Joint Investigative Mechanism had a strong mandate
to investigate and identify perpetrators independently
from the politics in the Council. But the renewal of the
JIM's mandate fell victim to exactly those politics. That
does not mean we now need to settle for less - all the
more so because, since the JIM. ceased to operate, we
have received reports that the regime has carried out at
least five more chemical-weapons attacks, and maybe
even more. The disappearance of the JIM. cannot be the
end of the story.

First, we must act upon the conclusions of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and on the outcomes of the
OPCW Fact-finding Mission. I reiterate that a referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court in The Hague by the Security Council is the most
appropriate path to accountability and justice.

Secondly, we must intensify our efforts to achieve
a mechanism that can continue the meticulous work of
the JIM. Such a mechanism should, first, independently
decide how it will conduct its investigations. I
emphasize that it should do so independently. It
should also investigate and identify perpetrators of
all parties to the armed conflict. Further, it should
operate independently from the Council, including
when it comes to the attribution of guilt. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands believes that the Security Council
should rally around the United States draft text for a
new mechanism.

Finally, we also have to consider all instruments
outside of the Council to advance accountability for
the use of chemical weapons. That effort should build
upon the important work of the JIM. and the OPCW
Fact-finding Mission. We are ready to take the lead
in this regard. In this context, we also re-emphasize
our strong support for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and
the Commission of Inquiry. We also support the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons, initiated by France.

In conclusion, there is no middle ground in the
Council when it comes to chemical weapons. Ultimately,
we must learn the lessons of history and ensure that,
100 years after the end of the First World War, there
can be no impunity for the use of chemical weapons. To
do otherwise is to effectively condone these appalling
attacks and to undermine the international architecture
that we collectively designed to stop them. In the words
of the Secretary-General, we must begin to repair the
damage to the chemical weapons disarmament and
non-proliferation regime.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to do
its utmost to achieve accountability for the horrific use
of chemical weapons in Syria. Impunity cannot prevail.

