Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me,
at the outset, on behalf of the Haitian Government, to
congratulate the delegation of the Government of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, which is serving this month
as President of the Security Council, for its initiative in
convening this open debate on the potential contribution
of peacekeeping operations to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace. The issue is indeed important.

In a constantly changing world confronted with
global threats and complex and changing security
issues, the nature of peacekeeping operations, their
relevance, cost, effectiveness and objectives have
rightly raised a number of questions. Many critics have
denounced - not without reason - the mismanagement
of some missions, in particular the inflated costs and
staffing, and the multiplication of tasks unrelated to
the fundamental objectives. Others, on the other hand,
severely criticize what they perceive as the artificial
politicization of peacekeeping, with too much attention
being placed on certain issues.

Nevertheless, there can be no denying that
peacekeeping operations are an excellent tool for
conflict management and have proven their necessity
over the past five decades. Incidentally, Mr. Antonio
Guterres rightly underscored that the United Nations
Blue Helmets represent an investment for global peace,
security and prosperity. Nevertheless, they are not a
perfect tool and have clearly shown their limitations.

Reforms have been proposed and initiated so as to
remedy such problems. However, we must admit that
a great deal remains to be done to ensure that such
operations are properly adapted to the complexity of the
new challenges, new threats to international peace and
security, the various contexts in which they are deployed
and to the difficult and often hostile environments in
which they are called upon to intervene. Updates are
all the more necessary, as the success stories, however
undeniable and spectacular they may be, cannot hide the
fact that there are what some consider to be half-success
stories or even resounding failures that, furthermore,
sometimes cast a shadow on the credibility, the image
and the moral authority of the United Nations.

Among the ever-increasing voices rising from all
sides - even here within the Security Council - calling
for a new doctrinal approach to peacekeeping, we note
in particular that of the Secretary-General, who has
affirmed that genuine, strategic reform ofpeacekeeping
operations is necessary. Clearly, new avenues for the
future must be explored.

The concept paper (S/2017/692, annex) prepared
by the Egyptian presidency of the Security Council has
outlined some very interesting approaches. Some of the
proposals that have emerged in efforts to achieve the
goal of sustaining peace share several characteristics.
We consider three of those elements to be essential.

The first is the principle of accountability,
which should guide all aspects of a United Nations
peacebuilding operation. Secondly, the role of the
Security Council must be strengthened so as to enable
it to fulfil its fundamental mission as a core instrument
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, one that is
capable of providing appropriate collective responses
consistent with its mandate, particularly in situations
where gross violations of human rights, atrocities
or serious violations of humanitarian law have been
committed. Thirdly, sustaining peace cannot only
involve the prevention of the outbreak, intensification,
continuation or resurgence of conflicts, as the concept
paper has clearly reminded us. Peacekeeping will
necessarily be incomplete if it does not also include
activities dealing with the root causes of conflict.

In the case of my country, Haiti, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which has
been working for some 13 years, is coming to an end.
The Haitian Government and the Security Council have
agreed. The foundation for political and institutional
stability in Haiti has been consolidated. For the first time
in decades, a peaceful, credible and inclusive electoral
process has made it possible to fill all elective posts
at all levels of governance. Through MINUSTAH, the
United Nations has largely contributed to that outcome.
Guided by that shared vision, the Haitian Government
and the United Nations are working together to establish
a new framework for strategic cooperation that will
reflect the new reality on the ground. Among others,
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
must illustrate that new partnership.

On behalf of the Haitian delegation, I would like to
conclude with four observations.

First, to us it seems essential that, in learning
from recent past lessons, the Security Council fully
reappropriate its mission of safeguarding and sustaining
peace, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. In particular, the Council must eliminate
the institutional bottlenecks which, all too often in
recent years, have undermined and even paralysed its
work aimed at fully discharging its role as the main
peacekeeping authority.

Secondly, the debate on sustaining peace cannot
ignore the question of extreme poverty, which plays a role
with which we are all too familiar in many intra-State
conflicts. Fratricidal civil wars often have their roots in
economic misery, social injustice, political oppression,
marginalization and exclusion. It is imperative to afford
more substantial assistance to developing countries
in the throws of conflict or in the post-conflict phase
of reconstruction and peacebuilding so that they can
break the vicious circle of poverty. If we fail to do so,
"sustaining peace" will remain empty words.

Thirdly, under no circumstances can the United
Nations shirk its responsibilities, in particular that
of respecting and promoting the rights of those it is
called upon to protect. In that regard, we welcome
the proposal submitted to States Members by the
Secretary-General that aims to end impunity and
provides for the appointment of advocates of victims'
rights within the framework of the Organization's
peacekeeping activities. So as to be fully in line with the
human rights norms that the United Nations has as an
essential mission to promote, that approach - we truly
hope - must cover all cases of human rights violations
and moral and material damages that a mission might
have caused.

Finally, the objective of sustaining peace is
inseparable from that of the sustainable development.
The Republic of Haiti reiterates its support for
a vision of sustaining peace, which, faced with
today's challenges - to paraphrase the Secretary-
General - calls for global responses that allow for
confronting the root causes of conflicts and combine
peace, sustainable development and human rights. It is
therefore incumbent upon the international community
to meet that challenge through the implementation of
mechanisms built upon collective solidarity, which are
essential to achieving the goal of sustainable peace.

