Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate. Given
your able stewardship, I am confident that you will
lead this body to successful and fruitful outcomes
in its deliberations. I also join others in thanking the
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings.

My delegation continues to believe that the full
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects is the only universal instrument available to us
to sufficiently address the theme that you have proposed
for the membership to consider today. In addition, we
trust that the recent entry into force of the Arms Trade
Treaty, which requires States to have effective national
arms-control systems, including legislation, will also
assist in that regard. We believe that the illicit trade
in such weapons exacerbates conflicts, crime and
terrorism, and undermines respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Such illicit trade has had devastating consequences in
that it leads to trafficking in humans, drugs and certain
natural resources.

South Africa fully shares the view presented in
your concept note (S/2015/306, annex), Madam, that
illicit transfers in small arms and light weapons are a
particularly acute problem in Africa, where we have
witnessed their recycling from earlier conflicts on our
continent. It is alarming to note that non-governmental
organizations have estimated the number of illicit small
arms in circulation at between 90 and 100 million, most
of which affect civilian populations, including innocent
women and girls. South Africa has consistently
advocated the need for the full implementation of two
types of small-arms and light-weapons disarmament
measures, namely, proper stockpile management
and effective disarmament measures in post-conflict
situations. Without sufficient controls over State-owned
small arms and light weapons, there is a serious risk of
their falling into the hands of armed groups, terrorists
and individuals with pure criminal intent. That hampers
our shared aim of attaining our development goals,
combating economic stagnation, addressing crippled
health-care systems and attaining lasting peace. It
is indeed an integral part of our collective effort to
accomplish our post-2015 development agenda.

My delegation shares the objective set out in today's
concept note, namely, that of identifying the challenges
related to small arms and light weapons in United
Nations peace operations, and the need to integrate
small arms and light weapons into initial consultations
and issues relating to new operations and the updating
of an implementation mandate. That is closely related
to stockpile security, border management, record-
keeping, the tracing of illicit arms, as well as to the
disposal of surplus, surrendered or confiscated small
arms and light weapons through their destruction.

Effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes need to be integrated into
broader peacebuilding processes. Assisting States
to implement commitments under post-conflict
agreements to which they are party is key to such
processes and fundamental to achieving those goals.

Finally, my delegation wishes to highlight its belief
that international cooperation and assistance are among
the central pillars of our overall implementation efforts
relating to the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. That relates
not only to taking care ofpost-conflict peace measures,
but most importantly, to stockpile management, where
the risk of diversion remains a major potential concern.

