Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to you for
having convened this public meeting on the situation in
Somalia. We also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Sir Kieran Prendergast,
and the Permanent Representative of Djibouti,
Ambassador Roble Olhaye, for their introductory
remarks, which have provided the framework for the
Council's deliberations today.
There is no doubt that the crisis in Somalia has
been one of the most complex and intractable which
the Council has addressed over the past 10 years,
during which there has indeed been little progress in
the political situation. The numerous inter-clan and
intra-clan rivalries, which have resulted in the inability
of the faction leaders and warlords to agree on
initiatives to end the crisis, have brought untold
suffering to the people of Somalia. This has affected
the will of the international community to continue its
engagement in seeking a solution to the conflict.

It is against this background that my delegation
commends the initiative of the President of Djibouti
which has led to the convening of the Somalia National
Peace Conference. As Ambassador Olhaye reminded
us, the hallmark of the Conference has been the
involvement of civil society, thus ensuring that the
people of Somalia take full responsibility for achieving
national reconciliation and peace.

It was a bold stroke for the Government of
Djibouti to have gone beyond the warlords and clan
leaders to the grass-roots level, and we hope that the
broad-based consultations now taking place will result
in a compromise which will reflect the needs and
aspirations of the people of Somalia.

It is therefore important that the Security Council,
through the presidential statement which we will adopt
later today, send a strong signal of support for the
Djibouti peace initiative and that the international
community offer not only moral but material support
for the Conference.

We also wish to commend the support shown by
the Organization of African Unity, the League of Arab
States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
other neighbouring States of Somalia in the search for
peace.

While noting the positive developments that have
taken place at the Conference, we regret that some
Somali leaders have rejected any peace proposal,
preferring to perpetuate the misery that has been visited
on the people of Somalia. We once again call on all the
faction leaders to reject the violence and to participate
in the Conference.

Somalia will need the assistance of the
international community as it rebuilds the social and
political basis of its society and seeks to bring about
national reconciliation. The United Nations has to
become involved in the facilitation of a peaceful
solution to the conflict. In particular, we need to
maintain a close and constructive relationship with the
Government of Djibouti and with the other regional
organizations in their efforts to broker peace. We have
to effectively lay the groundwork for a sustainable
peace so that the process of peace-building can begin.

My delegation wishes to join others in expressing
the dire humanitarian situation of the majority of the
people. Hundreds of thousands of persons have
suffered from the cumulative effects of nearly one
decade of armed conflict, a fractured economic
infrastructure, low food production and the virtual
absence of health and educational services.

We have noted the reports that nearly 1 million
Somalis are at risk of facing severe food shortages. The
United Nations system has been doing its utmost to
provide humanitarian and rehabilitation assistance
throughout Somalia under trying circumstances, and
we wish to urge those countries that are able to
contribute generously to the appeal made recently
through the inter-agency consolidated process.

Finally, we wish to pay tribute to the
humanitarian workers, some of whom have lost their
lives or suffered injury in the service of the people of
Somalia. We commend their selflessness and
perseverance in the execution of their tasks in these
most trying circumstances.

