Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the mission directed by the
Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Kalomoh, for the
assessment contained in the report before us.

My country shares the mission's analysis as to the
regional nature of certain problems in Central Africa in
a variety of areas - cross-border movements of armed
groups, movements of armies, child soldiers, refugees
and displaced persons, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, illegal
exploitation of natural resources and insufficient
economic integration of the region. It is therefore
useful and necessary for the States of the region and
the international community to coordinate appropriate
responses.

Security issues, of course, are of a priority nature.
Efforts of the international community with regard to
peacekeeping should be supported and coordinated,
especially those of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the African Union force in Burundi, or of the Central
African Economic Monetary Community in the Central
African Republic. It also seems to us that the initiatives
to better coordinate disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of combatants in the regional
framework - especially those of the World Bank and
the United Nations Development Programme - should
of course take fully into account the regional
dimension.

It seems to us also that countries of the subregion
and the international community should exert every
effort to combat arms trafficking. That is why we wish
the Council to soon set up a monitoring mechanism to
improve application of the embargo on arms and on
support to armed groups in the east of the Congo.

Grave humanitarian problems of the subregion
recalled by the mission - especially the considerable
number of displaced persons and refugees and
challenges to public health posed by the AIDS
pandemic - are equally urgent. They could only
benefit from cooperation in the subregional framework.
The sustained return of the subregion to peace and
stability also requires action for development and for
combating poverty. As the mission has stressed, if they
are to take advantage of the economic potential of their
subregion, the States of the subregion must develop
true economic regional cooperation involving the free
movement of persons and goods and the development
of communications infrastructures.

Let me turn now to the issue of structures. We
feel that, with respect to structures, the Secretary-
General's proposal to appoint a special envoy to assist
the countries of the subregion and provide liaison with
United Nations agencies should be considered in the
context of the international conference on the Great
Lakes region. I note that our colleague Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou has reminded us that there is no
precise equation between countries participating in the
conference on the Great Lakes and all those that
broadly constitute the Central African region. It may be
true that there is no strict equivalence, but there are
more than four such countries. Some would urge the
participation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's neighbours in the first round of the
conference, but the conference will undoubtedly have a
significant impact on cooperation between many
countries of the region and on their relations with the
United Nations. That is why we believe that, given the
importance of the conference, it is logical in this
context that we consider the modalities of the United
Nations involvement in the subregion and the need to
develop structures, as necessary.

We are, of course, very attentive to all we are told
by the Secretary-General and to what the other
members of the Security Council will say today, but I
wished to offer that thought this morning because I
wanted to convey our perception of the issue at this
stage.

