Ms. Ferreira (Angola): First of all, I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of January. We also congratulate the other newly elected members of the Security Council: Estonia, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and the Niger. We would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his timely briefing (see S/PV.8699) and exceptional guidance on this important issue. We align ourselves with the statement made by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)). At the outset, allow me to reiterate my Government's concern with the escalating tensions in the Middle East, including increasingly hostile confrontations, which have the potential to plunge the region into another deadly cycle of violence. As we gather in this Chamber today to discuss the importance of upholding the Charter of the United Nations, we urge all sides, under the terms of Chapter VI, to use all available peaceful means of resolution, and that any military intervention be approved by the Security Council. Given that in June we will all celebrate the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations Charter, we would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to upholding its principles. As our President, His Excellency Mr. Joao Manuel Gongalves Lourengo, mentioned in September during the general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, specifically in the context of international peace and security, multilateralism is the only way to resolve the conflicts that plague the different regions of the world (see A/74/PV.4). The Government of Angola has always supported the notion that the United Nations Charter is one of the most important global safeguards against international crimes. In that regard, the Republic of Angola respects and applies the principles of the United Nations Charter and the African Union Charter, seeking to establish friendly and cooperative relations with all States and peoples based on the principles of respect for national sovereignty and independence; equality among States; the right of peoples to self-determination and independence; the peaceful settlement of conflicts; respect for human rights; the non-interference in the internal affairs of other States; reciprocity of advantages; the repudiation and combating of terrorism, drug trafficking, racism, corruption and trafficking in human beings and organs; and cooperation with all peoples for peace, justice and the progress of humankind. However, when we assess how the challenges that we face around the world have evolved and how the drivers of conflict have become more complex, and when we see that the consequences of instability now have far-reaching consequences and create new threats on a global scale, it is crucial that we all contribute to the efforts being made to reform the United Nations, which span the areas of peace and security, development and management, in order to make the Organization and its Member States more effective in fulfilling the Charter's vision. During our tenure in the Security Council, we underscored the importance of promoting international peace and security by placing more emphasis on prevention. It is well known that the international community spends far more time and resources responding to crises than in preventing them, and that, through cooperation at the United Nations, we must rebalance our approach to achieving and maintaining international peace and security by finding more effective ways to help countries avert the outbreak of crises. Chapter VI of the Charter describes the tools that are available for the purpose of conflict prevention, namely, negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement and other peaceful measures and means. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a direct and commendable product of such tools and offers an integrated framework to address the economic and social drivers of conflict and to build stable societies, including through a focus on institutions and the rule of law. In the same vein, Chapter VIII of the Charter recognizes the value of regional arrangements and agencies as a first resort to the pacific settlement of local disputes. Regional perspectives are critical to understanding the challenges that we face, while regional capacity-building is crucial forrapid deployment. As part of the African Union and other regional organizations in Africa, we believe that regional ownership is essential for effective solutions to take root. In this regard, we welcome and fully support the dynamic partnership between the African Union and the United Nations, anchored in the two framework agreements on peace and security and in the alignment of the 2030 Agenda with Africa's Agenda 2063 because we firmly believe that conflict prevention depends crucially on advancing sustainable and inclusive development. We also believe that if we are to successfully address the challenge of immigration, as well as the threats of climate change and rising inequality, we must continue to build on these established frameworks. Given the constraints of time, I will conclude my statement by reminding all States Members of the United Nations, in particular the members of the Security Council, that in order to effectively respond to non-traditional and transnational security challenges, such as climate change, terrorism, violent extremism, nuclear proliferation and cross-border insecurity, the Security Council has to be reformed in order to be more flexible in its decision-making process. This has to happen not only because international peace and security issues are at a critical juncture, but because multilateralism is also under threat. Multilateralism cannot be upheld by one Member State or a group of States. Therefore, the United Nations, and specifically the Security Council, must continue to improve its working relations with other interconnected pillars of the United Nations system and also increase its focus on the concept of sustaining peace.
