The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for convening this meeting.

(spoke in English)
United Nations special political missions and
peacekeeping operations are some of our most
effective tools to promote and maintain international
peace and security, but they are temporary. We are
strengthening our focus on moments of transition,
when our missions are reconfigured or leave the
country. A mission transition is usually the result
of progress towards peace. It is a moment of hope,
potential and promise - an opportunity to re-engage
and re-energize our commitment. It is a time to help
national Governments themselves take forward policies
and programmes that address the root causes of crises
and conflicts and to put the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the centre of our efforts.

But mission transitions also pose risks. The
international community may pay less attention to the
country concerned. Strategic gains achieved during
decades of international support can hang in the balance
and the loss of life, economic devastation and reversal
of development gains caused by a relapse into conflict
can go far beyond the country's borders.

We must learn from previous examples, including
those of Timor-Leste and Cote d'Ivoire, which provide
important lessons on partnership and continuity.
Nationally-owned and forward-looking transitions
are therefore a priority for the entire United Nations
system. As national authorities and communities
assume increased responsibilities for security and
peacebuilding tasks, they need the continued support
of reinvigorated United Nations country teams and
multilateral and bilateral partners so that their path
towards durable peace and development is irreversible.
We must prioritize and strengthen partnerships with
national stakeholders across the United Nations system
and with international financial institutions and Member
States for collective action to ensure their success.

The United Nations role in transition processes
must be comprehensive and coherent and work in an
integrated way to address the interlinked and often
stubborn drivers of conflict: poverty, exclusion,
inequality, discrimination and violations of human
rights, exacerbated by climate change and the movement
of people. Our ongoing reform process is enabling more
joined-up engagement in support of national efforts
along the entire peace continuum, from the deployment
of a peacekeeping or political mission to withdrawal
or reconfiguration.
But the United Nations cannot and does not handle
the transition of a peace operation alone. Many other
institutions and groups are involved. As I mentioned
earlier, Governments are the most important partners,
but donors, international and regional organizations,
international financial institutions, civil society, local
institutions and the business community all play
an essential role. The United Nations can add great
value by bringing ideas expertise and resources from
different sectors together around nationally determined
priorities. The changing nature of our support
puts greater responsibility on us to collaborate, to
communicate and to participate in a collective effort in
which everyone has a role to play and a stake in success.

I welcome representatives from the World Bank
and the African Development Bank here today. They
have been extremely valuable partners in several of
the transition processes we have witnessed. Strong
partnerships between the United Nations and other
organizations, including regional and subregional
organizations and international financial institutions,
can help avoid a sudden drop-off in support as our
presence is reconfigured. We already have successful
models to inform transition processes. For example,
in 2016, the United Nations, the World Bank and the
European Union supported the Government of the
Central African Republic in drawing up a national
recovery and peacebuilding plan, and donors have
pledged $2.2 billion to implement it.

The convening power and advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the President of which is
with us today, has also proven to be an effective way to
enhance coherence among stakeholders and ensure the
continued attention of the international community to
longer-term needs. The Peacebuilding Fund's transition
window now covers two years before and five years
after a mission drawdown. I encourage all Member
States to donate to these important resource and to
substantially increase its capacity.

Earlier this year, I made transitions a corporate
priority for the United Nations and I have dedicated
special attention to transition contexts in several
countries. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the country
team have been working with the Government on
a comprehensive transition strategy. This year,
UNAMID made $32 million of its budget available for
joint activities with the United Nations country team in
priority areas, including the rule of law, human rights
and durable solutions for displaced people, in close
coordination with the Government.
In Haiti, the peace and development pillars of the
United Nations have formulated a common approach
to support the rule of law and governance institutions
since the establishment of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti in 2017. The country team
is finalizing a package of projects in priority areas
identified by the Haitian Government, including
some to be financed for the first time in Haiti by the
Peacebuilding Fund. Working with the European
Union, we have allocated $12 million in funding from
the Spotlight Initiative to combat gender-based violence
over the next three years.

In Colombia, we have responded to the
Government's request for support for the peace process
with two successive political missions, working in close
cooperation with our country team. I also welcome
initiatives under way here at Headquarters to provide
more holistic support. For example, the Department of
Peace Operations and UN-Women have developed a
joint initiative on gender-responsive conflict analysis
that has informed planning for our integrated office
in Haiti.

Countries that are healing after conflict may
face urgent and complex challenges, including
disarmament and security sector reform, reconciliation
and accountability processes and corruption. These
countries require multifaceted support for political
leadership, strong and inclusive institutions, the rule
of law, human rights, gender equality and sustainable
development to address the root causes of conflict.
Transitional justice and accountability for serious
crimes and human rights abuses are essential to securing
lasting peace. We are committed to advancing the four
pillars of transitional justice: truth, to acknowledge the
atrocities committed; justice, so perpetrators are held
accountable; reparations, so victims and communities
are compensated for harm they have suffered; and, last
but not least, putting in place reforms so that atrocities
and serious crime will never happen again.

The United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework is a central tool for multilateral
support under the leadership of the strengthened and
empowered resident coordinator system. Our regional
political offices also support resident coordinators
and the United Nations country teams to consolidate
peacebuilding gains in the post-mission phase. For
example, the good offices provided by the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel were
critical to addressing the political crisis in Liberia
following the 2017 presidential elections.

Delivering on the promise of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development means delivering for
those who have been left furthest behind - people in
countries affected by conflict and crisis. The United
Nations is strongly committed to supporting countries
as they strive to heal after conflicts and fulfil their
aspirations for peace, stability and a better future. We
will continue to bring stronger partnerships to improve
coherence and increase accountability across the
peace continuum.

In return, I urge all to remain engaged with countries
where United Nations missions are in transition to
deliver the 2030 Agenda and sustainable peace for the
people we all serve.

