Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I am confident that under your outstanding
leadership, the work of the Council this month will be
very productive. I would also like to thank the
members of the Council for the support and
cooperation they extended to me during China's
presidency of the Council last month.

I welcome Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who
has come to New York to attend today's meeting and
has made an important statement. The issues he raised
and the recommendations he made should be carefully
studied by the Council.

I would like to thank the High Representative,
Lord Ashdown, for his detailed briefing, and to say
how much we appreciate his tireless efforts to assist in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and help
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their task of
nation-building.

We were pleased to learn that the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is stabilizing. Ethnic relations
are improving, the economic reconstruction effort is
beginning to yield results, the process of refugee return
is nearing completion and relations with neighbouring
countries are improving daily. Such progress in the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina - which has
not come easily - is encouraging. We would like to
congratulate the Government and the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and we sincerely hope that the
Bosnian parties will continue their efforts in this
respect by further improving mutual trust and
cooperation and continuing to forge ahead with the
peace process.

At the same time, we have taken note of the fact
that building the capacity of the governing institutions
at the State level in Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
be further improved. In particular, the police and
judicial reform process still faces certain challenges.
We are of the view that it would be appropriate for the
High Representative to make that process a priority in
his work for the first half of the year.

We support the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's active cooperation with the High
Representative in carrying out his work. We are
confident that with the help of the international
community, the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to make progress in nation-building, embark
on the road towards independent development at an
early date and eventually become integrated into
Europe.

Peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will have an significant impact on the lasting peace and
development of the region as a whole. China has
always closely followed developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We will continue to work with the
international community in making a contribution to
the achievement of lasting peace and stability and
economic development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

