Mr. Moura (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, the delegation of Brazil joins previous
speakers in welcoming your initiative and in expressing
our satisfaction at seeing the brotherly country of
Colombia presiding over the Council. Your presence
here reflects the importance of this moment for
Colombia. We are certain that during the month of
August, the Council will be in very good hands under
the leadership of Ambassador Valdivieso. I am also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his important
statement this morning.

No other United Nations body, in its daily
activities, experiences the effects and consequences of
the uncontrolled circulation and use of small arms as
does the Council. When this matter was dealt with in
the Council for the first time two years ago, Brazil had
the honour of occupying one of the non-permanent
seats. Our then Foreign Minister had the opportunity to
participate in a productive debate on an issue that was
new and not very visible at the time. There can be no
doubt that the ministerial meeting of the Council and
the presidential statement issued at that time helped to
give this issue visibility on the world scene.

Much has changed since then. The situation is
more complex and fraught with challenges.
Mechanisms for addressing the question of small arms
are much more developed. Thanks to extensive
discussions, the issue is much better understood, and
the many dimensions of its manifestations in various
regions of the world have been recognized. The notion
of the primary responsibility of States has been
consolidated.

Two months ago the General Assembly adopted
the Protocol against the Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. In
our region, the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms
came into force. More important than any of this, we
managed to agree on a Programme of Action in the
context of the recently concluded United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Therefore the
Security Council today is debating this issue in a
context in which the international community has
already laid common bases for addressing these
problems.

It is important to conserve the achievements of
the Conference. The success was due to a large extent
to the skills of Ambassador Camilo Reyes, and it is
essential that we give the worldwide follow-up process
that has already been agreed upon the opportunity to
yield fruit. We are pleased to note that the Colombian
initiative to further pursue this issue recognizes the
limits of the jurisdiction of the Security Council in this
field and the need to avoid creating a process parallel
to that of the Conference. Small arms are being
addressed by the Security Council as elements in some
of its items and not from any conceptual perspective,
which could encompass the whole set of problems in
all their aspects.

For Brazil, the dimension of the phenomenon of
small arms and light weapons that is of particular
concern to the Security Council is the conflict
dimension. The role of the Council with respect to
small arms relates to conflict prevention, the
implementation of arms embargoes, the collection of
surplus arms in the post-conflict phase and the work of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants.

We know that this important role is not exclusive
to the Council, but it should be combined with the
efforts of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, in particular, and with regional and
subregional initiatives. Similarly, an integrated and
balanced approach to the phenomenon that takes into
account, for example, the fact that small arms are also
something that fuel organized crime, drug trafficking
and terrorism would go beyond the mandate of the
Security Council.

In the area in which this body has jurisdiction, it
seems essential to us to highlight the importance of
securing strict monitoring of the implementation of
arms embargoes decided upon by Council resolutions.
We would like here to place on record our recognition
for the efforts of the sanctions committees to ensure
monitoring of measures to combat illicit trade in
firearms in regions or entities that are subject to
sanctions and to make public the actions of persons and
countries that are involved in sanctions violations.

The reduction of the military capacity of UNITA
in Angola is proof that the Security Council, in
conformity with the mandate of relevant resolutions,
may play a key role in worldwide efforts to combat
illegal arms flows.

We are also convinced that two of the major
objectives of the Council in the area of small arms -
preventing conflicts and strictly implementing arms
embargoes - have been strengthened in the
Conference in the sense that it was able to adopt a
political undertaking to provide small arms and light
weapons only to governments or entities properly
authorized to receive them.

The basic document that the delegation of
Colombia has circulated for this debate contains a
series of important proposals. In order to make an input
in this thinking process, I would like to highlight some
points which, it seems to us, could strengthen the role
of the Council, without getting into the sectors that
relate to other bodies of the United Nations.

First of all, the Council should be ready to enter
into dialogue with regional and subregional agencies
that are also involved in Council agenda issues and
which have experience or initiatives in the area of
small arms. We encourage the Council to continue the
policy of strict implementation of arms embargoes in
all sanctions regimes and to continue to provide
incentives to all States to cooperate with the
investigations of the sanctions committees.

It is also important to take into account measures
to ensure that surplus weapons in a conflict that has
just ended are not diverted to neighbouring countries or
other regions where there is potential conflict. As to
the Conference on illicit trade, the Council could send
a positive signal by welcoming the adoption of the
Programme of Action and reaffirming the commitment
to contribute to the implementation of its provisions.

Lastly, at the first biennial meeting for the
implementation of the Programme of Action, the
Council might call on the Secretariat to provide
information on the progress achieved in securing the
objectives set in those paragraphs directed to the
Council.

Solving the problem of small arms requires the
commitment of all States, the assistance of civil society
and input from international, regional and subregional
organizations. The Council alone cannot successfully
tackle this challenge. But it is positive that this matter
is being discussed and the views of States Members
with respect to what they expect from the Council's
activities are being listened to. We hope that this open
debate will result in a substantive decision that will
once again reaffirm the determination of the Council to
work together with all concerned and contribute to
collective efforts to eradicate the evils caused by small
weapons.

