Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to thank you, Sir, and the other members
of the Security Council for quickly agreeing to the
request of the Group of Non-Aligned States to hold this
open meeting to study the report presented by the heads
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
destruction of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

The Security Council is meeting today to study
and important question, namely the assessment of the
conclusions of the teams of inspectors entrusted with
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq
and the monitoring and verifying of the presence of any
such weapons. We have studies with interest the two
reports submitted by the Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC and Director General of IAEA, Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei, respectively.

We are convinced that significant results in fact
have truly been achieved. These achievements are
consonant with Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) on the one hand, and are also in accordance to a
great extent with the demands of the chief inspector.
During the meetings of the inspectors in Baghdad he
asked the Iraqi Government to adopt three measures.
The first was to allow for free and unconditional aerial
surveillance through surveillance reconnaissance
aircraft. The second was for private interviews with
Iraqi scientists without third parties present. The third
was that Iraq adopt and enact legislation prohibiting the
possession or local manufacturing of weapons of mass
destruction. Iraq has recently done so. It has been
involved in dispelling concerns regarding substantive
issues. We have seen this in the statements of
international inspectors and through Iraqi acceptance of
overflights of American U-2 planes of its airspace.

We welcome the positive steps undertaken by Iraq
to cooperate with UNMOVIC and the IAEA and
believe that such positive cooperation, which is
continuing between Iraq and UNMOVIC, will lead to a
settlement of remaining unresolved issues.

We understand the profound and real concerns of
the United States and United Kingdom regarding the
dangers of the use of weapons of mass destruction for
the security and stability of the world. We welcome the
positions of member States of the Security Council. In
particular the positions of the permanent members, for
they have demonstrated a great sense of responsibility
during study of the issue. We understand all of that.

However, it also behooves the international
community to maintain international peace and
stability. Therefore, the United States and the United
Kingdom are crucial partners for the Middle East. They
must work to avoid war in this region. The
consequences would be tragic not only for Iraq but also
for the region and the entire world.

Thus, we hope that all the members of the
Council will be able to take position designed to
eliminate weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and
other States of the region by peaceful means and
through the United Nations. In light of this, and aware
of the legal, political and moral responsibility that
devolves on Council members to maintain international
peace and security in accordance with the principles of
the Charter, we hope that the Council will discharge its
responsibilities and make it possible for UNMOVIC
and the IAEA in accordance with the demands of their
mandate. We hope that the Council will make it
possible for both bodies to continue their work,
discharge their responsibilities under their mandates.

Thus, efforts would be pooled to facilitate
inspections, which have proved to be effective. That
would enable the peaceful implementation of the
Council's resolutions. Another report would then be
presented to the Council on Iraqi cooperation with the
international inspectors in the area of the destruction of
weapons of mass destruction, if they existed.

In that context, and in light of regional and
international events and of the repeated statements we
have heard opposing military action against Iraq, my
delegation reiterates the hope that it will be possible to
avoid any military action of any kind. For that would
threaten the security and stability of the Gulf region in
particular and the Middle East as a whole. Therefore
this prompts us to support the initiatives for peace to
deal with this issue.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reaffirm the need for Iraq to quickly and
unconditionally fulfil its remaining obligations to
facilitate matters for UNMOVIC and the IAEA. We
also urge the Council to exhaust all peaceful means and
diplomatic efforts to implement the relevant resolutions
for international peace and security, to put an end to the
suffering of the Iraqi people and to ensure respect for
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Iraq.
