Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would,
first of all, like to thank Lithuania for having organized
an open debate on the central issue of small arms and
light weapons. The statements made by the Secretary-
General and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights help us to gauge the real scale of the problem.
I would also like to thank Mr. Diakite' for his briefing

on the situation in West Africa - a region that is,
unfortunately, particularly affected by the proliferation
of small weapons - and for his very powerful

testimony. We will certainly heed his call.

France also associates itself fully with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.

Today's debate is based on an alarming fact.
According to the Small Arms Survey research project,
over 800 million small arms and light weapons are
in circulation around the world. These weapons have
caused over half a million deaths each year and are
responsible for almost 90 per cent of the victims of
armed conflicts. Make no mistake - today, small arms
are by far the most lethal weapons in the world. Their
main victims, unfortunately, are too often civilians,
among whom women and children are particularly
affected.

The proliferation of such weapons also fuels
regional conflicts and benefits terrorist groups, which
thus armed can continue their destabilizing and
barbarous activities. It also sows the seeds for organized
crime, which no longer knows any borders. And this
phenomenon is constantly evolving. Porous borders in
conflict zones, combined with advances in technology,
communications, finance and transportation, have
fostered relations among terrorist networks and
criminal groups operating internationally, making the
fight against this scourge even more complex. Lastly,
by encouraging the continuation of conflicts and the
destabilization of entire regions the illicit trafficking in
those deadly weapons presents a major obstacle to the
socioeconomic development of the most fragile States.
In the face of this dark scenario, the international
community cannot stand idly by. France is also aware
of the particular responsibility that falls upon it as an
arms-exporting country. That is why we, together with
our partners, have joined the front ranks in the combat
against the illicit trafficking in small arms. The United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by consensus
in 2001, was the first cornerstone of this edifice,
providing a general framework for efforts aimed at
containing the flow of small arms. The International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, which was authored by France and
Switzerland, further bolstered that framework in 2006.
We would now like to see the Programme of Action,
which is still legally non-binding, be strengthened in
the years to come.

In the face of such a scourge, which defies the
authority of States, the adoption of legally binding
instruments is indeed essential. That is why we were
among the first, together with our European partners,
to promote an Arms Trade Treaty that is commensurate
with the scale of this challenge, and which today has
become transnational. We worked together to achieve
a demanding and innovative treaty that, first, imposes
a new global standard for the trade in conventional
arms, including ammunition; secondly, triggers, for the
first time, the responsibility of exporting States; and,
thirdly, accords a paramount role to human rights and
international humanitarian law by banning the export
of all kinds of arms when there is a risk of genocide or
crimes against humanity. Together with African States,
we fought to make sure that the Treaty ultimately
included small arms and light weapons in its scope of
application.

The historic adoption of the Treaty by the General
Assembly in April 2013 ( resolution 67/234 B) and
its entry into force last December will contribute to
providing solutions to the illicit trafficking in small
arms. France is proud to have been among the first to
sign and ratify that treaty. In that regard, we call on all
Member States to sign and ratify the treaty, which will
strengthen international peace and security.

Other instruments exist, and they must, of course,
be supported. In the framework of the European Union,
for a long time we adopted common measures against
the stockpiling and destabilizing proliferation of small
arms, as well as a common position on controlling the
brokering of arms deals. Finally, we also participate
in the financing of innovative instruments, such as
the iTRACE programme and the INTERPOL iARMS
system.

We welcome the fact that Lithuania has decided to
continue the deliberation within the Security Council
launched two years ago by Australia, which led to the
adoption of resolution 2117 (2013). That resolution
served as a major step forward by actively involving all
the instruments of our Organization in order to better
combat the destabilizing and illicit trafficking in such
weapons in all regions of the world.

The efforts undertaken by Lithuania with a view
to adopting a new resolution on the subject are, in that
context, extremely important. The fight against the
trafficking in small arms should indeed be a cross-
cutting topic in all the areas of United Nations activities:
within the sanctions committees and the panels ofexpert
in charge of monitoring embargoes, but also within
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
when that is deemed useful and necessary. Structures
within the United Nations involved in combating
terrorism can also play an important role, and we hope
that the issue will be systematically taken into account
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.

The Secretary General's report on small
arms (S/2015/289), circulated a few weeks ago,
provides important clarifications and additional
recommendations that we will also need to implement.
We would like, as recommended by the Secretary-
General, for this issue to remain on the agenda of the
Council.

Control over all arms is the primary condition
for security in the world. For France, this is not just
a conviction, it is a historical commitment. No doubt
because our country has been the theatre of many wars,
we have been, and continue to be, one of the countries
that is most favourable to disarmament. We will
continue this fight as long as necessary, together with
the international community.

