Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): First, I should like to join others in extending condolences to France and the Niger for all those killed in yesterday's attacks in the Niger. Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly and all the briefers for setting out clearly the challenges and opportunities facing Guinea-Bissau. At the briefing in February (see S/PV.8736), we welcomed the peaceful conduct of the presidential election and expressed concern at the risks posed by the post-electoral fallout. Unfortunately, many of those risks have since been realized. First, the Bissau-Guinean military has taken an active and unwelcome role in politics. On 2 March, it occupied the Supreme Court, disrupting the ongoing legal challenge to the election results, and on 7 May, it briefly occupied the People's National Assembly building, preventing parliamentarians from entering. Secondly, we have seen reports of sustained violence and intimidation against political opponents, including Members of Parliament Marciano Indi and Armando Dias and former Prime Minister Aristides Gomes, as well as judges and journalists, including, on 26 July, the vandalism of the premises of Radio Capital FM. Thirdly, the new authorities appear to have turned a blind eye to drug traffickers, with reports of increased trafficking and no reported seizures. The serious drug-trafficking offender Braima Seidi Ba, who was convicted and sentenced by a Bissau-Guinean court in March, is not serving his sentence and is reportedly operating in Guinea-Bissau under military protection. Should that be the case, it would constitute a flagrant breach of the country's own judicial system. The destabilizing conduct by the new authorities comes at a great cost to the Bissau-Guinean people, who, suffering in poverty, compounded by the coronavirus disease, expect and deserve more from their leaders. However, thereare also opportunities-opportunities for the Bissau-Guinean Government to show that it takes its responsibility to its people seriously. We call on the Government to take these opportunities by demonstrating inclusive governance, by resolving problems through dialogue and by enacting crucial political reforms. Those include the urgent revision of the Constitution under the authority of the National People's Assembly and the implementation of the national strategic action plan on countering drug trafficking and organized crime. The Government should feel supported in taking those important steps. In that regard, we welcome the role of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in mediating the ongoing political crisis and call on ECOWAS to remain united, to keep the interests of the Bissau-Guinean people foremost and to strengthen its presence in Bissau in order to monitor and ensure the proper implementation of its decisions and of the reforms agenda. We call also on the group of five international partners and the international community to support Guinea-Bissau and to encourage its new authorities to live up to their responsibilities. In that regard, we support the Secretary-General's recommendations, in particular the establishment of a high-level platform to accompany the reforms agenda and the establishment of an Independent National Human Rights Institution compliant with the Paris Principles. In conclusion, as the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) prepares to withdraw from Guinea-Bissau, on behalf of the United Kingdom I would like to thank Special Representative Sori-Coulibaly and all the UNIOGBIS staff for their efforts and to congratulate them on having done a good job in difficult circumstances. We hope that Guinea-Bissau's leaders can take the responsibility to build on UNIOGBIS's efforts, move past the challenges and take advantage of the opportunities to carry Guinea-Bissau into the stable and democratic future that its people deserve.
