Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We are pleased, Sir,
that you are presiding over this important meeting, and
we thank you for convening it at this critical time for
the Middle East. My delegation particularly appreciates
that the Security Council has finally decided to address
the deteriorating situation in the Middle East. The
silence emanating from this Chamber was becoming
very loud, particularly to those who suffer the daily
violence. The fact that none of us can confidently
predict the way forward in the Middle East process
should not keep the Security Council from remaining
engaged and from acting on its responsibility for
maintaining global peace and security.

All of us are frustrated that the Middle East
seems to be locked into violence on both sides -
which in turn perpetuates violence. The world accepts
that the parties in the Middle East that must ultimately
agree in the negotiations for peace, namely the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority, cannot do it
through violence. Since violence will not resolve the
situation, a unilateral solution cannot be possible, and
dialogue will always remain the only solution for a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. We call on both sides in the conflict to seize the
opportunity for peace.

We are particularly pleased to speak in this debate
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. The Non-
Aligned Movement reiterates its commitment to work
towards a negotiated settlement. The challenge remains
to make this a reality in which both sides, Israeli and
Palestinian, share a common vision and are therefore
able, in good faith, to discuss the most difficult of the
final status issues, as equals working towards a
common goal.

The recommendations of the Sharm El-Sheik
Fact-Finding Committee, published in the Mitchell
report, were hailed by the Israelis, the Palestinians and
the world community at large, as containing acceptable
measures for de-escalating conflict, building
confidence and returning to the negotiating table. We
believe that there is still an opportunity to return to the
negotiating table.

Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace remain as
internationally accepted benchmarks for the outcome of
negotiations. Those resolutions enshrine an
international consensus that Israel must withdraw from
the Arab land occupied since the 1967 war in order for
a viable, sovereign Palestinian State to come into
being. The Non-Aligned Movement calls for the
resumption of negotiations between the two sides
within the Middle East peace process on the agreed
basis, taking into consideration the previous
discussions between the two sides, and it urges them to
reach a final agreement.

The Non-Aligned Movement also continues to
support efforts to deploy an international monitoring
mechanism, which would help the parties implement
the recommendations of the Mitchell report and would
help to improve the situation on the ground.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and heads of delegation of the Non-
Aligned Movement, meeting in the context of the fifty-
sixth session of the General Assembly, expressed grave
concern at the severe and dangerous deterioration of
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, which began on 28 September

2000. They were also concerned about the damage
caused to the Middle East peace process and about the
existing danger in the region, which has acquired
additional and urgent dimensions in the light of the
present international circumstances. They stressed the
need for fresh and qualitatively new efforts to bring the
Middle East peace process back to life and to bring it
to a speedy and successful conclusion. In that regard,
they called for concerted international input, based on
international legitimacy, regarding the final outcome of
the peace process, including the establishment of a
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

