Mr. Mutaboba: It is a pleasure to be with the
Council today and to present the thirty-fifth report
(8/2009302) of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country
(UNOGBIS).

In particular, I would like to brief the Council on
the continuing political and military tensions following
the assassinations of President Vieira and the Chief of
the General Staff, General Tagme Na Waie, preparations
for the presidential elections and the recommendations for
the establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.

The apparent calm following the assassinations of
President Vieira and General Tagme in March 2009
was disrupted when the Minister of Territorial
Administration and a candidate in the presidential
elections, Mr. Baciro Dabo, was killed by armed men
at his home in the early hours of 5 June. Another
leading Member of Parliament and a former Minister
of Defence, Mr. Helder Proenca, was killed together
with his driver and bodyguard in a car ambush at
approximately the same time. The State intelligence
services reported that both men were resisting arrest
over involvement in an alleged coup attempt. There
were also other arrests, including that of a former
Prime Minister, Mr. Faustino Imbali, in connection
with this alleged coup.

With regard to the presidential elections, these
violent events took place on the eve of the official
launch of those elections and threatened to disrupt the
election schedule. One candidate, Mr. Pedro Infanda,
who is also the lawyer of former Navy Chief of Staff
Bubo Na Tchuto, withdrew from the presidential race.
That brings the number of candidates down from 13 to
11.

However, let me stress that the preparations for
the organization of the elections as well as for the
international observation remain, as we speak, on
track. During Under-Secretary-General Pascoe's visit
to Guinea-Bissau on 13 June, the interim President
Raimundo Pereira confirmed that presidential elections
would be held as scheduled on 28 June.

The United Nations Development Programme is
providing technical support and UNOGBIS will
coordinate the activities of international electoral
observers from the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
09-37686
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
West African Economic and Monetary Union. The
European Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and some individual countries will also be
deploying electoral observers.

With regard to security developments, the general
situation is fragile and a sense of insecurity palpable
among both the elite and the general population, as
proved by the rumours of the death of the interim Chief
of General Staff, which caused panic among the
population in Bissau. Commander Induta was forced to
give a radio interview to prove that the rumour was
unfounded, to assuage the fears not only of the general
population, but also those of his supporters in the
armed forces.

There is also a high degree of distrust and
scepticism, particularly over reports that the two
politicians were killed because they had resisted arrest.
There have been four major incidents of violence
and/or alleged coups since August 2008. This is not the
ideal setting for peaceful elections, of course.

With respect to the Commission of Inquiry, the
investigations into the assassinations of President
Vieira and General Tagme Na Waie are ongoing. The
parallel military investigation into the bomb blast that
killed General Tagme was completed and the report
handed over to the Government. The Commission of
Inquiry, headed by the Prosecutor General, questioned
the validity of the military investigation and the lack of
cooperation by the military.

The Government sent a letter dated 22 May to the
Secretary-General requesting the setting up of an
international commission of inquiry into the double
assassinations of President Vieira and General Tagme.
It also requested that the African Union, ECOWAS, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States be invited to
assist the international commission.

Currently, the United Nations is working with
ECOWAS and the African Union to ensure that
appropriate international expertise and logistical
support are provided to the national Commission.
International support will need to be provided,
recognizing that the responsibility to address impunity
and bring the perpetrators to justice must rest with the
national authorities and be seen by the population as a
national undertaking. This is the only way that we can
contribute to making Guinea-Bissau's justice system
09-37686

credible in the eyes of its citizens and the international
community. The presence of international experts
naturally has security implications that need to be
considered.

With regard to human rights developments, six
people, including three civilians, are in detention at
various armed forces sites in Bissau in connection with
the alleged coup in June. They include the Director
General of intelligence services, who was detained
simply because he refused to sign the intelligence
services' communique of 5 June on the existence of a
coup attempt. The military has not yet handed over
evidence or the detainees to the judicial authorities,
despite various Government requests that it do so. The
detainees are being held in contravention of the law,
and the three civilians have had access to the Red
Cross but have yet to be granted free access to
relatives, lawyers or doctors.

As to the economic and social situation in the
country, the Government, which won an overwhelming
victory in the legislative elections seven months ago,
has been weakened by the paralysis over the March and
June events and mounting governance and security
challenges. As a result, the Government's focus has
moved away from delivering on its electoral promises
of paying civil service salaries and improving social
services and infrastructure. Disgruntlement over
continuing arrears, teachers' strikes and the political
and military instability have considerably eroded the
political capital that the Government enjoyed in
November 2008. This will require the elected
President, irrespective of What party he or she - there
is one female candidate - may be a member of, and
the party that won the 2008 legislative elections, to
work together in the interests of creating a political
environment conducive to stable governance for the
rest of the legislature. This enterprise will require a
selfless spirit among the political class, in particular,
and a healthy spirit of collaboration between the
institutions of the State. Continued instability is the
desire of spoilers who benefit from a weak State,
organized crime and drug trafficking.

The Secretary-General's report includes proposals
for the creation of a United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau. This proposal
comes in recognition of the need to strengthen and
enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations
presence in Guinea-Bissau at this critical time of
rampant poverty, political tension and instability. The
3
proposed Integrated Peacebuilding Office will support
the efforts of the Guinea-Bissau authorities and focus
on the reform of the defence and security sectors, the
promotion of the rule of law and human rights, enhancing
political dialogue and national reconciliation, and
strengthening national institutions.

The Integrated Office will also support the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission and contribute to the
coordination and coherence of international efforts in
Guinea-Bissau. The Office will work in close partnership
with the African Union, ECOWAS, the African
Development Bank, the European Commission, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. In
particular, there is a call for the Integrated Office to
coordinate the many security sector reform initiatives
undertaken by the international community in Guinea-
Bissau. Only through coordinated, coherent and concerted
efforts will we be able to make a real difference in the
reform of the security sector, which is a sine qua non for
peace consolidation in the country.

Allow me to appeal for the Council's support in
ensuring that the Office is well resourced and fully
staffed so that it can effectively fulfil its mandate and
make a real difference in the lives of the people of
Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, the challenges facing Guinea-
Bissau are enormous. Although the Government and
the people of Guinea-Bissau have the primary
responsibility to address these challenges, we in the
international community must stay engaged and
provide the much-needed support for critical reforms in
the justice, defence and security sectors, as well as for
public administration reform, for the work of the
Commission of Inquiry, and most urgently for the
peaceful conduct of the presidential elections.

