Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, let me express our
sincere thanks to the President and the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, respectively, for their progress reports
and briefings here this morning. Let me also thank
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Permanent
Representative of Peru, for his impeccable leadership
of the Council's Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

The work ofthe Mechanism is important to ensuring
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. Its work contributes to reconciliation,
economic development and peace because there cannot
be peace without justice. In that context, I will focus
on three challenges the Mechanism is currently facing:
first, witness protection; secondly, complementarity;
and thirdly, denial of war crimes.

On my first point, witness protection, contrary
to expectations, the progress report shows that the
workload of the Mechanism is increasing and will
continue to increase due to the prosecution of five
suspects accused of intimidating protected witnesses.
We strongly condemn any action that puts the safety
and security of witnesses and victims at risk. Such
actions endanger the legacy of the Tribunals and affect
the confidence ofwitnesses and victims in international
criminal justice. The protection of the more than
3,000 witnesses is a key residual responsibility of the
Mechanism. Prosecution by the Mechanism should
send a strong and clear message that those who attempt
to intimidate or to tamper with witnesses will be held
accountable. We urge Member States, in the upcoming
budgetary cycle, to provide the Mechanism with
required resources that reflect the increasing workload
of the Mechanism. Only then will the Mechanism be
able to fully implement its mandate.

That brings me to my second point, complementarity,
or cooperation between national judicial institutions.
States bear the primary responsibility to end impunity
and to thoroughly investigate and prosecute those
responsible for the most serious crimes under
international law. We note with appreciation that both
the Registry and the Office ofthe Prosecutor continue to
assist and support national criminal justice institutions
in the Great Lakes region, East Africa and the Western
Balkans. The assistance provided by the Prosecutor
enables those national criminal justice institutions
to carry out their responsibilities. We are, however,
concerned about the current situation in the Western
Balkans, where regional cooperation is decreasing.
Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina should
significantly strengthen their cooperation so that the
suspected war criminals who are still at large can be
brought to justice. That is in the interest of the respective
countries, as it contributes to reconciliation, regional
stability, economic development and sustainable peace.

That brings me to my third point, the denial of war
crimes and the glorification of convicted war criminals.
Last Sunday, 9 December, marked the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. While observing that anniversary, we are
deeply disturbed that the war crimes and the genocide
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia are
being denied and even glorified. The conclusion that
genocide was committed against the Tutsi has been
crucial to re-establishing peace and security in Rwanda
and to promoting reconciliation between the affected
communities. In that spirit, the General Assembly
designated 7 April as the International Day of Reflection
on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.

The glorification of war criminals with the consent
of or even organized by national authorities in the
Western Balkans is disturbing and concerning. The
denial of the Srebrenica genocide by parliamentarians
of the Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and leading politicians in Serbia is reprehensible. It
shows a lack of respect for the victims, their relatives
and the judgments of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We firmly reject the ideology of
discrimination, division and hate, especially in societies
that have already borne the devastating consequences
of hateful words being put into action.

Let me ask a rhetorical question. How can one
glorify ethnic cleansing, forcible displacements,
the destruction of villages and communities, the
rape of women and girls, and the killing of innocent
civilians? We therefore urge members of the respective
Governments first, to set the right example; secondly,
to stop public denials and glorifications ofthe atrocities
committed; and thirdly, to send a clear message to their
armed forces that only by fully respecting international
humanitarian law can they can truly defend their
country with pride and honour.

In conclusion, in January President Theodor Meron
will step down as the first President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. He leaves
behind an exemplary institution that operates as
efficiently and effectively as possible. There is gender
parity among the professional staff members; there
is a special focal point for gender-related issues; and
amendments to put conditions on early release are
currently under consideration. We support the intention
of the Mechanism to attach suitable conditions when
making decisions on early release. That is of key
importance to the families of the victims and to the
countries involved. The Mechanism has already
achieved much of what the Council envisaged and is
ready to face future challenges.

Finally, allow me to say a few personal words
to President Theodor Meron. In the open debate on
upholding international law earlier this year (see S/PV.8262), he shared with us that he was 9 years old
when his childhood in Poland was violently disrupted
by the Second World War. He survived a forced labour
camp and lost almost all of his family members during
that war. Again this morning, he shared his life's history
with us as his motivation for his professional legal
work. He touched our hearts. We are deeply impressed
by how his experience motivated him to put his life in
service of ending the atrocities of war by virtue of the
law. Justice must be done for the victims by holding
accountable those who bear the greatest responsibility
for the most serious crimes under international law. At
the same time, he ensures that convicted war criminals
are treated fairly.

His contribution to international criminal law
has been truly extraordinary and indispensable to its
development. On behalf of my Government, I sincerely
thank him for his service and wish him all the best in
his future endeavours. On a personal note, I hope that
he will write an autobiography.

