Mr. Jengeli (Somalia): I take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, the Secretary-General and all
those who have in one way or another urged the
Security Council to take urgent, relevant and bold
action to end the 18-year agony of the Somali people.

Once again, the situation in Somalia is under
discussion by the Security Council. At the very outset,
the question is: Will the outcome be any different this
time? I hope that my participation in this meeting of
the Council will help it to focus both on the problem of
piracy, which the Council is considering today, as well
as on the bigger picture in Somalia. I have been
heartened by the statements that I have heard today.

Let me now turn to the problem of piracy in the
Gulf of Aden and along the Somali coast. Because of
the recent surge in acts of piracy, there has been
significant coverage of this subject by the international
mass media. My Government strongly condemns those
criminal acts, which are obviously in violation of
international law and the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea. These acts of piracy are
categorically unacceptable and should be brought to an
end.

As all members are aware, Somalia has no
capacity to interdict or patrol its long coastline to
ensure the security of sea lanes. But we have indeed
cooperated with the international community in the
fight against piracy. We will continue to do so fully,
now and in the future. That is why we have supported
the implementation of the numerous resolutions on the
problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia. That is also
why we support resolution 1851 (2008), which the
Council has just adopted.

Let me also stress to the Council the importance
of adopting a comprehensive and holistic approach to
the Somali problem, as piracy, terrorism and the
humanitarian emergency are part and parcel of the
bigger Somali problem. Indeed, piracy and terrorism
are merely the symptoms of the greater malaise of the
Somali body politic since the collapse of the central
Somali Government in 1991. If we accept that premise,
I hope we will have no difficulty in seeing the real way
to tackle both piracy and instability in Somalia.

Without going into too much detail, the only
sustainable way to solve the problem of piracy and
other ills is to concentrate on the medium and long
terms, and not just on the short term. The most
effective and relevant way to do so is for the Security
Council, first, to take immediate and relevant
measures - hopefully before the end of the year, when
the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is to be reviewed - to authorize a robust
peacekeeping operation to assist in the restoration of
peace and stability and to build local capacity. The
undermanned AMISOM. contingent could become the
nucleus of that new United Nations force.

Secondly, the Council should strengthen the
Somali State by strengthening its security forces
through the provision of resources, training and
equipment.

Thirdly, the Council should boost the political
process currently under way in Djibouti, as it is the
only viable and credible option we now have.
If that is done right and implemented with
competence, urgency and integrity, any acts of
lawlessness in Somalia, including piracy, can be taken
care of. Other areas of urgent concern in need of
assistance include political mediation, reconciliation,
socio-economic development and humanitarian
assistance. But surely assistance in reconciliation and
security needs is the most important and urgent.

I wish to reaffirm to the Council that the
Transitional Federal Government of the Somali
Republic is fully committed to the implementation of
its mandate, in particular the functions envisaged under
the Transitional Federal Charter, as well as to the
onerous task of reconciliation in the country, despite
setbacks and daunting natural and man-made
challenges. I would like to dwell for a moment on the
goal of reconciliation.

We are in the process of implementing the Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the Alliance for the
Re-Liberation of Somalia, which was originally signed
in Djibouti on 19 August 2008. We recognize that there
have been delays and difficulties along the way, but
that comes as no surprise to us. After all, we have been
in a state of conflict since the collapse of the central
Government in 1991. In our view, resolve and firmness
are needed to successfully conclude the process and to
implement the Djibouti Agreement if the country is to
be saved. Any technical difficulties or objections
should be addressed within the process; but
implementation must proceed immediately and without
delay.

In that regard, I would like to inform the Council
that the cabinet today endorsed the Djibouti Peace
Agreement. The Transitional Federal Parliament will
consider it tomorrow. The first meeting of the Joint
Security Committee also took place today in
Mogadishu to plan for the 10,000-strong joint Somali
force envisaged under the Djibouti Agreement. Those,
too, are important developments. The current visit to
Mogadishu by Sheikh Sharif is also a positive and
welcome development. All those positive
developments give us great hope.

The Transitional Federal Government needs to
secure its land and territorial waters. It needs to collect
taxes. It needs to re-establish meaningful and durable
law and order. I submit that that can only be done by a
cohesive and united team focused single-mindedly on

substantially strengthening the security sector and
other State institutions. The lack of such cohesion and
unity within the Government and the absence of a
reliable security apparatus have indeed led to the
breakdown of law and order, thereby having a negative
impact on real socio-economic development and
creating a catastrophic humanitarian situation. The
Djibouti Agreement seeks to rectify many of those
things.

That is why I wish to end by urging the Security
Council, in no uncertain terms, not to waste another
opportunity. We call for the urgent deployment of a
fully fledged United Nations peacekeeping force to
enable the forthcoming national unity Government to
restore peace and stability and create a secure
environment for institution-building and socio-
economic development.

