I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director Waly for their detailed and complete briefings. We welcome the excellent work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and contributing Member States in the preparation of the first report of the Secretary- General on actions taken by Members States and United Nations entities to address the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime (S/2020/754). This is a very illustrative document that will enable us to have an updated view of the progress and challenges in implementing resolution 2482 (2019). The Dominican Republic applauds the good practices that Member States have been developing in strengthening their national mechanisms for the prevention, control, prosecution and investigation of the crimes and offences linked to terrorism. In addition, it is important to highlight the efforts of the UNOCT, UNODC and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in creating support mechanisms to help Member States develop strategies to counter linkages between terrorism and organized crime. These bilateral cooperative relationships must also continue and be enhanced with relevant regional and subregional organizations. For the Dominican Republic, addressing the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime is necessary to continue to be a country with a low risk of terrorism. Our legislative branch has established strong regulations for criminal offences originating from organized crime, and has regulated the issues related to financing terrorist acts or activities. Dominican national institutions have developed important mechanisms to prevent, control, prosecute and sanction any financial activity originated from identified organized crime. Those institutions collaborate continuously with UNODC and other regional and subregional organizations, such as INTERPOL, the Financial Action Task Force of Latin America, which we will continue to chair until December, and the World Customs Organization, where we hold the vice-presidency for the Americas. The Dominican Republic has already ratified the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Budapest Convention. These important counter-terrorism legal instruments are key to supporting and complementing national and other international legal framework to combat terrorism. The Dominican Republic would like to stress the importance of a secure cyberspace. Cybersecurity is a pressing matter. Increasingly, our daily lives develop in cyberspace, even more so in recent months due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which took our social order out of the physical plane and moved it, in good part, to a virtual one. The presence of terrorist activities like radicalization and financing in cyberspace has been amply demonstrated. We must therefore maintain our active collaboration with UNODC and other relevant United Nations offices to strengthen and develop national and international mechanisms and strategies that can keep up with the rapid pace of organized crime and terrorist- related activities in cyberspace. The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to the prevention and eradication of terrorism in all its forms. In that regard, we recognize the importance of securing all borders, addressing all forms of trafficking in persons and combating illicit drug trafficking and corruption as key to complying with resolution 2482 (2019). In that sense, the Dominican Republic had the intention of hosting a conference on border control in the fight against terrorism and the arrest of the flow of foreign terrorist fighters in the travel cycle, in March of this year. Unfortunately, that was not possible due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Finally, the fight against terrorism must not stop until we achieve our common goal: its eradication. Together, as the international community and, particularly, as members of the Security Council, we must commit to strengthening, updating and implementing national and international regulations, programmes and mechanisms designed to attack this terrible evil that threatens and violates global peace and security.
