Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by joining previous speakers in thanking you,
Sir, for organizing today's open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation
also thanks the Secretary-General for his report on this
issue (S/2010/579). I believe that today's debate offers
a valuable opportunity to take stock of what we have
achieved on key issues related to civilian protection,
such as the implementation of resolution 1894 (2009),
as well as to indicate areas where further work is
needed.

Recently, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are taking on more responsibilities in the
protection of civilians. While recognizing that the
primary responsibility for civilian protection rests with
the nations and parties involved in conflicts, situations
of armed conflict often make it extremely difficult for
nations and parties in conflict to provide adequate
protection measures to civilians. Furthermore, we have
seen many occasions on which armed groups have
resorted to violence against innocent civilians,
particularly women and children, as a means of
combat.

In this connection, it is essential for peacekeepers
to have more responsibility for supporting and
providing security to civilians at risk through tangible
protection strategies. In addition, the Security Council
needs to establish clear, credible, and achievable
mandates to ensure the successful and effective
protection of civilians prior to deployment.
Additionally, as the Secretary-General has stressed,
increased political support must be employed to ensure
that mandates of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) are implemented.

Ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law is essential to
civilian protection in armed conflicts. The international
community should stand firm against impunity for
violations of humanitarian and human rights laws
whenever they arise. Compliance should also be
applied to non-State armed groups, since more and
more conflicts involve such groups. As such, the
Security Council and other relevant international
bodies need to devise measures to ensure full
compliance regardless of the status of the parties to
conflict.
10-64740

Access to civilians affected by armed conflict in
order to provide humanitarian aid and basic safety and
security also needs to be guaranteed. Unfortunately, we
have seen many cases in which humanitarian personnel
and supplies have failed to reach those in urgent need
due to the interference of certain parties concerned in
armed conflicts. Such acts should be condemned, and
those involved in such acts should be held accountable.
My delegation hopes that the Security Council, on the
basis of the relevant paragraphs of resolution 1894
(2009), adopted last year, can deliberate further on this
1ssue.

Women and girls deserve special attention. As
recent tragic incidents in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo show, there are still many cases in which
armed groups, operating in massive and widely
dispersed areas, employ horrific sexual and other
violence against women and girls. My delegation looks
forward to all states further enhancing their efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) with respect to
ending impunity and upholding accountability for
serious crimes against women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. Also we hope for
increased coordination among the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the DPKO and other concerned
organizations to better confront these atrocious crimes.

The protection of civilians is an ongoing task that
must be consistently strived for during any armed
conflict. The safety and security of civilians in post-
conflict situations must also be ensured, as these areas
are at risk of deteriorating and falling into a spiral of
recurrent violence. In this regard, due consideration
must also be given to civilian protection in the
peacebuilding process, and we would like to encourage
the Security Council to incorporate this element in
future discussion on this issue.

