Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I thank Russia at the outset for having convened this
important meeting on the maintenance of international
peace and security, the settlement of conflicts in the
Middle East and North Africa and countering the
terrorist threat in the region.

At a time when peace is being challenged and
terrorists are becoming increasingly strong in
numerous regions around the planet, I reaffirm that
the region of the Middle East and North Africa is no
different from the rest of the world. They are part and
parcel of the global fabric. If justice were to prevail
and domination were to be eliminated; if neighbourly
relations among nations were the rule, peace and
security would follow - hence the importance of
today's proposals. The settlement of current conflicts
needs to draw on a rigorous analysis of the root causes,
which would facilitate the search for a resolution. The
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa actually,
particularly the Israeli occupation, arise from a small
number of factors, including exclusion, domination and
the failure to respect international law. Those are the
very same causes that have given rise to terrorism and
its territorial expansion.

The ongoing Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory, continued aggression against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and settler violence are among the direct causes
of many conflicts in the region. The hardships imposed
by occupation and a sense of despair are among the
reasons that attract people to terrorism. Accordingly,
the international community must act immediately to
put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and
other Arab territories and work to establish a Palestine
State with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with international law and the Arab Peace Initiative
that my country proposed over 13 years ago.

The atrocities committed against the heroic Syrian
people, including the criminal use of barrel bombs
and poisonous gas by the Syrian Government, can
be counted among the reasons for the expansion of
terrorism and violent extremism that are undermining
international peace and security. Achieving peace and
security in Syria requires a broad coalition to deal with
the profound causes that allow the Syrian regime to
remain in power and refuse to comply with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex), which called for the
creation of a transitional government with expanded
powers. The Al-Assad regime cannot participate in any
war against terrorism because it is the very embodiment
of terrorism. Any resolution of the Syrian must be
based on the conviction that those who have the blood
of their own people on their hands cannot be part of any
settlement of the crisis.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has fought terrorism
everywhere and has taken part in the international
coalitions against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). The countries that now claim to be coming to
fight ISIL's terrorism cannot do so while supporting the
regime in Syria and its foreign allies such as Hizbullah,
Saraya Al-Quds as well as other terrorist faith-based
groups. In that regard, my delegation expresses its deep
concern over the military operations of the Russian
Federation in Horns and Hama. There are no Daesh
troops at the present time in those cities. Those attacks
have claimed a number of civilian victims. We demand
an immediate end to those attacks, which must not be
repeated.

The attempts at domination and interference in the
affairs of States and attempts to worsen confessional
rifts by creating divisions, such as Iran has done in a
number of States in the region, are processes that history
had proven to be doomed to fail, They lead to the denial
of rights and the deprivation and denial of political
rights and provide further ground for terrorism. Also,
my country has supported the measures adopted by the
Iraqi Government to restore balance in the political life
of that country and to include all components of the
Iraqi people in order to fight terrorism.

In brotherly Yemen we have seen how international
legality has been under siege. We have seen the Iranian
dictate undermining all the gains of the Yemeni people.

It is for that reason that we responded to the appeal
from the Yemeni Government through its President
Hadi Mansour. We believe that the resolution of the
conflict in Yemen entails an open dialogue between the
various components of Yemen in accordance with the
peace initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its
mechanism and with Security Council resolution 2216
(2015).

It is reprehensible that Iran continues to politicize
the regrettable incident that took place during the Hajj
pilgrimage. It is equally reprehensible that Iran does
not show respect for the sanctity of the pilgrimage and
the lives of the victims. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has always sought to insure the security ofpilgrims. We
have thwarted numerous Iranian attempts to carry out
sabotage over the years. We express our condolences to
the bereaved families of the pilgrims. We will conduct
the necessary investigations and will punish anyone
who turns out to have failed in his or her duty, but we
will not allow anyone to attempt to exploit that human
tragedy.

Lastly, Sir, the resolution of the conflicts in the
Middle East certainly requires a rigorous analysis of
their reasons and root causes. We also reaffirm the need
to end the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories
and to halt the abuses being committed by the Syrian
authorities, International legality, good neighbourliness
and non-interference in the affairs of other States need
to be respected. Otherwise, fighting terrorism and
overcoming terrorism will be no longer within our
reach.

