Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Security Council is meeting today to
consider the situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. It has before it the important report of the
Secretary-General (S/l999/l6l) on the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), as well as
the letter of 29 January from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
contained in document S/ 1999/ 108, whose content clearly
reflects the current complicated situation.

Furthermore, in the conclusions of his report, the
Secretary-General indicates that events in the region -
some very recent events were reported today during our
consultations - suggest the need to extend the presence
of UNPREDEP for a further six-month period.

For those reasons, Argentina firmly supports the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, to which it has
contributed observers since December 1995. We are
convinced that UNPREDEP represents one of the Security
Council's central efforts for peace in the region,
particularly at a time when delicate and complex
negotiations are taking place with regard to the situation
in Kosovo.

As the Secretary-General indicated in his report, the
presence of UNPREDEP in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia has an effect that is both preventive and
stabilizing. The fact that the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia has not felt the repercussions of the conflicts
that have affected and continue to affect neighbouring
countries and regions is clear proof that UNPREDEP is
fulfilling its mandate in a completely effective manner.
Because the situation in Kosovo has not yet been
resolved, the presence of UNPREDEP, which is a
preventive Force, constitutes an irreplaceable reassurance.

 

Equally important is the mandate that this Council
gave to UNPREDEP to monitor illicit flows of arms and
other activities prohibited under resolution 1160 (1998). It
is a well-known fact that illegal arms flows exacerbate the
intensity of conflicts, creating tragic circumstances that
hamper reconciliation and peace processes.
In the light of all this, we support the extension of
UNPREDEP's mandate for a further six-month period, until
31 August 1999, with its present composition and mandate.

In conclusion, I should like to congratulate and
express my confidence in the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Fernando Valenzuela Marzo, to
Force Commander Brigadier-General Ove Stromberg and to
their staff for their efforts and dedication in the
accomplishment of this very important mission.

