Mr. Roed-Larsen: When I last briefed the
Council in December, I struck a cautiously optimistic
tone, citing the opening of a narrow window of
opportunity for resuming the peace process. This
window of opportunity - based primarily on the stated
willingness of both sides to talk to each other - still
remains open. In recent weeks, key Israeli and
Palestinian officials have met. We hope that a first
meeting between the two Prime Ministers, Mr. Qurei
and Mr. Sharon, will come at the earliest opportunity.

If they do indeed meet, as we expect, we might
see the preparation for bold actions we have long
called for - actions that could allow us finally to
move down the path to peace as envisioned in the
Quartet's road map and endorsed in security Council
resolution 1515 (2003).

Already, Mr. Sharon has announced preparations
for one bold step which could re-establish the requisite
trust between the two parties to fulfil all their
requirements under the road map. Earlier this month,
he announced that he would withdraw the Israeli
military and settlements from the Gaza Strip, where
they control about 40 per cent of the land. No Israeli
prime minister has previously had the boldness and the
vision to say he will remove settlers - as long called

for by the international community - and initiate a
plan for its implementation. The proposed step -
withdrawal from occupied territory - should be

welcomed by all.

Prime Minister Qurei did so recently after
meeting with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak,
saying he would accept it as a first step of a broader
withdrawal. Further statements of support have been
made by our Quartet colleagues and other Member
States engaged in the attempt to forge peace in the region.
But, as the Secretary-General said after Mr. Sharon's
announcement, the withdrawal from Gaza must be seen
as a first step. It must be made in the context of the road
map and as part of a cooperative engagement between
Israel, the Palestinian Authority and the international
community. We anticipate hearing more fully, and in
operational terms, about Mr. Sharon's plan soon.

The announcement has set the stage for three
possible scenarios in the coming months. One is the
resumption of a vigorous peace process, with re-
engagement between Israel and many of its Arab
partners. The second is unilateral Israeli disengagement
from parts of the occupied Palestinian territory, starting
in Gaza, but not as part of a process or re-engagement.
The third centres on the inability of the parties to enact
that withdrawal, which would maintain the status quo,
with all the violence and misery that goes with it. That
could lead to the rapid erosion of the Palestinian
Authority and, with it, growing disorder, chaos and
possibly even gang rule in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Such a scenario would be deeply against
Palestinian and Israeli interests and could be a
destabilizing element in the region.

The only viable long-term option for both parties
is the first - the resumption of the peace process. If
both parties engage in good faith and are guided by the
international community under the auspices of the
Quartet, real progress can be made. The alternatives
could lead to dramatic and negative consequences.

Still, much has been made of the possible
unilateral nature of this move. It is unlikely that, in
practice, an orderly withdrawal of thousands of settlers
from the Gaza Strip could take place without
cooperation from the Palestinian Authority and the
assistance of the international community. Without
such cooperation and assistance, a withdrawal could
easily strengthen the most radical elements, weaken the
Palestinian Authority further and lead eventually to
more violence.

In that sense, the term "unilateral withdrawal" is
not particularly meaningful, because such a withdrawal
cannot take place in vacuum. In practice, a withdrawal
must be negotiated between the two sides or through a
third party. That was the case of the so-called unilateral
withdrawal by Israel from southern Lebanon, which in
fact was negotiated by the United Nations under the
auspices of the Security Council.

Such cooperation and assistance should readily be
given. As long as the removal of settlers in the Gaza
Strip is a true withdrawal, it should be supported as a
bold confidence-building act and a first step to the
fulfilment of the United Nations calls to the
Government of Israel to end its occupation, as set forth in
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

This cautiously positive view of the situation is
tempered by the grim reality that confronts both
Palestinians and Israelis. We remain in a stalemate
characterized by continued violence and lack of
constructive progress on the road map, with Israeli
occupation still firmly entrenched and little concrete
Palestinian movement on reform.

Sadly, the Gaza withdrawal announcement
occurred in the context of a recent upsurge in violence
that has led to more bloodshed, loss of life and misery.
Since the last briefing on 16 January, at total of 11
Israelis and 65 Palestinians, including at least eight
under age, have died. At least 305 Palestinians and 58
Israelis have been injured. That brings the death toll
since September 2000 to 925 Israelis and 3,165
Palestinians.

Much of the recent Israel military action has been
concentrated in the Gaza Strip. Many of the Palestinian
deaths came during two raids - one in January and
one last week. A total of 24 Palestinians were killed
during the exchange of fire in those raids. In addition, a
series of Israeli military incursions in the area of Rafah
next to the Egyptian border has left nearly 600 people
homeless through house demolitions. In all, nearly
10,000 people have lost their homes since October 2000.

The tragic outcome of those events underscores
the importance of the parties' taking immediate steps to
return to the negotiating table in order to end such
violence. We call on the Government of Israel to fulfil
its responsibilities under international law to protect
civilians. We call upon the Palestinian Authority to
fully ensure that only authorized individuals within
defined security forces have access to and are allowed
to have weapons, in keeping with that entity's law.

I regret to report that, during the current reporting
period, the relative reduction of terrorist attacks was
shattered on 29 January by a suicide bombing in
Jerusalem that killed 11 and injured at least 50. We
must reiterate our utter condemnation of terrorism. No
cause can justify such heinous crimes. We urge the
Palestinian Authority to take the steps necessary to
bring those who plan, facilitate and carry out such
attacks to justice.

In the context of this continuing violence and
terror, we applaud the Government of Egypt for its
continuing and tireless efforts to secure a ceasefire by
working with the Palestinian Authority and a variety of
Palestinian groups and with Israel. Although no
agreement has been reached as yet, efforts continue -
ones that, we hope, will soon lead to a full and lasting
ceasefire between Israelis and Palestinians.

The conflict exacts a toll on the lives of the
people of the region in ways other than violence. The
humanitarian situation remains dire in the West Bank
and Gaza Strip. Continued closures and Israeli military
operations hinder Palestinian economic and social
activity and cause the Palestinian people to endure
daily humiliations. The economic situation is still very
poor, with high unemployment and widespread poverty.

However, according to the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the Palestinian
Ministry of Finance, the West Bank economy stabilized
in 2003. That is attributed in part to an easing of the
most severe measures of closure - notably curfew -
combined with the Palestinian population's developing
new coping mechanisms. According to those
institutions, the West Bank economy grew by 4.5 per
cent last year, with a concurrent gain in employment.

While that may seem promising, we must caution
that it comes in the context of an economy that had
already seriously contracted. In addition, it roughly
matches the population growth rate, meaning that per
capita income remains constant. However, the
stabilization of the economy underscores that, if
closure were eased as part of a peace process, the
Palestinian economy could start to recover.

Even with some signs of economic stabilization,
the more than $1 billion that donors provide annually
must still be used primarily for budgetary support and
humanitarian relief. The frustration among donors over
the diversion of development aid to humanitarian
needs, coupled with the almost daily obstructions that
Israeli security measures cause to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, is causing some donors to
diminish or curtail their funding programmes.

This attrition of funds to the Palestinian Authority
has left it on the verge of bankruptcy - a potentially
catastrophic situation, because Palestinian Authority
salaries are one of the few means of support for
Palestinian families. The insolvency and the resulting
chaos that would follow such a collapse would make
resolution of the conflict infinitely more difficult and
would strengthen the hand of those who would use
violence to advance their aims. Only a lifting of the
policy of closures, coupled with a continued
commitment from donors, will assist the reconstruction
and development of the Palestinian economy. However,
that development can be put on a sound footing only if
the Palestinian Authority continues to make strides in
reforming the way it conducts its business and provides
space for civil society to flourish.

The area of security is particularly vital. Last
week, the Palestinian Authority Cabinet approved a
decision to channel Palestinian security personnel
salaries directly into bank deposits, which will help
make the payment system regulated and transparent. It
is of the utmost importance that that decision be
implemented without delay. Also, there are continued
efforts to overcome the obstacles to unifying the
disparate Palestinian Authority security services into
one framework under the authority of the Prime
Minister. We should all support that goal, towards
which Mr. Qurei has been working so assiduously.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
continues to face financial difficulties. An increase in
calls on UNRWA's resources because of the
humanitarian situation, coupled with a lessening of
support for the Agency, has brought about a financial
crisis that will lead to less support being provided to
Palestinian refugees. UNRWA has received less than
half of the $196 million that it requested last year to
feed some 1.1 million Palestinians, to rebuild destroyed
shelters, to create jobs and to provide emergency health
services, including counselling for traumatized children.
A population of more than 1.5 million refugees relies
on those emergency services. UNRWA has now
launched a new appeal for $193 million to cover 2004,
and we hope the international community will respond
generously in View of the urgent needs on the ground. I
would like to take this opportunity to remind the
Security Council that the United Nations, through
UNRWA, runs the bulk of essential social services in
the Gaza Strip.

The continued construction of the barrier on
Palestinian land, including around Jerusalem, casts a
pall over the positive developments I mentioned earlier.
As the Secretary-General stated in his report to the
General Assembly last November:

"In the midst of the road map process, when each
party should be making good-faith confidence-
building measures, the barrier's construction in
the West Bank cannot, in this regard, be seen as
anything but a deeply counterproductive act".
(A/ES-10/248, para. 29)

That litany of negatives, coupled with Mr.
Sharon's positive announcement on the Gaza Strip
withdrawal, highlights the importance of restarting the
peace process through the Quartet's road map. We must
ensure that its revival does not suffer the fate of the
first attempt to implement the road map. Last June, the
essential principle of parallelism was abandoned, and a
succession of small steps stalled almost immediately.

However, now the parties must take advantage of
the opportunity provided by a potential resumption of
the peace process based on the Gaza withdrawal
initiative. The leaders of both peoples must recommit
themselves to peace and must begin to work to fulfil
their obligations under the road map. They must
understand that there is no alternative plan on the
horizon that will relieve them of the responsibility to
take difficult and necessary steps.

At the same time, the Quartet must re-engage
with the parties and must revitalize its efforts. The
parties have shown that they cannot bring about peace
on their own. There is too little trust between them to
work together effectively without international help.
But they need not act on their own. The road map
provides them with a guide to peace backed by a united
international community represented by the Quartet.

During this period, the Government of Israel and
Hizbullah agreed, through German mediation, to an
important prisoner exchange. We congratulate the
Federal Republic of Germany on its tireless efforts to
broker this humanitarian understanding.

In the last briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.4895), we noted with great concern the discovery
of explosive devices that had again been planted by
Hizbullah on the Israeli side of the Blue Line. This
development is a blatant violation of Security Council
resolutions and poses a risk to lives. It can potentially
destabilize the area.

We urge all parties to refrain from any action that
could lead to destabilization and call on the
Government of Lebanon to establish full control over
south Lebanon in order to ensure that international
peace and security may prevail. Hizbullah's attack on
19 January on an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) bulldozer
attempting to remove one of these devices was a very
regrettable and unwarranted escalation, which killed
one soldier and injured another. The subsequent IDF air
attack on Hizbullah positions in south Lebanon, in
which no one was injured, was also regrettable.

Since the last briefing to the Security Council and
despite numerous calls for their cessation, Israeli
overflights of Lebanese territory have continued.
During the reporting period, the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) recorded Israeli air
violations on at least six different days and anti-aircraft
fire by Hizbullah on at least two occasions. One
violation does not justify another, but I would like to
stress the difference between an overflight and actions
that pose obvious mortal risk.

The absence of the requisite governing authority
in south Lebanon allows groups that do not share the
Government of Lebanon's desire for peace to take
actions that jeopardize security throughout the region. I
want again to vigorously reiterate both the Secretary-
General's and the Security Council's call for the
Government of Lebanon to exercise its authority
everywhere in southern Lebanon through the activities
of the Joint Security Forces and the Lebanese army. I
would like to repeat here the Secretary-General's words
in his report to the Council last month on UNIFIL: "I
urge the Government [of Lebanon] to exert control
over the use of force on its entire territory and to
prevent all attacks across the Blue Line" (S/2004/50, para. 28).

Meanwhile, UNIFIL will continue to contribute
to the restoration of peace and security by observing,
monitoring and reporting on developments in its area
of operation.

I would like to take this opportunity to underline
the consistently outstanding and courageous work
performed by the officers and soldiers of UNIFIL. In
difficult and often dangerous circumstances, they serve
the cause of peace with distinction. Under the
determined leadership of Major General Lalit Tewari
during the past two and a half years, they have risen to
every challenge. Last Saturday, General Tewari passed
command of UNIFIL over to Major General Alain
Pellegrini. I thank General Tewari, a fine officer who
upheld the best traditions of the United Nations in
working tirelessly to achieve peace.

The situation in the Golan has remained calm
since our last report and serves to exemplify how,
ultimately, all parties can exercise restraint and work
through diplomatic channels to resolve their
differences. President Assad's recent overture to
resume peace negotiations with Israel is encouraging.
We believe that it would be in the interest of peace for
Israel to respond positively to this outstretched hand. I
truly hope that both parties seize this opportunity to
forge a peace agreement, based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515 (2003).

The parties have another chance for peace. The
international community has another opportunity to
make the road map process work. It behoves us to do
everything within our power to make something of
these chances. We have repeatedly called in this forum
and elsewhere for the parties to take bold steps to build
confidence and jump-start the peace process. An Israeli
withdrawal from Gaza has the earmarks of such a step.
We anxiously await the details and timetable for the
withdrawal and urge the Palestinians to meet the plan
with meaningful reciprocal confidence-building
measures, most imperatively in the area of security.

These actions must be taken with care, but also
with some haste. The humanitarian situation in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip should not be allowed to
deteriorate any further. The people of both sides
deserve to be free of violence, terror, fear and
harassment. Without delay or preconditions, and in
keeping with the road map, their leaders should guide
them, with the help of the international community, to a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).

As we enter what could be a dynamic yet
potentially confusing time, I wish to remind members
of the Council, as they analyse events and statements,
of what Cicero once said in a letter to a friend:

"Unchanging consistency of standpoint has never
been considered a virtue in great statesmen. At
sea it is good sailing to run before the gale even if
the ship cannot make harbour; but if she can
make harbour by changing tack, only a fool
would risk shipwreck by holding to the original
course rather than change it and still reach his
destination. Similarly, while all of us as statesmen
should set before our eyes the goal of peace with
honour it is our aim, not our language, which
must be always the same."

