Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China highly commends the Kuwaiti presidency for its
initiative to convene today's debate. I warmly welcome
the Kuwaiti Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Sheikh Al-Sabah, to
New York to preside over this meeting.

I wish to thank Secretary- General Antonio Guterres
and welcome back the former Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

The United Nations was born in the afterglow
of the world victory against fascism. The Charter of
the United Nations gave expression to the reflections
of peace-loving peoples around the world and
carries the optimistic hopes of all nations for peace
and development.

Today's world is undergoing profound changes not
seen in a century. We should stay true to our agenda,
uphold our mission, resolutely safeguard the principles
and purposes of the Charter and continue to carry
forward the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
We should work together to build a new type of
international relations featuring win-win cooperation,
and establish a community of shared destiny for
humankind. I should like to share the following ideas
with the members of the Security Council.

First, countries should build partnerships based
on equality, consultation and mutual understanding.
Equality in sovereignty is an important norm governing
inter- State relations. The sovereignty of countries big or
small, strong or weak, poor or rich must be respected.
Interference in the internal affairs of other countries
must not be permitted. The international community
should uphold multilateralism, pursue mutual trust
and win-win cooperation, abandon the Cold War
mentality and zero-sum games, and act upon the five
principles of peaceful coexistence and the Charter of
the United Nations in steadily promoting democracy in
international relations and in governing global affairs
through consultation.

Secondly, countries should strive for a world of
universal security through joint contributions and
sharing. In the face of traditional and non-traditional
security threats, including terrorism, regional conflict,
the refugee crisis and climate change, no single country
can stand aloof. It is important to foster an outlook of
comprehensive, common, cooperative and sustainable
security, promote international cooporation across the
board, adopt a holistic approach to addressing issues
fundamental to world and regional security, and build
universal security.

Thirdly, countries should respect the work of the
United Nations as the main channel of mediation and
safeguard the mission and authority of the Council.
The Council, as the collective security machinery for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
is equipped with a sacred Charter mandate. We should
support the Council, acting in accordance with the
Charter, in seeking the peaceful settlement of conflict
by political means and by fully bridging differences
through dialogue and consultation.

As the first signatory of the Charter, a founding
Member of the United Nations and a permanent member
of the Security Council, China is ready to shoulder all
its responsibilities, stay committed to maintaining the
international system built around the United Nations,
uphold the basic norms governing international
relations underpinned by the Charter, work alongside
other Member States and the United Nations, and
make greater contributions to world peace, common
development and international cooperation.

