Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, we greatly welcome President Obasanjo,
whose presence honours us. We have listened
attentively to his comments.

Very briefly, before I address the question of
Darfur, I shall comment on cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union. In short, the
Council deals on a daily basis - unfortunately - with
crises afflicting the African continent. We note that, at
the same time, Africans are the first to be involved in
resolving those crises. As President Obasanjo has
said- and we are well aware - we have a new
Africa. Africa is shouldering its responsibilities
collectively and with determination.

My delegation is convinced that the Security
Council has every interest in working closely with
regional organizations, in particular with the African
Union, whenever that strengthen the Council's actions.
Our respective actions complement one another. We
have seen that in Burundi. We see it today in the Darfur
crisis, to which I will return. As well, there is
cooperation with subregional organizations, and my
Government is very gratified to cooperate with the
Economic Community of West African States with
respect to West Africa, in particular Cote d'Ivoire.

My question is both simple and complex. I am
asking myself about how to enhance that cooperation's
effectiveness. Might the solution be cooperation on a
case-by-case basis? Or should cooperation be somehow
institutionalized? I do not know. We are now reflecting
on how the Council could work most effectively. Any
comments from President Obasanjo on ways to
improve cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations and the Council would enrich our
process of reflection.

On the question of Darfur, I have no questions at
this stage because the questions I had in mind have
been formulated very well by preceding speakers. I
have nothing to add to that list of questions.

I would like simply to take this opportunity to
stress before the Council the main lines of my
country's action in the Security Council. The first is
that we believe we should be very demanding of the
Sudanese. The Council's recent message to the Sudan
in resolution 1564 (2004) must be heeded and acted on.
It is a clear message: the Sudanese Government must
fulfil all its obligations. In particular, it must provide
safety and security for the population in Darfur and
combat impunity. For their part, the rebels must end the
violence and not hinder the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. All the Sudanese parties must participate in
good faith in the negotiations at Naivasha and Abuja.
And, as the Secretary-General said, the parties must
demonstrate their willingness to compromise.

The second base of our action is that the African
Union must receive all the assistance from the
international community that it needs. In this crisis, the
African Union has an irreplaceable role in backing up
the international community's demands and promoting
the necessary cooperation of the Sudanese
Government.

We are fully aware that deploying in that region
of the Sudan an international presence composed of
unarmed observers and military personnel responsible
for security is not an easy undertaking. There needs to
be significant planning and logistic support, as
President Obasanjo has told the Council. We realize as
well that it is desirable to have cooperation and
assistance from Member States that possess experience
in this area.

France and the European Union are ready. I think
we need to act quickly. 3,000 or 4,000 men are not too
many and are probably sufficient. My country will do
its utmost within the institutions of the European
Union to ensure that the Union can support the African
Union as effectively as possible.

In conclusion, the Council, like the international
community as a whole, can act only in close
cooperation with the African Union. In is in that spirit
that France contributed its assistance to the African
Union's mission to Chad.

