Mr. Lamani: At the outset, permit me,
Mr. President, to express our gratitude to you for
inviting the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) to participate in this important debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in stabilization processes. I wish to
convey to the Council the warmest felicitations of the
Secretary-General of the OIC, who could not
personally attend this important debate owing to the
short notice and to his other, prearranged engagements.

The OIC, with its 57 member States and three
observer States spread across all the geographical
regions of the world, has been engaged in a cooperative
and collaborative relationship with the United Nations,
reinforcing our common efforts in the pursuit of peace,
security and development worldwide. In the spheres of
conflict resolution and peace-building, the Charter of
the OIC complements the Charter of the United
Nations and calls for the settlement of disputes that
might arise among member States by peaceful means
such as negotiation, mediation, conciliation and
arbitration.

The issue of cooperation between our two
organizations - part of the theme of the Council's
current debate - is viewed with seriousness by our
respective governing organs. In that connection, I am
pleased to recall successive General Assembly
resolutions, including most recently resolution 57/42,
adopted by the Assembly at its fifty-seventh session,
which welcomed with appreciation the continuing
cooperation between the United Nations and the OIC in
the fields of peacemaking, preventive diplomacy and
peacekeeping. I recall with equal pleasure the report of
the Secretary-General on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (A/57/405), which acknowledged with
appreciation the cooperation of the OIC, inter alia, in
the areas of conflict prevention and peacemaking.

These remarks go beyond semantics and
pleasantries, since many of the issues on the Security
Council's agenda are also of major concern to the
OIC - notably issues related to, inter alia, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the conflicts in
Sierra Leone, Somalia and other African countries, the
Middle East, Palestine and Jammu and Kashmir.

In the recently concluded thirty-first session of
the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held in
Istanbul last month, the OIC reaffirmed its support for
the Middle East peace process, including the
implementation of the road map - which indeed
complements Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) as well as General Assembly resolution
194 (III) - aimed at ending the occupation of Arab
territories. That, we believe, would be an effective
prerequisite for the achievement of peace and stability
in the Middle East.

The OIC has welcomed the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004), which sets forth the
framework for Iraq's transition to a sovereign
democratic State.

The OIC strongly supports all efforts aimed at
restoring peace, national reconciliation and stability in
Afghanistan, as well as at promoting the socio-
economic rehabilitation and reconstruction of that
country. Thus, as a complementary measure, it has
established an Afghan people's assistance fund aimed
at supporting international reconstruction efforts in that
country.

The OIC has reaffirmed its support for initiatives
aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the issue of
Jammu and Kashmir, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions and with the aspirations of the
Kashmiri people. In that connection, it has welcomed
the opening of the composite dialogue process between
Pakistan and India, in which the question of Jammu
and Kashmir and issues of peace and security, as well
as other issues of concern to the two countries, are
expected to be addressed.

The OIC has commended the endorsement of a
peaceful United Nations settlement plan by the Turkish
Cypriot people and has supported the good offices
mission of the Secretary-General.

I believe that it would be fair to say that neither
the United Nations nor the OIC is oblivious to the
growing trend towards Islamophobia that is being felt
in several parts of the world. Unless the resultant
injustice is effectively redressed, conflict and
consequent instability will continue to trouble large
parts of the planet. It is also evident that today, in
addressing important regional conflicts, global threats
of terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, greater cooperation between the OIC and
the United Nations, especially the Security Council, is
essential. This would need to be complemented by
close cooperation with other regional organizations so
as to thwart the pernicious objectives of extremists and
ideologues, who are active in seeking to promote a
clash of civilizations and cultures instead of fostering
understanding, tolerance and cooperation among
nations, which is our collective desire, and a crucial
need of the time.

In its quest for stability, peace and justice, the
OIC has endorsed several recent initiatives, such as the
dialogue among civilizations proposed by President
Mohammed Khatami of Iran, and the "enlightened
moderation" proposed by President Pervez Musharraf
of Pakistan. It has decided to establish institutional
relations with other regional organizations for the
purpose of fostering intraregional and interregional
cooperation, which we hope will provide a stimulus to
similar initiatives by other regional and interregional
organizations.

We sincerely believe that these efforts need to be
synergized into a mutually reinforcing interplay among
the various intergovernmental organizations, with the
United Nations leading the way in formulating
complementary strategies to bolster the stabilization
process in various parts of the world.

The Annual Coordination Meeting of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the OIC member States, held
every year in New York during the general debate in
the General Assembly, the OIC Group of Permanent
Representatives in New York and the biennial meetings
between the two systems of our organizations, are
readily available instruments for dialogue and
cooperation between the OIC and the United Nations.
With these and other instruments, we pledge our
resolve to continue to work with the United Nations
and other intergovernmental organizations in steering
our world towards the peaceful environment of the
global village, which is our common destiny.
(spoke in French)

In conclusion, it is certainly clear to us that the
United Nations has never been so necessary and that its
cooperation with regional systems has never been so
useful as it is today. It is up to all of us to come
together to meet the challenges posed by war,
terrorism, disease, poverty, ignorance and many other
crises, because it is in this forum - the United
Nations - that the rules of international legitimacy are
being developed.

