Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for his very comprehensive briefing as usual,
as well as Ambassador Tanin for his very useful
intervention.

I must begin my statement by recalling the
attacks in Mazar-e-Sharif. The United Nations

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
indeed the entire international effort in support of the
Government and people of Afghanistan were brutally
attacked in Mazar-e-Sharif last April. I hereby convey
to the Special Representative Portugal's highest
appreciation for the courage shown in the face of
adversity and for the constant commitment that
UNAMA's personnel showed to their mission. We
commend their dedication. That is the guarantee that
the losses suffered will not have been in vain.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/381),
the Special Representative's briefing and Ambassador
Tanin's statement have, I believe, covered the essential
aspects of the situation in Afghanistan and shown us
what it takes to make the transition a success.

Last spring was a hard time indeed. The security
assessment indicates that insecurity persists and that
the rising number of casualties, especially those
involving civilians, is a clear sign that the battle for the
future of Afghanistan continues. The recent attack on
the Intercontinental Hotel underlines this situation in a
very symbolic way. But this is a battle that must be
won, not only on the ground against the enemy but also
in terms of public opinion - Afghan public opinion,
first and foremost, but also international public
opinion.

Civilian casualties are evidently the cruellest face
of war. Limiting civilian casualties must therefore rank
at the highest level in the military command's priorities
as a fundamental element in the war in Afghanistan, as
in any other war. We are aware that significant efforts
had been and are being made to decrease civilian
casualties caused by military operations. We call upon
military commanders to pursue these efforts with
steadfast commitment.

It is clear, nevertheless, that it is the insurgents
who are responsible for the vast majority of civilian
casualties and for the growing numbers of innocent
victims. I recall the Special Representative's
mentioning last March the offer made to insurgents to
bring forward their own numbers of civilian casualties,
which went unheeded. I also recall the multiple steps
already being taken to try to address damage to
civilians caused by national and international forces. It
would be extremely useful to build upon what is
already on the ground and integrate the valuable
advice, expertise and goodwill we are able to
contribute in order to adequately compensate civilians
for their justified grievances.

The Special Representative reports that a draft
regulation on the women's protection centres is now
under consideration by the Technical Legislative
Review Committee of the Council of Ministers.
Portugal is encouraged by the fact that this process has
been allowed to proceed with the required
inclusiveness so that the amendments that fully protect
women's human rights were incorporated in the final
version of the draft law. We are also pleased to see that
UNAMA continues to raise awareness and monitor the
implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women. We commend UNAMA's
continued efforts in terms of the protection and
promotion of human rights as well as the role played
by UN-Women. Portugal reiterates the importance it
attaches to the participation of women in Afghan
Government institutions, including the civil service.

Concerning the protection of children, which was
mentioned by the Special Representative, I would also
like to highly commend the initiative of UNAMA and
UNICEF, in partnership with the Office of the Special
Representative, on violence against children. The broad
range of partners assembled by the United Nations
agency and the Special Representative is an
encouraging sign of public commitment to the rights of
children.

Finally, we take note of the multiple efforts being
made by the Afghan Government, both internally and
externally. Abroad, recent regional steps towards
increased cooperation, at both the bilateral and
multilateral levels, are to be welcomed as Afghanistan
reassumes its role as a fundamental crossroads of Asia.
This shows how Afghanistan's neighbours can and
should play a crucial role in the process of stabilization
of that country, and indeed of the region, as underlined
by Mr. De Mistura and Ambassador Tanin.

On the home front, significant challenges remain.
We entirely second the affirmation in the report that

"[i]t is vital that the transition be managed so as
to lead to an improvement in security, as well as
better access to essential services for the
population" (S/20H/38], para. 69).

Transition is not only security, as Staffan de
Mistura underlined. Military success on the ground
must translate into an effective governance framework
and into strengthening the rule of law, institutions and
public services in order to protect those gains from
erosion caused by lack of accountability and
disconnection from the population's needs. In this
regard, the inauguration of the joint independent anti-
corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee can
only be applauded and its work strongly encouraged.

Recent developments at the institutional level,
namely in the Parliament, have highlighted the need for
renewed capacity for political compromise and
adherence to the Constitution. The historical moment
Afghanistan is living requires undivided focus and
commitment. I am sure that decision-makers in
Afghanistan are working hard so that this phase
remains contained within the bounds of a growing
constitutional democracy.

I conclude by saying that the transition is set to
begin this month, and this is something to
commemorate. Vast amounts of resources and political
will are concurring to make July 2011 a point of
departure rather than a point of arrival for Afghanistan
and its people. It is up to us to continue to support, as
allies and friends, the Government of Afghanistan and
its people so as to achieve the success they deserve.

