Mr. Madureira (Portugal): I thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the Tribunals for their very useful
and comprehensive briefings here today. Allow me
also a special word to congratulate Judge Joensen for
his recent election as President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I also wish to
extend our congratulations, through the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Meron, to the elected judges of the
Residual Mechanism who were recently sworn in.

We wish to commend, first of all, the Presidents
of the Tribunals and the Prosecutors for their efforts
in keeping the judicial work on track, in line with the
estimates of the completion strategy. Our appreciation
goes also to the judges and staff of the Tribunals for
their hard work to conclude the judicial activity of
the Tribunals within the time frame established by the
Council in resolution 1966 (2010).

The reports (see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349) of the
Tribunals and the briefings today in that regard reflect
the concrete progress made so far. They highlight the
fact that practical measures - such as using ad litem
judges for the trial of contempt cases, which was recently
put in practice - can produce considerable results in
terms of speeding up the judicial activity concerning the
principal cases. We therefore encourage the Presidents
of the Tribunals to continue to actively identify possible
ways of further promoting the better use of resources
with a view to improving the management of the time
devoted to particular cases, while naturally keeping
fully with the required principles of justice.
We understand that, as we approach the time when
the Tribunals will close their doors, such management
becomes more difficult. Indeed, both Tribunals continue
to share a grave concern owing to staff attrition
and recruitment difficulties. Creative, realistic and
cost-effective solutions to that issue need to be found and
implemented as amatter of urgency. We note some positive
developments in that regard - for instance, the waiver
of the six-month rule for applications for professional
posts, which has facilitated the contracting of new
personnel. The particular nature of the Tribunals, which
struggle to abide by trial deadlines while maintaining
the process of winding down all court activity, requires
a distinct and more flexible interpretation of the United
Nations general administrative norms. We therefore
encourage flexibility on the part of the Secretariat, as
well as creativity on the part of the Tribunals.

In short, Mr. President, we wish to recognize the
Tribunals for their hard work in performing their
invaluable role in ensuring accountability for the worst
crimes, in the most professional way and under difficult
circumstances. Both Tribunals have also made valuable
contributions to the establishment of the Residual
Mechanism, which we would like to recognize. They
have contributed to the ongoing drafting process of
the Mechanism's rules of procedure and evidence, the
preparation of its budget, which was recently adopted,
and other necessary activities. I wish to commend the
Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs for their
contribution to the rather complex process that will
enable the Residual Mechanism to start performing its
functions fully from day one, that is, from 1 July.

At this stage we would like to highlight three
aspects that continue to be of concern to us. First, we
can never overstate the importance of cooperation with
the Tribunals. While we welcome the fact that there are
no outstanding fugitives on the list of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
as well as the generally satisfactory assessment of
cooperation reported by the ICTY Prosecutor in his
report (S/2012/354, annex 1), despite some concerns, we
wish to turn to the ICTR and highlight the need to locate
and arrest the remaining fugitives being sought by the
Tribunal. In that respect, we urge the continuation of
efforts on the part of the States concerned to facilitate
the arrest and transfer of those fugitives to that Tribunal
and to allow justice to be fulfilled.

Secondly, as mentioned before, as we approach
the end of the Tribunals' work, bearing in mind the
projected number of convictions, we have to be prepared
for the increasing number of requests addressed by the
Tribunals to States to host convicted persons to serve
their sentences and the need to find appropriate and
prompt responses to such requests.

Finally, we need to encourage definitive solutions
to address the singular situation of acquitted persons -
referred to again by the President of ICTR. They remain
still today under protective measures in safe houses in
Arusha because they can neither safely return to their
communities nor find host countries willing or able to
accept them. That is an unsustainable situation with
human rights implications, and a prompt solution must
be found to it.

In conclusion, Portugal wishes to congratulate the
Presidents, Prosecutors and staff of the two Tribunals for
their work. They have laid the groundwork for the future.
They have helped to set up the Residual Mechanism and
are assisting the countries of the respective regions,
their judicial authorities and their civil societies to take
over the vital task of fighting impunity for the gravest
of crimes.

