Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
Azerbaijan's assumption of the presidency of the
Council and to thank you for having convened this
debate on counter-terrorism. It is imperative that the
Council remain actively seized of the matter.

As the Secretary-General emphasized in his
statement, more than 10 years after the events of
11 September 2001, terrorism remains a grave threat to
international peace and security, and we must continue
to work relentlessly to combat it. This issue, which was
one of our priorities during our 2011 presidency of the
Group of Eight, is particularly important to France,
which was recently affected by that scourge on its own
territory.

The terrorist threat, which is more present than
ever, has evolved; specifically, it is becoming more
regional. Many local-level groups are affiliated with
Al-Qaida or pursue their own objectives. Those
amorphous groupings are having an impact on the
security and socio-economic development of entire
regions, in the Sahel - today in particular - Yemen,
the Horn of Africa, Central Asia or South Asia.

The Sahel region is very much affected, as the
events of the past few weeks have made clear, with the
occupation of cities in northern Mali by terrorist
groups and those who support them. We note that those
groups, wherever they are to be found, take advantage
of the historical weaknesses of the States targeted and
exploit them in order to create sanctuaries, which can
then be used as rear bases for operations aimed at
neighbouring States.

We cannot stand by idly in the face of the threat
of the expansion of regional hotbeds of violent
radicalization. To meet that challenge, the international
community must work together and give pride of place
to the implementation of national, regional and
international strategies. Such strategies must deal with
the issue comprehensively. Thus the elimination of
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
requires the implementation not only of security
policies but also of development and good-governance
programmes. That can be done by, for example, putting
in place regional strategies. That is the approach taken
by the European Union, whose Sahel strategy has both
a security track and a development track.

I believe that two components of counter-
terrorism strategies are particularly important:
capacity-building and the promotion of the rule of law,
because they provide States under threat with a long-
term approach. As we all know, when State authorities
lack resources, that fact is often exploited by terrorists.
Such States, threatened by the activities of terrorist
groups on their territory, must have at their disposal the
means necessary to dismantle networks and foil attacks.
They must also begin to cooperate politically and
operationally, especially at the regional level.

However, it is also vital that they have the means
and the technical assistance necessary to allow them to
prosecute, try and convict terrorists while complying
with human rights. France participates in these global
efforts, for instance by lending its support to the
establishment of judicial counter-terrorism centres in
Mauritania and Niger and offering training for judges.

France attaches great importance to counter-
terrorism efforts at the United Nations, the role of
which is irreplaceable and indispensable. The United
Nations has allowed us to establish a sound
international framework to combat terrorism. I am
thinking in particular of the relevant resolutions of the
Council, beginning with resolution 1373 (2001), the
many relevant United Nations conventions and
protocols and in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, the creation of which we supported
in 2006 when it was established by the General
Assembly. This series of texts reflects the current
international consensus on counter-terrorism.

Establishing norms is not enough, of course. We
need to strengthen specific actions against terrorism.
To that end, a number of projects and initiatives are
being undertaken under United Nations auspices, such
as the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on the ground, the technical assistance
programme of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, and the new United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre. I welcome the quality of work done
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which analyses and assesses the situation
of States, facilitates the establishment of technical
assistance programmes, and works to strengthen
regional cooperation by States in combating terrorism.

As we approach the biennial review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to be held in the next few
weeks, it is essential to continue working to improve
the institutional architecture of the United Nations
bodies tasked with fighting terrorism. On this point, we
support the proposal of the Secretary-General
regarding the appointment of a United Nations counter-
terrorism coordinator. It is indeed vital to improve
international coordination, particularly through the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
offers the appropriate framework.

That improved coordination should be done on
two levels. First, it should be undertaken within the
United Nations in order to avoid duplicated initiatives
and to allow for synergies. Secondly, however, there
should also be coordination with outside institutions,
such as the European Union or the Global Forum, and
with other organizations that have counter-terrorism
competencies, such as INTERPOL. That is how we
will ensure both the coherence of international action
and the clarity of the work of the United Nations in this
area.

