Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. I welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan.

China congratulates Afghanistan on the
successful holding of parliamentary elections on
18 September. This was a major event in Afghan
political life and constitutes an important step towards
achieving an Afghanistan run by Afghans and towards
peaceful reconstruction. We highly appreciate the
preparatory work that the Afghan Government carried
out in a very difficult and complex situation, and we
commend the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its support and assistance
to the country. We hope that, through these elections,
the Afghan people will further bolster consensus with a
view to the early achievement of reconciliation, peace
and development.

The process of peaceful reconstruction in
Afghanistan is now at a critical transitional stage
fraught with many challenges. In July, the Kabul
Conference on Afghanistan was successfully held. That
international Conference - the very first held in
Afghanistan - was significant: it was an important
step in the Kabul process and enriched and enhanced
the partnership between Afghanistan and its
international partners to advance the country's
reconstruction process. In its next phase, the work of
the Security Council and the international community
must focus on implementing the communique adopted
at the international Kabul Conference on Afghanistan.

Peace, stability and development in Afghanistan
require ownership and leadership by the Government
and the people of that country. We support the Afghan
Government's efforts to build its capacity to exercise
control throughout its territory. In order to achieve
fresh progress, work should continue in a balanced
manner in the spheres of economic development, safety
and security, national reconciliation, governance, the
rule of law and combating drug trafficking. We

encourage the Government and the people also to take
effective measures to step up economic development
and improve living standards. We support the Afghan
peace and reintegration programme formulated by the
Government, and we hope that the Government will
listen to the views of its people and their political
parties so that the political basis for reconciliation can
be broadened.

Peace, stability and development in Afghanistan
also require the sustained engagement and support of
the international community, which should, on the
basis of respect for the country's independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, honour its
assistance commitments to Afghanistan. Such
assistance should be in line with Afghanistan's national
development strategy and should respect the priorities
identified by the country itself. We should all continue
to help the Afghan Government to enhance its national
security capacity and to accelerate the building of the
police and security forces. China supports a continued
central coordinating role for the United Nations and
UNAMA in facilitating the peaceful reconstruction of
Afghanistan.

China is very concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in the country and about the
increasing number of security incidents. We are
troubled by the increase in casualties among innocent
civilians. In our view, the transfer of security
responsibilities to the Afghan Government must be
based on ensuring the country's security and stability.
We hope that UNAMA will do more to protect
civilians, within its mandate.

