Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I join in welcoming Mr.
Holkeri to the Security Council and thank him for his
briefing. We compliment Mr. Holkeri on the work done
in his first few months in office in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), especially those
relating to the promotion of substantial autonomy and
self-government in Kosovo. The pace of work in the
process of transferring responsibilities to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government is
proceeding satisfactorily, it seems. We are also pleased
with Mr. Holkeri's acceptance of the proposals, which
are in line with chapter 8 of the Constitutional
Framework, to consider the transfer of additional
responsibilities which are reserved for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

Further progress in the discussions in the
Assembly of Kosovo, in spite of the difficulties therein,
and progress at the local government level are positive
developments. Here again, we congratulate the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) on its efforts to move ahead. The continued
existence of parallel administrative structures,
however, remains a matter of concern. Also of concern
are the issues of security and freedom of movement. In
spite of efforts by UNMIK to strengthen the rule of
law, substantial problems remain.

We are pleased that there has been an increase in
the return of refugees. However, further progress is
needed on other issues, such as sustainable returns,
minority rights and inter-ethnic integration. Here,
despite the complexities involved, we support
UNMIK's ongoing efforts.

While we support UNMIK's ongoing efforts to
establish standards in Kosovo, we continue to have
reservations about the standards-before-status
approach. This is a unique approach; it has not been
applied to other situations in similar circumstances.
Standards-before-status, for instance, was not applied
in East Timor or other disputed areas, such as Abkhazia
or Western Sahara. Standards, we agree, are important,
but they should not become an unnecessary obstacle to
the early resolution of the future status of Kosovo. We
recognize that the status issue in Kosovo is very
complex and delicate, and may yet require patient, hard
work to resolve. However, we feel that the status issue
must be given its due priority and should be de-linked
from standards. The development of standards should
proceed independently. However, even if resolution of
the status issue may take some time, it should not be
conditional upon the achievement of standards which
may be difficult to realize.

Pakistan therefore fully supports Mr. Holkeri's
efforts in launching a direct dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade on practical matters. We hope that in due
course this dialogue, once established, can become the
basis for further discussions on the status issue. This
may work in parallel with other mechanisms, including
those aimed at allowing all the people of Kosovo to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination.
The issue of status and the important principles that
underlie it are too important for the Council to ignore
or to put off.

One final word on UNMIK: while we fully
recognize that the future of Kosovo is being viewed in
the European context, the role of UNMIK must
continue to be an international one. In that regard, we
would like to see a greater geographical balance in the
recruitment of senior UNMIK staff, particularly the
principal international officers. Similarly, UNMIK
must also continue to seek the widest possible
international support for its key activities and
initiatives, especially in the United Nations and among
the troop-contributing countries.

In conclusion, I once again commend Mr. Holkeri
for his achievements thus far and assure him of
Pakistan's continued support for his efforts to establish
peace, stability and self-governance in Kosovo, with
respect for the rights of all its people.

