Mr. Amolo (Kenya): Allow me to begin by
expressing my delegation's warm appreciation for the
excellent spirit of cooperation and compromise that
permeated the intensive and lengthy consultations we
have had on this item. The result is this draft resolution,
which we believe achieves a good balance of all positions
laid out during the negotiations. The draft before us today
is in response to the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report of 23 February 1998, which we
strongly supported and commended.

In December 1996, during the Summit Meeting of
Heads of State and Government of France and Africa,
Bangui was in the throes of a fratricidal conflict. What
followed was a unique experiment with conflict
management and prevention which, as is evidenced by
today's meeting, has been generally successful. We say
this because many of the goals set by the International
Mediation Committee, the International Monitoring
Committee and the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) have
been accomplished.

As clearly spelt out in MISAB's third periodic report
in document S/ 1998/86, the provisions of the Bangui
Agreements relating to the formation of a government of
national union, the adoption of an amnesty law covering
offences in the context of the third rebellion, and the
situation of former heads of State can now be regarded as
having been fully implemented. Since then, the National
Reconciliation Conference has taken place and a National
Reconciliation Pact adopted. We believe that this is a
critical step towards consolidating peace, stability,
security and the future prosperity of the Central African
Republic.

Meanwhile, the process of disarmament, which is
still ongoing, has to a large extent been addressed. Credit
for the improved political and security situation goes to
the people of Central Africa, States contributing troops to
MISAB and the Government of France, which had the
foresight, faith and courage to continue supporting the
peace process in the Central African Republic.

The stage in Bangui is now set for the home stretch.
The situation, however, remains fragile and is not
irreversible. The establishment of a United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA)
will therefore provide the needed assurance to the people

 

of the Central African Republic that we recognize the gains
they have made, seek to assist in consolidating these gains
and are interested in their future stability. At the same time,
the appointment of a Special Representative, who, among
other things, will provide good offices and mediation
between the Government and political parties, will boost
confidence in the process of national reconciliation and help
in the coordination of the United Nations post-conflict
peace-building effort. It is our hope that the establishment
of MINURCA at this point in the peace process confirms
the international community's engagement in the Central
African Republic and will assist in ushering in an era of
national reconciliation, democracy and reconstruction.

In the same vein, it is important and noteworthy that
the draft resolution clearly recognizes that, for long-term
peace and stability in the Central African Republic, a
sustained commitment by the international community in
support of economic, social and institutional development
is indispensable, and in this regard we welcome the
progress achieved in discussions with international financial
institutions and urge our development partners to provide
the necessary support. It is also important that we all
contribute to the Trust Fund established by the Secretary-
General.

In his letter to the Secretary-General of 8 January
1998, His Excellency President Ange-Felix Patasse
expressed his Government's solid commitment to continuing
to carry out political, security and economic reforms. We
expect that the implementation of these reforms will be
accomplished rapidly within a definite time-frame. This, of
course, includes strict adherence to the election timetable
that has been set, as well as recognizing the need to
prioritize the promulgation of an electoral code. We are
greatly encouraged that President Patasse yesterday issued
a decree, No. 98, establishing a committee to follow up on
the National Reconciliation Pact, in accordance with article
7 of that Pact.

The Secretary-General recommended that MINURCA
be established for a limited period and that its mandate end
90 days after the announcement of the election results. We
believe that this is enough time to lay a solid foundation for
the Central African Republic's renaissance. A new
dependency on United Nations peacekeeping operations to
hold our countries together is not one that we would cherish
or want to see nurtured.

Kenya will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

