Mr. Ramdin: On behalf of the Organization of
American States (OAS), I would like to thank the
Security Council for this occasion to speak before it in
this open debate on Haiti.

First of all, I would like to acknowledge the
important participation of President-elect Rene Preval
in this debate and to congratulate him on his electoral
victory. We look forward to welcoming President-elect
Preval and his delegation to Washington this coming
Wednesday at a protocollary session of the OAS
Permanent Council. I take this opportunity to
underscore the strong commitment of the OAS to
supporting the new Government and the people of
Haiti and to helping President-elect Preval meet the
numerous challenges ahead in building the requisite
conducive governing and security environment.

The presidential and legislative elections held on
7 February were, first and foremost, a decisive victory
for the Haitian people. The large turnout of the Haitian
electorate and the enthusiasm and perseverance that it
demonstrated on election day reconfirmed Haitians'
solid commitment to the democratic process, which
bodes well for the challenging months and years ahead
as the Government strives to meet the people's
demands and to temper expectations for a quick fix to
the country's deep-rooted problems.

In the immediate term, it will be important to
successfully conclude the legislative elections, whose
second round is scheduled to take place on 21 April. It
will be equally critical to maintain the time frame for
the holding of municipal and local elections in Haiti,
slated for 18 June. We would like to ask President-elect
Preval to be particularly vigilant in ensuring that those
elections take place on the scheduled date.

The OAS has noted with interest and appreciation
the reaching out of the President-elect to various
sectors in Haiti and a mutual reaching-out to him,
which suggests an important basis for national
consensus-building, national dialogue and
reconciliation. We all know that elections tend to
exacerbate existing differences and divergences among
sectors in a country and that in Haiti, there has been a
general atmosphere of polarization in the political
sphere for many years. We would urge President-elect
Preval to continue his outreach to multiple political and
social sectors and to build an open, inclusive
Government, which can provide a necessary base from
which Haiti can recover socially, economically and in
terms of overall stability.

We have also noted with appreciation the priority
that Mr. Preval has accorded to his relations with the
nations of our hemisphere, as several of his first visits
as President-elect have been to countries of the
Americas. That interest is mutual, and, in the context
of the inter-American system, we look forward to
working with the new Haitian Government in the
community of nations of the hemisphere to tackle
common challenges and difficulties in a collective and
collaborative manner.

In addition to immediate actions to alleviate
suffering and build hope, there is no substitute for
long-term institution-building and investment in the
Haitian infrastructure and economy in order to sow the
seeds for a viable future. In terms of basic institutions,
the expansion and professionalization of the Haitian
police force are essential to provide public security and
a security environment in which the economy can grow
and spread its benefits. A strong, independent judiciary
and a legal framework that will protect human rights
and make everyone equal in the eyes of the law, as well
as provide a framework for greater economic
investment, will be critical. As we all know, much
more work must be done in those areas.

In order to have a structure that will permit Haiti
to grow and develop in a sustainable way, it will be
imperative to begin building a stronger, more efficient
and transparent State in Haiti. Effective entities that
will hold the Government accountable to the people
will be important, as well as public institutions that
will be able to deliver basic services to the population.
A strong State will also be able to tackle problems and
threats generated internally or externally - such as
drug trafficking and other manifestations of organized
crime - that will otherwise seriously compromise
Haiti's future.

The environmental challenges in Haiti are clearly
enormous, and no discussion about Haiti's future can
ignore that stark reality. Reforestation, soil depletion,
water conservation and sanitation are some of the
critical issues to be tackled.

The OAS is poised to harness its expertise and
resources internally, and also to continue to coordinate
and mobilize the resources and efforts of other
institutions of the inter-American system, to contribute
to long-term institution-building and social and
economic reconstruction in Haiti. We have already held
several meetings among inter-American institutions, on
the basis of the needs expressed by the incoming
Government, in order to undertake action in support of
the Government's future efforts as well as the efforts of
local non-governmental agencies and other entities.

The OAS will continue to support the Haitian
registry and identification system as a crucial basis for
social and economic development and for future
electoral processes and will continue to help build a
solid, professional and permanent electoral institution
on the basis of our recent work in Haiti and the
expertise we have developed throughout the
hemisphere over the past 15 years. We are also set to
support the strengthening of the Haitian human rights
system and judiciary and to strengthen the emerging
Haitian political party system, among other areas.

In closing, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valde's, for
their efforts and for their close and effective
collaboration with the OAS Special Mission in Haiti
over the past years.

