Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I have asked for the floor in order to make a further statement in response to what was said earlier by the representative of the Turkish regime. The representative of the Turkish regime claims that it does not recognize the legitimacy of the Syrian Government. I can assure him, from the Chamber of the Council, which is charged with the maintenance of international peace and security and which is handling the situation in Syria, that we have never and will never seek recognition of our legitimacy from a criminal terrorist regime. We derive our legitimacy from the Charter of the United Nations; from the name of our country, the Syrian Arab Republic; and from our seat in this Chamber. Above all, we derive our legitimacy from the Syrian people, the blood of whom, I would recall, was spilled by Recep Tayyip Erdogan's regime when he sent tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters into our country. All who are present in the Chamber are aware, thanks to the reports of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council, that tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters came to Syria from 101 countries around the world. Of course, those foreign terrorist fighters did not reach Syria by parachute or spaceship; the majority of them infiltrated my country via the Turkish-Syrian border under the supervision of the Turkish regime and its intelligence services, which facilitated the entry of those foreign terrorist fighters to Syria. Those are not our words nor are they baseless. The representative of the Turkish regime says that we are not his counterpart. I ask my dear colleague to believe that we are not looking to be a counterpart to a regime like his. The Turkish regime is an exceptional one; it has no equivalent in the entire world thanks to its irresponsible practices, which undermine international peace and security. Today, military forces of the Turkish regime arrived in Libya. What do Turkey and Libya have in common? What borders threaten the Turkish security? Why do we see the presence of forces of the Turkish regime in Libya? For some time now, the Turkish regime has been sending to Libya Syrian and foreign mercenaries who fight alongside the Turkish regime in Idlib. The Turkish regime occupies parts of north-eastern Syria through an aggressive military operation, which it has ironically codenamed Operation Peace Spring. The Turkish regime is first and foremost a sponsor of Jabhat Al-Nusra, which is classified as a terrorist entity by the Security Council. The Turkish regime supervises, finances and facilitates the operations of that terrorist organization, which controls Idlib and its environs. I advise my Turkish colleague not to speak about legitimacy, as the legitimacy of the Turkish regime as an extremist religious party does not derive from its people. It comes instead from implementing its own agendas that do not serve the policies and interests of Turkey. Turkish interests are derived from what Turkish officials used to refer to as "zero problems". Today, the Turkish regime is responsible for the total lack of security, peace and stability in the Middle East region.
