Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France was a sponsor of the resolution we have just
adopted on the situation in Darfur. Along with the
efforts of the Secretary-General, the resolution, which
is in line with the Council's policy in recent weeks,
combines dialogue and strong pressure on the
Government of Sudan to protect the population of
Darfur. That is our only goal in the resolution.

The primary responsibility of the Government of
Sudan is to protect its population. Given the nature of
this crisis, the international community cannot remain
on the sidelines. Beyond the effort to be made to
provide humanitarian assistance - which must still be
developed further - the international community must
ensure that there is access in the provision of that aid.
It must also ensure that people who have suffered so
much are no longer subjected to human rights
violations and abuses. The Government of Sudan has
made commitments to the Secretary-General with
regard to access for humanitarian aid. We welcome the
fact that that matter appears to have been resolved.

But the Government's commitments also involve
the security situation, in particular with regard to the
disarmament of the Janjaweed militias - whose
behaviour has been atrocious - and the arrest and
bringing to justice of their leaders and accomplices.
The Security Council will monitor that situation
closely on a regular basis. Moreover, the Council
expects to receive a report in the next few days from
the representative of the Secretary-General following
the joint mission now on the ground. The resolution
calls for the Secretary-General to report to the Council
on this matter within 30 days, and monthly thereafter.
The Council will then assess the implementation of the
commitments made. Failing that implementation, the
Council will have no other choice but to plan for other
actions, including measures provided for in Article 41
of the Charter. This is in line with the conclusions
reached by European Union ministers at the latest
meeting of the General Affairs Council. We are
convinced, however, that the authorities in Khartoum
will do what is necessary. As the resolution states, it is
also essential that rebel groups respect the ceasefire
and engage in peace talks without preconditions.

As stated by Mr. Michel Barnier, France's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, during his trip to Darfur
on 27 July, we believe this to be an extremely serious
crisis. Despite the fact that the worst has been averted
due to the outstanding work done by non-governmental
organizations, a humanitarian disaster is still possible.
We hope that the Sudanese authorities will understand
the message being sent by the Council today, namely,
that the determination we are asking of them goes hand
in hand with our conviction that a humanitarian
catastrophe can be avoided in Sudan.

Lastly, I would like to add that France is pleased
by the support given to the resolution by the member
States of the African Union. Their contribution to
resolving this humanitarian crisis is pivotal to the
efforts being made.

