Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Recent
months have seen some potentially promising
developments in rebuilding the momentum necessary
to advance efforts towards peace. The United States
remains firmly committed to the vision of two
States - Israel and Palestine - living side by side in
peace and security, and to the Road Map as the best
way to achieve that goal. There is a growing consensus
in support of that vision and an urgent desire to achieve
It.

Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas are
both committed to working towards the realization of
that vision. We, the international community, should
support their efforts and those of responsible regional
actors who are committed to progress towards the
establishment of a Palestinian State.

During the most recent visit of Secretary Rice to
the region, Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas
agreed to hold bi-weekly meetings to discuss practical
issues such as security and movement and access,
which impact the daily lives of Palestinians and
Israelis. They also agreed to work on developing a
political horizon. The first of those meetings was held
on 15 April, and we believe that represents an
important step forward on the bilateral Israeli-
Palestinian track. It is our hope and expectation that
these regular meetings will build confidence between
the parties, improve the lives of their respective
peoples and lay the foundation for meaningful
negotiations in the future. Palestinians must know that
their State will be viable. Israelis must know that a
future State of Palestine will not be a threat. While we
are not yet at final status negotiations, those important
issues can and should be discussed now.

The work of peace is made more complex by the
posture of the Palestinian Authority Unity Government.
The position of the United States and that of the
Quartet is clear: we will support a Palestinian
Authority Government committed to the Quartet's
foundational principles of peace, renunciation of
Violence, recognition of Israel and acceptance of
previous agreements and obligations, including the
Road Map. Those are principles upon which any
Palestinian State must be founded. Its commitment to
those principles must be the measure of international
support for the Palestinian Authority Government.
Only a Palestinian Authority Government that accepts
those principles can fulfil the aspirations of the
Palestinian people for a better future and a State of
their own.

But there are those who wish to undermine the
efforts of President Abbas, Prime Minister Olmert and
the international community to advance peace. It is the

responsibility of the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority
Government to prevent terror and take the necessary
steps to stop attacks from within Gaza, and we call on
them to do so. Hamas' latest rocket attacks and breach
of the ceasefire send a clear signal that it is not
prepared to support progress towards peace and that
Hamas is the obstacle to the Palestinian people's ability
to achieve their aspirations of statehood. In that regard,
we also call again for the long-overdue release of
Corporal Shalit. And we also support the immediate
release of BBC journalist Alan Johnston.

Beyond the parties themselves, the international
community, particularly States in the region, should
commit itself to helping the parties succeed. The Arab
League's reaffirmation in Riyadh in March of the 2002
Arab League Peace Initiative offers the prospect of a
regional political horizon for Israel to complement the
bilateral Israeli-Palestinian track. Just as Israelis and
Palestinians should clarify a political horizon together,
so should the Arab States clarify a political horizon for
Israel. Those two tracks are not substitutes one for the
other; indeed they reinforce each other.

We welcome the 18 April meeting of the Arab
League Follow-up Committee. Its decision to charge
Egypt and Jordan with outreach to Israel on the
Initiative is a good first step, and it is important that
this dialogue expand in the future to include more Arab
States.

Turning to Lebanon, the United States remains
committed to a sovereign, democratic and prosperous
Lebanon. We continue to call for the full
implementation of all Security Council resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon, including 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006). And I would note that this
includes the immediate release of the Israeli soldiers
abducted last summer.

It remains critically important that all those
involved in the assassination of former Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri and in other attacks in Lebanon since
October 2004 be held accountable. We support the
efforts of the United Nations International Independent
Investigation Commission and look forward to the
timely establishment of a tribunal of an international
character in order to help insure that justice is done.
We remain concerned by mounting evidence of the
continued shipment of arms to Hizbollah and other
armed groups and call on all States to enforce the arms
07-31853
embargo established by Council resolution 1701
(2006).

The presidential statement of 17 April
(S/PRST/2007/12)underscored the Council's resolve
that the arms embargo be enforced. In that regard, we
are pleased with the Council's support for the dispatch
of an independent mission to assess the monitoring of
the Lebanese-Syrian border. The Security Council must
be united in insisting that Syria and Iran abide by their
obligations under Council resolutions to respect
Lebanese sovereignty and end their support for the
armed militias, who pose a threat to the Lebanese State
and to the stability of the region.

