Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau, to the Council today, and to thank our
briefers, Special Representative Filho, Ambassadors
Vieira and Ndong Mba and Ms. Tavares Pinto, for their
valuable remarks.

More than three months ago, in mid-May, we
commended the encouraging progress achieved towards
a solution to the country's political and institutional
stalemate (see S/PV.8261). The appointment of an
inclusive Government, the reopening of the National
Assembly, the election of the President of the National
Electoral Commission and the announcement of
legislative elections for November sparked optimism
about the prospects for a new degree of resolve and
normalization. Against that backdrop, the reported
delays and lack of concrete measures taken to prepare
for the legislative elections raise concern. The timely
and credible conduct of the legislative and presidential
elections represents a crucial step towards the
resumption of peacebuilding and an important element
of the Conakry Agreement. I would also like to express
our concern about the lack of a substantial review of
the Constitution and electoral law. However, we are
hopeful about the possibility of progress with the
recent announcement of the stability pact consultation,
focusing on security reforms and the judiciary.

We therefore call on the Guinea-Bissau authorities
to provide firm political direction and assume the
leadership of the electoral process, and to step up
the required technical preparation and empower the
electoral management bodies to implement appropriate
efforts to ensure timely and credible elections. Avoiding
a new impasse over post-electoral power-sharing will
be essential to ensuring stability in the long term.

We commend the adoption of a new law
introducing a minimum 36 per cent quota for women's
representation in elections and appointments to the
National Assembly and local governing bodies. We
also welcome the creation of the Bissau-Guinean
Council of Women, which aims to promote women's
participation in national peacebuilding, reconciliation
and political processes. Those measures can help to
lay the foundations for a more equal, participatory and
modern society capable of facing its new challenges in
development, modernization and growth.

However, we remain concerned about the fact that
drug-trafficking and transnational organized crime
still represent a serious threat to peace and stability
in Guinea-Bissau, the subregion and beyond. In that
regard, we call on the country's political leaders
and State institutions to take meaningful steps, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other relevant agencies, to prevent
and reduce these issues, which could cripple political
progress and development for years to come.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau,
we share the view of the Chair of the Committee that
any deliberations about the existing sanctions should
not interfere with the present electoral process.

Last but not least, I would like to express our
full support to Mr. Jose' Viegas Filho, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the staff of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations country team for
their dedication.

