Mr. Motoc (Romania): It is a privilege to see the
Foreign Minister of Argentina playing such an important
role in the preparation, convening and conduct of this
important meeting of the Security Council. We are
honoured by the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Haiti, of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, the acting Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States (OAS) and of those
members of the Council and countries from the region
with ministerial representation today.

The initiative of the Argentine presidency of the
Security Council to organize this open debate is
welcome and timely. Haiti is a test case for the United
Nations, and for the Council in particular. What it
comes down to is our very ability to sustain or foster a
long-term, multidimensional, integrated investment in
durably addressing the political, security and economic
challenges of complex post-conflict situations.
Romania has always believed in encouraging
involvement and participation in such tasks on the part
of regional and subregional institutions, while carrying
out an ongoing dialogue with the Council and the
United Nations. That has also been echoed in the
relevant findings and recommendations of the High-
Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change.

Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore try to be brief and specific in my remarks.

First, I would like to join other speakers in
supporting the fundamental vision on which our debate
today is predicated, namely, that of a close
interrelationship between security, political
institutionalization and economic development in
Haiti. The stabilization and development of Haiti are
not easy tasks, but they are within reach, provided that
consistent and coordinated efforts are resolutely
undertaken in all three areas I have just mentioned.

Like others, we believe that improving security in
Haiti remains one of the core issues, as it is a pre-
condition for the achievement of a wide range of
objectives being pursued in Haiti - such as the
creation of an environment conducive to democratic
elections, the consolidation of State institutions, the
fostering of national dialogue and improving the
economic situation. The persistent violence perpetrated
by illegal armed groups constitutes an extremely
worrying sign of the many dangers that continue to
threaten this severely tested country. Such violence can
undermine ongoing stabilization efforts and disrupt the
transition process. We support the efforts of the
Transitional Government to curb violence while
observing universally recognized human rights and the
standards of the rule of law.
The role of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in upholding
Government efforts to bring about peace and
reconciliation in the country remains decisive. We
commend troop-contributing countries for their
investment in that operation. They did deliver on their
commitment to deploy the Mission in a timely manner
throughout Haiti's regions.

We are encouraged by the recent large-scale joint
operation conducted by MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police in the troubled districts of Port-au-
Prince. Further action of that kind is still needed as a
matter of urgency to continue to redress the current
security situation.

Romania also acknowledges the difference that an
effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programme would make to the overall
improvement of the security picture. That is the reason
for our call for the establishment without further delay
of a national commission responsible for carrying out a
comprehensive, country-wide DDR programme.

On the political front, we are encouraged by the
commitment of the Transitional Government to
organize elections in 2005 and to ensure the subsequent
transfer of power by February 2006. The decisions of
the Provisional Electoral Council regarding the timing
and budget for elections should lead to greater clarity
with regard to the schedule for the transitional period
and the needs associated with international assistance
for elections. In that regard, Romania welcomes the
signing on 10 January of the global accord on an
important assistance project for elections by the
Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Provisional Electoral
Council. The assistance pledged on that occasion
aimed at covering the most immediate aspects of the
elections is new evidence of a strong international
commitment to the holding of free and fair elections. It
also attests to the good cooperation prevailing among
international and local partners in Haiti. We look
forward to an inclusive political process, without
which - as rightly asserted in the latest report of the
Secretary-General - no sustainable peace and security
can be achieved.

As always, Romania attaches great importance to
combating impunity and to the due observance of
human rights by all parties. Arbitrary detentions should
stop without delay. The Transitional Government must
release those against whom no charges have yet been
brought, and bring to justice those responsible for
human rights violations. Accordingly, reforming the
judiciary has to be a high priority in Haiti.

As a country that promotes cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
Romania remains supportive of enhanced involvement
on the part of regional organizations in efforts aimed at
stabilization and development in Haiti. The streamlined
working relationship between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States (OAS) in Haiti
once again demonstrates the political weight and
effective impact of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in stabilization
processes, which is a theme that Romania is attempting
to pursue in the course of its mandate as an elected
member of the Council.

The stabilization and development of Haiti was
strengthened with the recent establishment of the Core
Group on Haiti. A positive development has been the
use of the cooperation architecture employed there in
the area of electoral assistance. We also welcome the
recent signing of a memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations and OAS on coordination
of electoral assistance to Haiti, as well as the
indications of increased cooperation between
MINUSTAH and the International Organization of la
Francophonie and other relevant organizations and
partners involved in the electoral process.

In fostering functioning democracy in Haiti, it is
of the utmost importance that development projects are
launched and implemented with the help of the United
Nations, international financial institutions and
Member States. Such projects have to be "quick
starters" and have an immediate impact on the living
conditions of the population, for there can hardly be
democracy in a country where the basic needs of the
population are not fully provided for. Accordingly, we
agree with the need to establish a long-term
development strategy for Haiti with the assistance of
the international community, as reflected in the interim
cooperation framework. We also welcome the recent
decision by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund to provide emergency assistance for
Haiti's recovery in support of the Government's efforts to
deliver urgently needed basic services to the population.

Finally, I would like to conclude by restating our
conviction that the structural instability in Haiti requires a
long-term commitment and a multidimensional approach
that is based on the lessons learned from the past and
on addressing the core causes of instability, including
the economic and social dimensions. The efforts of the
Transitional Government, the meaningful and effective
involvement of the United Nations through
MINUSTAH and a wide range of other bodies of the
United Nations system, and the impressive regional
cooperation developed in support of Haiti are
important steps towards moving further towards the
day when Haiti regains its rightful place among the
stable, prosperous and democratic States of the world.
The proposed mission of the Security Council to Haiti -
possibly in conjunction with a similar mission by the
Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti - would also be a step in that direction.

Lastly, allow me to restate what I said in the
beginning, namely, that we feel very privileged to have
you, Mr. President, preside over this important meeting
of the Council.

