Mr. Brown (United Kingdom): With the
unanimous agreement today, under the leadership of
President Obama, and with the great speeches that have
been made around this table, we are sending a united,
unequivocal and undivided message across the world
today that we, as leaders of nuclear-weapon States and
non-nuclear-weapon States, are together committed to
creating the conditions for a world free from nuclear
weapons.

Today's meeting is also a recognition that we are
at a decisive moment. We face the risks of a new and
dangerous era of new State nuclear-weapon holders
and perhaps even non-State nuclear-weapon holders.
So, as we prepare for next year's summit in
Washington, DC, and the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons - and, I am pleased to say, on the
advice that we have received from the great statesmen
who are here today, Mr. Schultz, Mr. Perry,
Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Nunn, as well as from all the
countries around this table - I believe we should be
prepared to act now to renew and refresh for our times
the global bargain that is at the heart of the non-
proliferation Treaty. It is a bargain under which we
affirm the rights and responsibilities of those countries
which forgo nuclear weapons, and it is a bargain under
which there are tough responsibilities to be discharged
by nuclear-weapon States.

I believe that there are three elements to the
renewal of the non-proliferation Treaty. First, we have
to be clear that civil nuclear power remains an essential
part of any solution to the challenges of climate change
and energy security, that that means that access to this
affordable, safe and dependable energy source must be
expanded and that, as we have heard from Africa today,
we should be prepared to offer access to civil nuclear
power to non-nuclear-weapon States.

In doing so, I believe that we must, as the
international community, be completely confident that
we are able to ensure effective mechanisms for
multilateral control of the entire fuel cycle,
safeguarding fissile material and preventing
proliferation with tough and immediate sanctions for
those who break the rules. Our country recently
published ideas on how that might be done and how we
might establish a new partnership among industry,
academia and Governments to solve the technical and
policy challenges in this area. I hope that others will
join us in this work.

Secondly, accompanied with access of non-
nuclear-power States to civil nuclear power, we must
strengthen the non-proliferation regime, for increased
access to civil nuclear power must not mean increased
risk of the further proliferation of nuclear weapons. I
believe that the lesson of recent months is that we
cannot stand by when Iran and North Korea reject the
opportunities of peaceful civil nuclear power and
instead take steps to develop nuclear weapons in a way
that threatens regional peace and security.

Today, I believe, we have to draw a line in the
sand. Iran must not allow its actions to prevent the
international community from moving forward to a
more peaceful era. And, as evidence of its breach of
international agreements grows, we must now consider
far tougher sanctions together. I believe that, in future,
the onus of proof must be on those who breach the
non-proliferation Treaty, and we must give the
International Atomic Energy Agency the resources it
requires to meet and discharge its responsibilities.

I hope that we can also make more progress on
securing the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and make real advances on a
fissile material cut-off treaty. And we must take
collective action together to enhance nuclear security
globally to ensure that terrorist groups cannot gain
access to nuclear materials. I warmly welcome
President Obama's initiative to hold a summit on
nuclear security next year. Today, the United Kingdom
deposited with the United Nations our instrument of
ratification of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and I hope
that other countries will do likewise.

But there is a third obligation in these future
negotiations. Nuclear-weapon States must pursue
active disarmament with a credible road map that will
command the confidence of all non-nuclear-weapon
States. We should commit to making irreversible the
steps on disarmament that we have already taken; we
should work together to map out the next steps on the
road to the elimination of nuclear weapons. Credibility
is the key, and the International Atomic Energy Agency
already undertakes detailed inspections. We need to be
more transparent if we are rapidly and verifiably to
reduce nuclear weapons globally.

The United Kingdom has already taken some
major steps towards disarmament, reducing by 75 per
cent the explosive power of our stockpile. France has
made important progress too. And, of course, the
United States and Russia have made strong progress on
negotiating a new treaty on strategic offensive arms.
The current plan to reduce warhead stockpiles to fewer
than 1,500 should, in our view, be followed by further
reductions of all nuclear-weapon types. Thereafter, we
believe, the talks should be expanded to include all
other countries. Britain is determined to play its part in
full, making our deterrent part of a broader negotiation.

We stand ready to participate and to act. I pledge
today that the United Kingdom will retain only the
absolute minimum credible and continuing nuclear
deterrent capability. As a demonstration of that pledge,
I can say that today, subject to technical analysis and to
progress in multilateral negotiations, my aim is that,
when the next class of submarines enters service in the
mid-2020s, our fleet should be reduced from four boats
to three. I have therefore directed our National Security
Committee to report to me before the end of this year.

This conference today recognizes that we are at a
watershed moment. The choices being made now by
each nation will determine whether we face a future
arms race or a future of arms control. But if we rise to
this challenge, then our generation - a generation that
has known all too often only the horrors of conflict and
the perils of proliferation - will be remembered not
for the years of tension, but for the years of progress.
And we will be remembered for the time we came
together to secure the future of our world for
generations to come.
