I would like to thank the President for convening today's important and timely meeting on peacekeeping operations. While the world is dealing with the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, peacekeeping operations must cope with the challenge of implementing their mandates in the prevailing global health crisis. Ihave the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African States members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We would like to thank Brigadier-General Maureen O'Brien, the Deputy Force Commander of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), Lieutenant-General Shailesh Tinaikar, Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and Lieutenant-General Dennis Gyllensporre, Force Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for their briefings. The Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterate their support for United Nations peacekeeping as one of the mechanisms at the disposal of the Organization to strengthen international peace and security and to promote the protection of civilians in particular. We further echo the view that supports pursuing peacekeeping operations that are relevant, effective, efficient and fit for purpose. We are pleased that the Action for Peacekeeping initiative has helped to delineate the respective roles and responsibilities of the United Nations, troop- and police-contributing countries, host countries and regional organizations. However, we note with concern the changing nature of threats to international peace and security and the complex, volatile and dangerous environments in which peacekeeping missions operate, including their increasing exposure to asymmetrical threats, in particular MINUSMA, the African Union Mission in Somalia and to a certain extent the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). MONUSCO remains the United Nations peacekeeping mission with the highest number of casualties. Our peacekeepers are increasingly becoming vulnerable and frequently subjected to targeted attacks. It is against this backdrop that the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines maintain the view that emphasis should be placed on improving the safety and security of peacekeepers by adopting modern technology for use in peacekeeping operations, among other measures. The United Nations should adopt the use of smart technology and enhance key capabilities that enable peacekeepers to counter any attack by armed groups and other forms of asymmetrical threats, which are increasingly prevalent in peacekeeping. The Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines recognize that the prevailing global health crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic has compounded the challenges in relation to the safety and security of peacekeepers. It is essential for the United Nations to mitigate the impact of this pandemic on peacekeepers and improve their safety and security. At the same time, we encourage Force Commanders to ensure that all the necessary measures are implemented within their missions to prevent the transmission of COVID-19 from peacekeepers to civilian populations, as this may significantly tarnish the reputation of the United Nations mission and aggravate anti-international sentiments that exist in some theatres of operation. The 2010 cholera outbreak in Haiti is a pertinent example. There, the unmanaged spread of a disease among peacekeepers created significant challenges for the host country and led to permanent reputational damage for the United Nations. The Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also encourage those missions that have had varying degrees of success in implementing their mandates during the pandemic to share their experiences and lessons learned with host-State authorities in order to strengthen capacities and build resilience. We note the close link between Security Council mandates given to peacekeeping missions and their performance. The performance of peace operations depends on the nature of the mandate, capabilities, available resources and appropriate force multipliers and enablers commensurate with the needs of the peacekeepers in their various theatres of operation. The Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines attach great importance to issues of effectiveness of peace operations, but the performance of peacekeeping missions must be assessed in a fair and evidence-based manner. As a beacon of hope for many civilians, it is incumbent on United Nations uniformed and civilian personnel to uphold the values of the United Nations and conduct themselves in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Organization. Misconduct by United Nations peacekeeping personnel must not be tolerated. In this regard, we are committed to eradicating sexual exploitation and abuse committed by our forces. We have taken corrective measures to address this problem. In addition, greater emphasis should be put on cultural awareness of peacekeepers in host countries in order to avoid unnecessary misunderstandings and to harness the support of local communities. On 29 May, we celebrated the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. The theme for this year was "Women in Peacekeeping: A Key to Peace". As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we must acknowledge that some of the objectives of the resolution have not been achieved, including aspects pertaining to peacekeeping operations, where women remain underrepresented. We therefore reiterate our position that transformative strategies must be adopted to fully implement the commitments made with respect to advancing the women and peace and security agenda. These strategies should, inter alia, implement the aspirations set forth in resolution 2242 (2015) and the United Nations uniformed gender parity strategy for the period 2018-2028 to increase the deployment of uniformed women in military and police roles, including in leadership positions. All means must therefore be pursued to ensure the realization of these goals, including targeted recruitment, adequate and appropriate facilities conducive for women peacekeepers, and women mentorship and training programmes to ensure higher levels of participation for women in peacekeeping operations. Finally, we encourage the United Nations to strengthen its cooperation with regional organizations in the field of peacekeeping. We welcome the mutually enriching continued support and collaboration we are seeing, particularly in these difficult times, in efforts to alleviate the impact of COVID-19. We take this opportunity to commend the continued commitment of troop- and police-contributing countries and the sacrifices that uniformed and civilian personnel have made in implementing United Nations peacekeeping mandates in challenging environments and in adapting to the current difficulties posed by COVID-19.
