Ms. French (United States): I would like to thank
Special Representative Fall and Secretary-General
Allam-Mi for their briefings today and for all their
work in Central Africa, which is facing a challenging
set of political, economic and social issues.

We would like to take this opportunity to focus on
the situation in Cameroon, which demands the attention
of both the Security Council and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). We are
concerned about the fact that the situation continues to
deteriorate, with increasing levels of violence, including
against civilians, witnessed in the past few weeks.
Recent press reports indicate that as many as 40 people
were killed in the north-west region of the country in
the last week of May. The stakes in Cameroon are too
high for this crisis to continue without being addressed.
Cameroon continues to be an essential security partner
in the fight against Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
West Africa, including as a member of the Multinational
Joint Task Force.

The ongoing crisis in the anglophone regions
threatens to detract from our mutual security
objectives in the region of the Lake Chad basin. If
confidence-building steps leading to a meaningful,
broad-based dialogue are not taken now, tensions
could increase further, leading to the potential for
violence related to the forthcoming elections this
autumn, and to the possibility that the legitimacy of the
election results could be called into question. We have
unfortunately seen far too many examples of tensions
spiking in the Central African region during and after
electoral processes, and it is clear that we will have to
remain vigilant in that regard in the coming months
in Cameroon.

While we welcomed President Biya's public
commitment to dialogue at the beginning of this year,
and while we recognize the initial work of Cameroon's
commission for bilingualism and multiculturalism,
we are concerned about the fact that there has been
little progress to date towards a peaceful resolution.
Most of the constitutional reforms of 1996 calling for
decentralization, which may have helped to defuse
tensions, have so far not been implemented. It is
essential that all parties take steps immediately to
de-escalate the crisis and protect civilians from harm.
In that regard, we believe that Mr. Fall and UNOCA
have an important role to play in engaging with all
parties in Cameroon in order to encourage constructive
engagement, accountability for the allegations of abuse,
and a de-escalation of tensions. We look forward in the
coming months to further discussions with the Council
about the situation in Cameroon.

