Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
by that resolution. The report covers the period from
10 December 2013 to 10 March 2014, during which
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations.

On 10 February, I provided an open briefing to all
Member States, noting that while the total number of
issues before the Committee had decreased over the
past year, the complexity of the issues had significantly
increased. I reminded delegations that the Committee
and the Panel of Experts relied on the cooperation of
Member States to successfully undertake their work
and asked delegations to respond to the Committee's
and the Panel's letters in due course and to consider
favourably any requests for visits made by the Panel.
The Panel, which participated via video-teleconference,
explained the two-way arms embargo, with a focus on
detailing exemptions to the arms embargo into Libya,
highlighting the need for Member States supplying
lethal materiel to the Libyan Government to include
a note from the Libyan body responsible for arms
procurement - the Military Procurement Department
in the Libyan Ministry of Defence - in order to
minimize the risk of supplies being diverted to various
armed groups, who might at a later stage use these
supplies to undermine the Government's authority.

Concerning the asset freeze, the Panel reported
that some Member States lacked the national legal
framework to properly implement the asset-freeze
measures. Furthermore, the Panel stressed that where
frozen assets belonging to designated individuals were
sought by the Libyan Government on the grounds that
they were stolen from the Libyan people, this should
occur only after a competent court had made a finding
to that effect.

Concerning the travel ban, the Panel encouraged
delegations to share with the Committee or the Panel any
information they may have about the listed individuals.

On 15 February 2014, the Committee received the
final report of the Panel of Experts under resolution
2095 (2013). Iwill briefly summarize some observations
contained in the final report. Concerning the arms
embargo, the Panel concluded that the proliferation of
weapons to and from Libya remained a major challenge
to the stability of Libya and the region. In that context,
the Panel noted that the control of non-State armed
actors over the majority of stockpiles in Libya, as
well as ineffective border control systems, remained
primary obstacles to countering proliferation and that
Libya had become a primary source of illicit weapons,
including man-portable air defence systems. The Panel
further noted that investigations relating to transfers
to 14 countries reflected a highly diversified range
of trafficking dynamics and that trafficking from
Libya was fuelling conflict and insecurity, including
terrorism, on several continents, which was unlikely to
change in the near future.

While the Panel lauded the creation of the Military
Procurement Department as the focal point for security
assistance, it expressed concern about a number of
outstanding issues: the lack of centralized oversight
of military procurement; the absence of identified
procurement focal points for Ministries other than
the Ministry of Defence; the lack of clarity regarding
precise end-users; and the limited capacity of the
various forces to manage and secure their stockpiles.
Finally, the Panel also expressed concern about
transfers to Libya in violation of the arms embargo,
including non-notified deliveries to the national forces
and transfers to non-State end-users, in particular the
civilian market.

Concerning the asset freeze, the Panel focused
its efforts on the hidden assets of listed individuals,
including those of Saadi Al-Qadhafi. The Panel
revealed further instances of Member States lacking
the legislative capacity to implement the asset-
freeze measure, which in one instance resulted in the
dissipation of almost $2 million in funds that should
have been frozen. The Panel expressed concern about
the confusion as to the means and the legality of
repatriating frozen assets allegedly stolen by designated
individuals to Libya.

With regard to the travel ban, the Panel reported
that two individuals listed under the travel ban, Aisha
Al-Qadhafi and Mohammed Al-Qadhafi, had left
Algeria and travelled to Oman, in violation of the travel
ban, and that it continued to investigate an alleged plot
to smuggle Saadi Al-Qadhafi and his family to Mexico
in 2011.

The Committee discussed the report and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in informal
consultations on 26 February. The report was generally
well received and lauded for its wealth of information.
The main points that emerged from the discussion
were the serious concern about the persistent arms
proliferation from Libya; the need to further clarify
arms procurement structures and procedures in Libya;
cooperation with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya concerning the storage and security of stockpiles;
and how to carry forward the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts. Of the 15 recommendations, the
Committee agreed to take follow-up action on 9. Two
recommendations required no action and the Committee
simply took note of them, and two recommendations
were addressed to the Security Council. The Committee
put on hold the remaining two recommendations
pending the outcome of follow-up action related to
other recommendations.

Lastly, let me refer to some updated statistics on
the issues dealt with by the Committee since the last
periodic report to the Council. In relation to the arms
embargo, the Committee approved two exemption
requests and received two notifications on which no
negative decision was taken. The Committee also
responded to one request for guidance from a Member
State.

