The Secretary-General: I appreciate this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Libya and to discuss events in the wake of
the Council's adoption of resolution 1973 (2011).

At the Paris summit convened on 19 March by
President Sarkozy, the international community called
for an immediate ceasefire and agreed to undertake the
necessary measures, pursuant to resolution 1973
(2011), to stop the brutal campaign of violence by the
Libyan regime against its own people.

Resolution 1973 (2011) also reaffirmed Libya's
sovereignty and territorial integrity and explicitly
foreclosed any foreign occupation of Libyan territory.

Those issues dominated discussions during my
recent travels. Authorities in Egypt and Tunisia were
deeply concerned about their nationals who were still
in Libya and about the heavy burden of caring for
refugees at their borders, as well as about the daunting
task of reintegrating nationals who had left the country.

In all of my meetings, public and private alike, I
took special care to stress that action under resolution
1973 (2011) was governed by an overriding objective,
namely, to save the lives of innocent civilians.

The international community has acted together
to avert a potentially large-scale crisis. I expect the
international community to continue to exercise full
diligence in avoiding civilian casualties and collateral
damage.
2
Finally, I emphasized how important it is for the
international community to speak with one voice both
in implementing resolution 1973 (2011) and in dealing
with the humanitarian situation. Tunisia and Egypt,
because they have borne the brunt of the refugee crisis,
deserve high praise.

Let me now update members on the
implementation of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011). As members are aware, military strikes were
initiated on 19 March by United States and European
forces with the objective of effectively establishing a
no-fly zone over the country. That campaign is
ongoing. Libyan authorities have repeatedly claimed
that they have instituted a ceasefire, including in a call
to me by the Prime Minister of Libya on 19 March. We
see no evidence that that is the case. To the contrary,
fierce battles continue in or around the cities of
Ajdabiya, Misratah and Zitan, among others. In short,
there is no evidence that Libyan authorities have taken
steps to carry out their obligations under resolutions
1970 (2011) or 1973 (2011).

From the beginning, the United Nations has
engaged in strong diplomatic efforts. I have kept in
close touch with all parties, including Libyan
authorities. I have called repeatedly for an immediate
end to the violence and for unrestricted humanitarian
access. In this context, let me note that humanitarian
aid is exempt from the sanctions regime.

On 13 March, my Special Envoy to Libya,
Mr. Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib, visited Tripoli accompanied
by the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator. They
and their teams undertook broad consultations with the
Libyan Foreign Minister and other senior officials. My
Envoy set forth the international community's position
clearly and unequivocally. Attacks on civilians must
stop; those responsible for crimes against their people
will be held accountable; safe humanitarian access
must be guaranteed; and resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) must be implemented in full.

The Special Envoy emphasized that it was in
Libya's best interest to cease hostilities and change the
dynamics of the crisis. If Libya did not act to comply
with resolution 1973 (20110, the Envoy stated, the Security Council may be prepared to take additional
measures. The Libyan Foreign Minister responded by
claiming that the Government had been forced to act as
it has by perceived threats from Al-Qaida and lslamist
terrorists. He also told the Special Envoy that Libyan
11-27608
authorities had offered an amnesty to rebels who laid
down their arms. Further, he stressed that mechanisms
should be put in place so that rebel forces are also
required to abide by any ceasefire.

On 21 March, my Special Envoy met with leaders
of the Libyan armed opposition, including the
Chairman of the Libyan Transitional National Council,
in Tobruk. They reiterated their call for a ceasefire and
for the lifting of the siege imposed by Libyan
Government forces on some cities in rebel hands. They
also expressed deep concern about the hardships
inflicted on the Libyan people and demanded an end to
the use of tanks and heavy weaponry targeting
civilians. They further requested that we quickly
dispatch a humanitarian assessment mission to all parts
of the country.

Yesterday, I held an informal meeting with the
African Union Commission Chairman, Mr. Jean Ping,
and discussed at length how the United Nations and the
African Union can work together to resolve the Libyan
situation. Tomorrow, my Special Envoy will travel to
Addis Ababa for a meeting convened by the African
Union. Representatives of both the Libyan Government
and the opposition will attend, as will representatives
of relevant Member States and regional organizations.
Their aim is to reach a ceasefire and political solution.

Resolution 1973 (2011) demands that the Libyan
authorities comply with their obligations under
international law. The United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator and his team have had only limited access.
We continue to have serious concerns, however, about
the protection of civilians, abuses of human rights,
violations of international humanitarian law, and the
access of civilian populations to basic commodities and
services in areas currently under siege.

More than 335,658 people have fled Libya since
the beginning of the crisis. Some 9,000 remain
stranded along Libya's borders with Tunisia and Egypt.
As of 21 March, the International Organization for
Migration and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees have provided evacuation
assistance for more than 60,000 people leaving Libya.
The regional flash appeal for the Libyan crisis, which
requested $160.3 million, is 63 per cent funded. There
are also contingency plans to deal with possible new
waves of migrants and refugees totalling as many as
200,000 to 250,000 people.
11-27608

Meanwhile, the World Food Programme has
received reports that food prices in Libya are rising
sharply, with the price of flour, for example, doubling
in recent weeks. The United Nations and the Libyan
authorities continue to be far apart in their respective
analyses of the scope and scale of the humanitarian
situation. No agreement has been reached on how an
inter-agency needs-assessment mission would be
carried out. I would like to remind all parties currently
engaged in hostilities in Libya of their obligations
under international humanitarian law to allow and
facilitate the safe, rapid and unimpeded access of
humanitarian organizations to populations in need.

My Special Envoy's mission was too brief to
reach definitive conclusions about the human rights
situation, but he found many worrying signs, including
threats and incitement against the armed opposition.
Colonel Al-Qadhafi's threats were aired repeatedly on
national television. Journalists continue to be arrested.
Foreign reporters in Tripoli told the United Nations
mission about the population's general state of fear,
tight control by the security services, and instances of
arrest and disappearances.

In light of these findings, the Special Envoy
informed the Government of Libya of the intention of
the Human Rights Council to create an independent
international commission of inquiry that will
investigate all alleged violations of international
human rights law in Libya, identify those responsible,
make recommendations and report to the Human
Rights Council. The Special Envoy formally requested
the cooperation of the Government of Libya with the
commission of inquiry, and this request was met with a
positive response, although specific actions were not
discussed.

Resolution 1973 (2011) requests Member States
to notify my office immediately of the measures they
take or intend to take to protect civilians, enforce the
no-fly zone, and facilitate humanitarian operations and
evacuation flights. The resolution requires that I report
to the Council within seven days and every month
thereafter on the implementation of the resolution,
including any information on violations of the flight
ban. Today, I am submitting my first report.

So far, the United Kingdom, France, the United
States, Denmark, Canada, Italy, Qatar, Belgium,
Norway, Spain and the United Arab Emirates have sent
letters of notification, circulated to all Council
3
members, in line with the provisions of resolution 1973
(2011). We have also received notification from NATO
of its decision to commence an alliance operation in
support of an arms embargo against Libya pursuant to
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).

I look forward to being kept informed as further
implementing steps are taken by Council Governments,
including the mechanism envisaged in paragraph 8 of
the resolution. I shall also designate a focal point for
coordination within the Secretariat. Similarly, we look
forward to receiving a concept of operations from
Member States, as envisaged in paragraph 11 of the
resolution.

Resolution 1973 (2011) further requests that I set
up a panel of experts to assist the Libya Committee in
monitoring the implementation of the sanctions. The
Secretariat is reviewing its roster of sanctions experts to
identify suitable candidates. Some have already been
contacted. It is expected that those appointed to the
panel will posses expertise in the areas of arms, finance,
transportation - both aviation and maritime - and
customs and border control.

Given the critical situation on the ground, it is
imperative that we continue to act with speed and
decision. The resolution places great responsibilities on
the United Nations system. I assure the Council that we
will work closely with Member States and regional
organizations to coordinate a common, effective and
timely response.

