Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan would like
to welcome you, Mr. President, and to join the other
members of the Council in condemning the recent
terrorist attack outside the Houses of Parliament in
London. We express our condolences to the families of
the victims and wish the injured a speedy recovery.

We congratulate President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo on his election as Head of State
and hope that under his wise stewardship the people
of Somalia can achieve tangible results in restoring
their country. We express our deep appreciation to the
leadership of the Federal Republic of Somalia, Special
Representative Keating and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, for their comprehensive
and thought-provoking updates. We also commend
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for their commitment to bringing peace
and security to the country.

Kazakhstan welcomes the significant political and
electoral progress that has been made in Somalia, as
well as the improvements in the security situation. The
formation of a new Cabinet is an important practical
step in tackling the challenges that the country faces.
Preliminary measures aimed at building stable State
institutions and interministerial coordination should be
taken as soon as possible in order to enact legislation
and develop national strategies. That will provide a
foundation for the rule of law, good governance and
security-sector reform. It is essential that the resources
be found to pay the salaries of the army regularly with
the assistance of the United Nations system, together
with that of regional and international organizations
and financial institutions. We are looking forward to
the upcoming London conference on Somalia, which
will prepare a road map for a future federal security
structure designed to consolidate the current efforts.

The international community should support
Somalia in its efforts to reach the political goal of
achieving one-person, one-vote universal elections in
2020. To that end, technical guidance from the United
Nations Department of Political Affairs, UNSOM. and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union will be required in order
to establish regional and local electoral structures.
The historic momentum towards inclusive democracy,
as seen in the increased representation of women
in the upper and lower houses of Parliament, must
continue. The electoral achievement across the country
would not have occurred without the heroic efforts of
UNSOM, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and especially the bravery
of AMISOM. in combating the destructive acts of
Al-Shabaab. The training and financial and technical
support that AMISOM. needs to enable it to succeed
in the current asymmetrical conflicts it is facing must
therefore be intensified. Kazakhstan is very concerned
about the recent Al-Shabaab attacks and calls for closer
collaboration between the Government, AMISOM,
UNSOM, the United Nations system and other
international partners.

As Chair of the Security Council's Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009), concerning Somalia and Eritrea, Kazakhstan
is striving to promote peace and security in the Horn
of Africa. We underline the importance of ensuring
sufficient financial resources for implementing
Somalia's first national development plan. It is
evident that the United Nations, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and regional financial
institutions should reinforce the Government's
commitment to pursuing the path of sustainable
development. Such goals can be achieved, inter alia,
by introducing macroeconomic measures, including
creating jobs for young people and building the
capacity needed to establish and maintain the new and
stable public institutions that the country is striving
for. Only such national approaches, combined with
a comprehensive and holistic regional strategy that
addresses the issues of security and development, can
ensure lasting peace and stability for the country and
the wider subregion.

Likeothers,weareconcernedaboutthehumanitarian
situation in Somalia caused by the ongoing drought.
Our inability to provide assistance will undermine
the pursuit of key State-building and peacebuilding
initiatives. While we appreciate the efforts of several
countries to host Somali refugees, only a major
concerted effort by the international community can
mitigate the massive problem of refugees that we are
witnessing today. The prevailing tensions and armed
conflicts have resulted in death, violence and human
rights abuses, especially among children, women and
other vulnerable groups. Such acts of violence call for
intensifying the mobilization of protection services
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures by well-trained experts assigned to UNSOM.
Counter-terrorism efforts in Somalia must take into
account the rights, special needs and protection of the
sectors of the civilian population that are affected by
the armed conflict.

Despite the situation, Kazakhstan has hope and
optimism for Somalia with respect to its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, and
we would like to express our full support to the newly
elected President and his new Government in their
vision for Somalia.

