Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mali is
pleased to see the Security Council meeting under your
presidency, Mr. Minister, in this important public
debate on strengthening cooperation with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs). I wish to thank
Ambassador Mahbubani and his team for having taken
the initiative of organizing this debate on an issue that
is relevant to us all.

My delegation was pleased to see that the
countries speaking in this debate represented a very
broad range of countries that, like Mali, have
participated honourably in United Nations
peacekeeping operations throughout the years. It will
be very important to take their opinions into account.

Mali would like to contribute to this collective
reflection by stressing the following points. First, we
think that it is our very real obligation to encourage
genuine dialogue with troop-contributing countries. Of
course, the process of holding consultations between
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop
contributors means holding meetings in accordance
with the guidelines contained in the presidential
statements of4 November 1994 and 28 March 1996.

But there are certain limits in this system, as we
can see from the problems encountered by the United
Nations Protection Force in the Balkans, the United
Nations Operation in Somalia and the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone. We must find and improve
consultation procedures that are in keeping with the
Charter and that allow troop contributors to be properly
heard when they speak about the possible use of their
contingents.

Accordingly, we welcome the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1327 (2000) of 13
November 2000 and General Assembly resolution
55/135 of 8 December 2000, which endorsed the
recommendations made by the Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations with regard to strengthening
consultations between the troop contributors, the
Security Council and the Secretariat.

As the excellent working paper provided by
Singapore for this occasion points out, we must
strengthen consultations and exchange of information
with troop contributors on peacekeeping operations,
including planning, management and coordination. In
this connection, we would advocate more public
meetings like the one held on 4 October 2000 on
UNAMSIL. We agree with the view that in this way we
would be able to build up trust that is essential if
Member States are to provide the necessary resources
and shoulder the risks involved in deploying
peacekeepers.

But - and this is my second comment - this
very necessary trust must be based on a true
partnership between those who decide and those who
implement. As has been recalled time and again, this
close cooperation was lacking in the case of
UNAMSIL, and also in many earlier operations.
Drawing lessons from the past, and to prevent any
recurrence of crisis, Mali would like us to be able to
invoke Articles 43 and 44 of the Charter whenever
useful and whenever possible. Basically, it is a question
of inviting the Member State providing the armed
forces to - and I quote Article 44 - "participate in
decisions of the Security Council concerning the
employment of contingents of that Member's armed
forces". This is what should happen, including in all
aspects of planning peacekeeping mission tasks, in the
evolution of mandates and with regard to the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel.

Along those same lines I would like to mention
here the relations of confidence between the Security
Council and the Economic Community of West African
States, which they decided to strengthen, to develop, in
a spirit of partnership after their meeting on 21 June
2000.

Similarly, we noted with great interest proposals
made in the general debate in the Fourth Committee in
November 2000 on the question of peacekeeping
operations in all its aspects. These proposals have been
repeated by their authors here today. In large part we
share those views, especially what was said by India,
Jordan and Pakistan.

To ensure success for United Nations
peacekeeping operations - this is my third and last
point - it is important to strengthen the Secretariat's
capacity to plan, deploy and conduct operations. Here,
we fully support measures recommended in the
Brahimi report and supported by the Secretary-General
in his implementation report of 20 October 2000.

In conclusion, I would just like to say that as far
as Mali is concerned, the United Nations can have no
future as a guarantor of international peace and security
unless it achieves the triptych of dialogue, partnership
and modernization.

