Mr. Zoubi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the
sisterly Libyan Arab J amahiriya on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month and to congratulate your predecessor, who
skilfully conducted the work of the Council last month.

My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Palestinian question continues to be at the
core of the conflict in the Middle East, and there
continues to be an urgent need to find a peaceful
solution that will lead to a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace accepted by all parties. There is no
alternative to the two-State solution. All parties must
seriously engage in negotiations targeted at achieving
the only possible solution: an independent Palestinian
State. Peace and stability in the region and for its
peoples can be achieved only through a peaceful
solution based on the two-State vision.

The peace to which Arabs aspire is one based on
the restoration of the Palestinian people's legitimate
rights, including their right to establish an independent,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State on their
national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative,
which is a basic attempt to address all aspects of the
Israeli-Arab conflict. In that regard, Jordan welcomes
the efforts of the Quartet. We commend the European
Union, the Russian Federation and the United Nations,
including the Security Council, and approve of the
positive moves by the United States Administration in
embarking directly on peace efforts. We also commend
and appreciate the international support for efforts to
find a solution to the problems in the Middle East, and
we hope that it will be reciprocated by all parties
concerned.

Jordan condemns all unilateral measures and
practices that obstruct the peace process, in particular
the settlement activities being carried out in East
Jerusalem. Moreover, the natural growth in the existing
settlements in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and East
Jerusalem constitutes a violation of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, threatens the negotiations on final status
and runs counter to Israel's obligations. Such activities
remain an obstacle to the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State.

Israel, the occupying Power, must refrain from
any attempts to change the character of East Jerusalem,
including excavations near the Al-Aqsa mosque, and
put an end to its aggressions against Islamic sites,
notably the historic Ma'man Allah cemetery, which
contains the tombs of prominent Arab and Muslim
personages, and to its attempts to deface or eliminate
its Islamic and Arab features and to build a museum
over it. Israel must halt those illegal and sacrilegious
activities and respect Jordan's special and historical
role in preserving those Muslim holy sites, in
accordance with the provisions of the Jordan-Israel
Peace Treaty.

The Security Council should exert pressure on
Israel to put an immediate end to its aggressions, which
can only increase tension in the region. Israel's
unilateral and illegal measures, which seek to create
new facts on the ground, to eliminate Jerusalem's Arab
and Islamic character and alter its legal status,
constitute aggressions against the rights of the
Palestinian people, sacred Muslim shrines and the
Islamic heritage, whose preservation has been called
for by UNESCO. Those measures run counter to all
international norms and resolutions calling on Israel to
maintain the historic sites and religious shrines in
Jerusalem.

Israel must fully lift its blockade on Gaza, open
all crossing points and refrain from obstructing the
efforts of humanitarian relief agencies to meet
humanitarian needs and provide medical treatment. The
humanitarian situation in Gaza remains desperate.
Gaza must be rebuilt, and the devastating effects of the
Israel invasion must be addressed.

My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will seriously and expeditiously consider the report of
the Board of Inquiry established to investigate Israeli
against United Nations facilities in Gaza. Jordan is
fully committed to supporting its Palestinian brothers
and sisters, alleviating their suffering and providing
them with humanitarian assistance through Hashemite
philanthropic agencies. We also stand ready to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
provided by other States and entities. Typically,
between 18 and 24 trucks leave Jordan daily. As of
18 March, a total of 47 convoys, comprising 804
trucks, have left Jordan since the aggression against
Gaza.
