Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): At the outset,
I would like to express my deep condolences to the
delegation of Cote d'Ivoire. Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
attended the Brazilian Diplomatic Academy, and we
were both in the same class. He was a very dear friend
and colleague, and we will miss him.

(spoke in Spanish)
I wish to thank the Peruvian mission for convening
this open debate. We believe that the United Nations as
a whole and the Security Council in particular have a
pivotal role to play in seeking solutions to the complex
and prolonged conflicts that affect the Middle East.

Once again, Brazil wishes to express its full support
for implementing a two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, with Palestine and Israel living side
by side in peace and security, within mutually agreed
and internationally recognized borders based on the
1967 borders and in accordance with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the parameters of
the peace process. Moreover, the Brazilian Government
reaffirms its understanding that the final status of the
city of Jerusalem must be defined through negotiations
between Israel and Palestine based on the relevant
Council resolutions, particularly resolutions 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016).

Brazil is following the situation in the Gaza
Strip with concern, against the backdrop of the
demonstrations of recent weeks. We reiterate our
conviction that civilians should be able to exercise their
right to demonstrate peacefully. The recent escalation
has caused many deaths and unnecessary injuries,
including among young people. We call on the parties
to refrain from any act that could put more civilians
in danger.

Recent developments in Syria continue to demand
the urgent attention of the Security Council. The
Brazilian Government expresses its great concern
over the escalation of the conflict in recent weeks, and
once again condemns the use of chemical weapons. We
reaffirm that it is imperative to conduct thorough and
impartial investigations into all allegations of chemical
attacks and that, if confirmed, those responsible must
be brought to justice.

Emerging from the conflict in Syria, however, will
require full respect for international law. In that context,
Brazil reiterates its belief that the conflict can be
brought to an end only through political means through
negotiations, under the auspices of the United Nations,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our
full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura and the political negotiations in Geneva. The
international community must send an unequivocal
message in support of an inclusive political solution to
the crisis in Syria. We are also deeply concerned about
the situation in northern Syria and the violence in Idlib
and Afrin. We call on all relevant parties to respect
international law.

In Yemen, we are currently witnessing one of the
most serious humanitarian disasters in the world. We
deeply regret the recent escalation of hostilities and
all violations of international law and international
humanitarian law arising from conflict. We reiterate
that the only way to end the Yemeni conflict and
address the humanitarian crisis is a negotiated political
solution through an inclusive dialogue.

In that regard, we reaffirm our full support for the
work of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. We welcomed
his early contacts with the parties to the conflict
with attention and optimism, and we wish to offer
our strongest support for his proposal to resume the
negotiations, based on parameters that will be defined
in the coming months. We call on all parties to work
with the Special Envoy and to return to the negotiating
table without preconditions. We also reiterate the need
to respect resolution 2216 (2015) on the arms embargo
on Yemen, and we urge all Member States to observe
its provisions.

In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its adamant support
for the efforts of the Government and the people of
Lebanon towards stability and development. In that
context, we underline the vital role played by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and its Maritime
Task Force in stabilizing a highly volatile environment.
Brazil is proud to lead the Maritime Task force, at its
helm since 2011.

