The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zivalj
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) took the
seat reserved for him at the Side of the Council

Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Coordinator of United Nations Operations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 14 September 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
transmitting the twentieth report on the activities of the
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
document S/200l/868.

As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I invite Council members who wish to take
the floor to so indicate to the Secretariat as from now.

Following statements by the Council members, I
will give the floor to those Member States that have
asked to speak under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

Before giving the floor to those who wish to
speak, I should like to extend the apologies of the
members of the Council to all those who have had to
wait, starting with Mr. Petritsch and Mr. Klein. In our
consultations we had an important discussion on the
question of terrorism, which delayed the beginning of
this public meeting. If members of the Council agree,
we can have an hour's discussion now, until 1.15 p.m.,
and conclude our meeting, and then resume it at 3 pm.
sharp.

I hear no objection.

I now invite the Council to hear briefings by Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

I now give the floor to the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch.

