Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Singapore deplores
in the strongest terms all acts of violence and terror
that target civilians, and we call for an end to extreme
acts by both sides. The latest Israeli attack in a
residential area in Gaza, resulting in the death and
injury of innocent Palestinian civilians, is not only
highly regrettable in itself, but will also have the ill-
timed effect of potentially rolling back the positive
movement generated by recent concerted international
efforts.

We agree with the characterization made by
several world leaders, including the Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom, Mr. Jack Straw, who said that
the attack was unacceptable and counterproductive. We
join the Secretary-General in calling on the
Government of Israel to halt such actions and to
conduct itself in a manner that is fully consistent with
international humanitarian law.

Israel has the right and, in fact, the responsibility
to protect its own civilians from terrorist attacks.
However, we understand that the Palestinian Authority,
with the support of regional players, has been working
with Palestinian groups to put a stop to the suicide
bombings and other acts of terror against the Israeli
population. The recent Israeli attack undercuts such
efforts and undermines Israel's legitimate right to
defend itself from terror. It is also, of course,
counterproductive to international efforts to find just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

One wrong act does not justify another. We take
this opportunity to appeal to the Palestinians to
exercise maximum restraint in this critical phase, and
we call on both parties to maintain their stated support
for a negotiated settlement. We also urge the
Palestinian Authority to continue to work with all
Palestinian groups to stop all acts of terror, which have
been widely recognized as undermining the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to statehood. We
note that Ambassador Al-Kidwa reiterated in his
statement today that

"Indeed, the Palestinian side has condemned this
practice [of suicide bombings] that has
undermined the Palestinian national interest".

The current situation clearly demands the
continued and sustained engagement of the Security
Council. In this regard, we are pleased that the Council
has responded promptly to the request by the Arab
Group in convening this open debate, which, we hope,
will defuse the situation on the ground. We hope that
the Palestinian people will take comfort in the fact that
we all share their outrage.

The Security Council should continue to find
ways to implement its own resolutions. Singapore
believes that the best way of addressing the situation is
through implementation of relevant Council
resolutions, including 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Non-
implementation of its resolutions weakens the
Council's authority, including its ability to ensure full
compliance with its other resolutions.

Ultimately, the resolution of the Middle East
problem is contingent on achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace agreement and the normalization
of relations within countries in the region. We hope
that the international community will not be held
hostage by the actions of extremists on both sides who
are determined to disrupt the peace process.
Preparations for the proposed international
conference must begin soon in order to make
substantive progress towards the vision outlined in
resolution 1397 (2002) with definite timelines. This
should build on relevant Council resolutions; and
existing peace agreements and understandings,
including the negotiations at Camp David in the year
2000; and the subsequent discussions at Taba, as well
as the Tenet Work Plan, the Mitchell Report and the
Arab peace initiative. It is important for the
international conference to address the issues of
security, peace and economic distress in parallel.

We also hope that the Secretary-General's idea
for the deployment of an impartial, robust and credible
multinational force, which could create a secure
environment and the political space to allow the
comprehensive strategic framework to take root, will
not be forgotten. Only by adopting such a
comprehensive framework can the security needs of
Israel and the political aspirations of the Palestinian
people be addressed simultaneously.

In order to achieve the comprehensive solution
that we all support, we need a strong diplomatic
vehicle to drive the process. Given the difficult
political terrain of the Middle East, we believe that the
"quartet" may provide the strong four-wheel-drive
diplomatic vehicle that is needed. Here we welcome in
particular the latest joint statement by the "quartet",
issued only 11 days ago on 16 July. It has an important
paragraph that I would like to quote:

"Consistent with President Bush's June 24
statement, the UN, EU and Russia express their
strong support for the goal of achieving a final
Israeli-Palestinian settlement which, with
intensive effort on security and reform by all,
could be reached within three years from now.
The UN, EU and Russia welcome President
Bush's commitment to active U. S. leadership
toward that goal. The 'Quartet' remains
committed to implementing the vision of two
states, Israel and an independent, viable and
democratic Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, as affirmed by UN Security Council
Resolution 1397." (S/PRST/2002/20, annex)

When Council members met in informal
consultations two days later to discuss, and then
endorse, the statement by the "quartet", there was
considerable interest in the three-year time frame that it
established. We now hope that the "quartet" will take
the next steps and spell out the specific time lines and
target that have to be met to achieve this three-year
goal.

