Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): We are grateful to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
for his very comprehensive and useful briefing this
morning. We have noted the progress made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in preparations for the elections in
Kosovo and in finalizing the institutions of provisional
self-government.

However, we are concerned about the security
situation, in particular about reports that several
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK police members
were recently injured during riots following a car
accident in the north of Mitrovica. Such attacks on
United Nations personnel are serious, and they hamper
the work of those people who are dedicated to bringing
peace to the province. The population of Kosovo must
be made to understand that taking out their frustration
on KFOR and United Nations personnel will not help
solve their problem. The political leaders must do
everything possible to convince their partisans not to
resort to violence. We also deplore the murder of five
members of a Kosovo Albanian family near Pristina on
20 August 2001 and the attack on a Serb convoy, which
left three persons injured at the beginning of the month.
These violent acts negatively impact on the creation of
a safe environment for displaced persons and refugees
to return to Kosovo and undermine efforts to bring
peace and stability to the region. We equally deplore
attempts at political assassinations, as well as
continuing organized crime activities. We support
UNMIK efforts at curbing such acts, while stressing
that it is the responsibility of the Kosovars themselves
to create conditions conducive to a multi-ethnic
Kosovo.

With a large number of refugees in the province
and with the closure of the border at Blace, the work of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo is being
considerably hampered. We call on the Government of
Macedonia to make arrangements for the re-opening of
the route for easy access of supplies to United Nations
personnel in Kosovo and for the return of refugees in
Macedonia. We have noted KFOR's seizure of
weapons, such as pistols, grenades, ammunition and
anti-personnel landmines. My delegation encourages
KFOR in its operations to cut down the supply lines of
the extremists. We also call on all those who have
contact with the extremists to persuade them to cease
violence and to participate in the UNMIK process to
build and guarantee an autonomous, safe and peaceful
Kosovo.

The talks between Mr. Hans Haekkerup and the
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Covic, on 15
August have reassured us of the support of the Serbian
side for the principle that there should be no security
and administrative structures parallel to those
administered by UNMIK. We also welcome the
positive attitude of Belgrade regarding the registration
of Serb community voters for the forthcoming Kosovo-
wide elections. It is crucial that all communities
register to be counted as residents of Kosovo and have
a chance to vote and be represented in the Kosovo
Assembly. We support the need for an enhanced public
campaign to encourage voter registration and the
eventual participation of the Kosovars in the election
on 17 November.

We also note that the issue of Kosovo Albanian
detainees in Serbian prisons was discussed during the
meeting. We hope that the Serbian authorities will soon
hand over those detained to UNMIK so that these cases
can be reviewed as appropriate by UNMIK. These
measures should help build confidence between the
communities. With the collaboration of the Serbian
Ministry of Justice, UNMIK should be able to further
improve the judicial process and enhance the trust of
the people in the judicial system of Kosovo.

My delegation encourages the Serbian authorities
to continue dialogue and cooperation with UNMIK on
the security arrangements in anticipation of the
November elections. Such cooperation is essential to
ensuring the wide and safe participation of all the
communities in the elections, which should hopefully
lead to a multi-ethnic Government and should
contribute to lasting peace in the region.

