Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in welcoming back Mr. Inzko to the Security Council
and thanking him for his report (S/2017/379, annex)
and briefing. He has the United Kingdom's continued
support in his role as High Representative. We are
grateful for all the work that he does for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its people.

Looking back over the reporting period, it is
clear that 2017 was full of promise for Boznia and
Herzegovina. The path to accession to the European
Union (EU) lay ahead - finally unblocked after years
of inertia - and the reform agenda had begun to
deliver the jobs and growth for which so many cried out
when they took to the streets in 2014. Yet as the High
Representative's report makes clear, narrow interests,
whether personal or political, have instead set back
progress this year and dampened the prospects and
potential of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On too many occasions this year, Bosnia's leaders
returned to the divisions ofthe past instead of delivering
for the future. Those setbacks have only served to
distract attention away from much needed progress
on the reform agenda embodying reforms that would
promote greater security stability and prosperity across
the country. We clearly saw that in the celebrations in
the Republika Srpska on 9 January.

The referendum on the national debt was in
clear defiance of the Bosnian Constitutional Court's
authority and a direct challenge to the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The participation of Serb members of the
Bosnian armed forces raised tensions even further and
underscored the urgent need to implement the defence
review. Furthermore, the continued efforts of Bosnian
Croat politicians to advocate for electoral reform this
year have also distracted attention from the reform
agenda and much needed socioeconomic reforms. We
have seen economic legislation blocked and delayed
because leaders have chosen to act in the interests of
one of the constituent peoples and not in the interest of
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina's people.

Finally, we have seen the Bosniak member of the
Presidency undermine trust in the ruling coalition by
unilaterally and unsuccessfully launching a revision of
the legal case accusing Serbia of complicity in war-time
genocide. That sort of backward-looking and divisive
politicking has no place in 2017.

There is still time for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
leaders to deliver this year. Through the reform agenda,
they have a clear map charting the way ahead. It is a
path that will lead to growth and stability, but one that
needs renewed commitment and engagement. It is a
path that remains central to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
EU membership - an aspiration shared by so many
across the country. It remains, however, a path not yet
taken, and that has not been without cost. More than
$75 million dollars of International Monetary Fund
(IMF) funding was delayed late last week by the failure
to adopt the law on excise duties. More than $1 billion
of further IMF funding now at risk.

As my Foreign Secretary, Boris Johnson, made
clear during his visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina last
month, it is long past time for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
leaders to work together so as to deliver the reforms
that would enable the country to compete and thrive
in the modern global economy. During the past recent
months, we have seen that they can find common
ground. The successful repeat elections in Stolac show
that the authorities can deliver for the people. But it
is also clear that, until national interests trump narrow
interests, stability in Bosnia will not be entrenched and
all concerns about the political and security situation
will remain, because continued divisive rhetoric
and repeated political crises only put pressure on the
country and distract from much needed reforms.

We therefore share the High Representative's
assessment that the European Union-led peacekeeping
force with an executive mandate remains Vital.
Accordingly, we will support the retention of that crucial
asset when its mandate is up for renewal in November.

