Mr. Moussa (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, I would especially like to congratulate you
personally, Mr. President, as you assume the presidency of
the Security Council at this very delicate stage.

The Council is meeting today to look into the situation
in the Middle East in the wake of the bloody developments
in Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian areas. This
sends a very important message. The Arab-Israeli
negotiations, which started in Madrid five years ago, are
facing problems, and the march towards peace is stalling.
The Security Council, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, must therefore intervene.

The events in East Jerusalem and other Palestinian
areas came as no surprise for those who have been
monitoring the evolution of the peace process. Nor is the
direction taken by Israeli policy surprising. It is like a dark
tunnel into which it is trying to drag the rest of the Middle
East. It is trying to circumvent the pillars of the peace
process and its basic points as had been agreed, and to
relinquish the commitments made in that framework.
Yes, Mr. President, what happened was no surprise for
us in Egypt. Nor was it a surprise for you. We had issued
warnings at the highest levels in Egypt; we had warned the
Israelis about the outcome of this policy. President Hosni
Mubarak more than once said that only evil and harm
would come of this policy - and this is exactly what has
happened. The policy of pressure, blockade, closing of the
territories, demolition, imprisonment and the lack of respect
for commitments can yield only frustration and outbursts,
blood and victims. N 0 one can be blamed except the Israeli
policy - its shameful stalling and the relinquishment of its
commitment to the peace process.

We strongly condemn the changes made by Israel in
Jerusalem, as well as its incitation to action and the
challenges it has issued. We also condemn the settler
policy, which will never be recognized by the international
community because it is illegal. In spite of all of this, the
matter goes beyond what happened yesterday. It takes on a
totally different dimension that is really very dangerous,
namely the Israeli position vis-a-vis the peace process -
not only on the Palestinian track, but also on other Madrid
tracks: the Palestinian track, the Syrian track and the
international Arab tracks. What we see is Israel moving
away from the basic points that have been agreed.

Thus, first, the Israeli policy avoids any mention of
the principle of land for peace or its implementation; and
this destroys the basis for that process.

Second, the Israeli Government went back to the
settlement policy in spite of a direct reference in the Oslo
agreement to avoid any measures that might affect
negatively the outcome of the negotiations and the final
status of the territories.

Third, the Israeli Government once again has sought
to change the demographic and geographical composition
of Jerusalem, which is subject to negotiations under the
documents annexed to the Oslo agreement. The final
status of Jerusalem has yet to be defined or determined.
It has to be determined through negotiations and not
unilaterally, either by Israel or by Palestine.

Fourth, the Israeli Government refused to implement
the redeployment agreement in Hebron despite the official
provision to that effect in the agreement and its own
commitment to that implementation.

Fifth, Israel would not redeploy its forces in other
areas agreed to - the B and C areas - in accordance
with the transitional agreement on redeployment in these
areas as of 7 September 1996.

Sixth, the Israeli Government would not resume
negotiations on the final status, in accordance with the
provisions of the agreement.

Seventh, the Israeli Government has gone back to
the policy of committing acts of aggression against
civilians, as happened in the past two days when the
Israeli Army fired on civilians, killing more than 60
Palestinians and injuring hundreds.

Eighth, Israeli forces have entered Palestinian towns
and cities. This destroys the idea of autonomy. We are
talking about two distinct and separate societies - two
neighbouring entities. We are not working to establish one
entity that would dominate another. That is not an Arab-
Israeli peace. That is an Israeli peace. And it will never
be achieved under any circumstances.

Ninth, this all comes in addition to the Israeli
economic blockade. This Israeli policy has been carried
out against the Palestinian entity and the Palestinian
Authority, not only through closing the territories and
imposing the blockade, but also by eliminating any
opportunities for economic advancement or economic
independence for the Palestinians.

Tenth, add to this the policies of imprisonment, and
what one gets is a dark picture of the Israeli-Palestinian

 

track - the result of the very unwise and aggressive
policy, that has been adopted by the Israeli Government.

Not only does this eliminate the prospects for the
Palestinian-Israeli track - but it also affects the other
tracks. We will hear the Foreign Ministers of Lebanon and
Syria speak of the stalling developments on both tracks.

In View of this, perhaps the Council will recall what
the Cairo summit decided last June - that the peace option
is a strategic Arab option that would require a serious
commitment by the other side, namely Israel. Perhaps
members would also recall the message sent by that summit
that the lack of commitment by Israel or any reversal of its
position vis-a-vis the commitments to the peace process
would lead to a setback for the whole process, with all the
implications and the dangers inherent in plunging the region
back into the cycle of violence, thus forcing all Arab
countries to reconsider their positions in the peace process
with Israel. The Israeli Government bears full responsibility
for this.

This is the framework to which we, as Arab countries,
all have committed ourselves. The peace option is a
strategic option, but we cannot accept a reversal of position
by Israel. We cannot accept a threat to peace or a threat to
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinians or to the
return of land - Syrian or Lebanese.

We have invested so much time and have made so
many efforts to create a framework for peace, in Egypt in
particular. We have aimed, since the very beginning of the
peace process to close the file on the Israeli-Arab conflict
and to open a new chapter of cooperation, understanding
and coexistence. We still believe in this, and we still have
this goal. But it cannot be implemented by one side alone.

Therefore, I call upon the Israeli Government to
review and reconsider its policy because its outcome is very
dangerous. The alternative to peace is something that the
international community cannot bear because it will
jeopardize stability and peace in the whole region. No one
can accept this. We want an Arab-Israeli peace that is
balanced: right for right, security for security, and
commitment for commitment. Peace will be established
only on this basis. Mr. Netanyahu spoke about reciprocity.
This is reciprocity - security for security, commitment for
commitment,and right for right. We all share in this
responsibility - all the parties, the two sponsors, the
permanent members, the Security Council and the
international community at large.

We must be serious in what we do. Egypt is ready,
as it has always been, to assist in putting the peace
process back on track. But we do not want the
exploitation of photo opportunities to deceive public
opinion. Israel must relinquish the negative policy it has
pursued and must implement its commitments, foremost
among which are to withdraw from Hebron, to end its
interference in the Palestinians' internal affairs, and to
stop blockading and killing them.

The Security Council must assume its obligations
and responsibilities in maintaining peace and security. It
must send the strong, clear and unequivocal message to
the Israeli Government that policies of violence against
civilians, of provoking religious sentiment, of
relinquishing contractual obligations and of political
prevarication will not lead to a positive outcome. The new
Middle East must be based on mutual respect without
violence and on making sacrifices to attain peace.

We extend our hand for peace, for a just peace that
will lead to a balanced, just coexistence between the
Arabs and Israelis.

