Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): When the
Secretary-General spoke to us earlier this morning, he
ended with this sentence: "Let us rebuild a centre that
can hold" (supra). I think he was referring to the
rebuilding of a centre in the Middle East, but his
remarks might apply to the Security Council as well,
which, as we know, has not often been united on the
Middle East question. We also need to rebuild a centre
within the Security Council.

One practical suggestion we have is that it might
be useful to review the many thoughtful statements the
Secretary-General has made on the Middle East
question, including the one he made today. If we use
his statements as a basis for action, then I think we can
rebuild the centre we need in this Council.

Speaking now in my national capacity, I note that,
as the fourteenth speaker, we will probably repeat or
endorse many of the points that have been made so far,
but some of them are worth repeating. We will make
five points.

The first point is that Singapore deplores in the
strongest terms all acts of violence and terror that
target civilians, and it calls for an end to extreme acts
by both sides. The Israeli forces must stop their
frequent military incursions into Palestinian cities and,
as virtually every other speaker has said, its siege of
Ramallah. At the same time, the Palestinian Authority
must undertake resolute efforts to put a stop to the
suicide bombings and other acts of terror against the
Israeli population. In this regard, we welcome the
categorical condemnation by the Palestinian Authority
of the recent spate of suicide bombings.

The second point we would like to make is that,
like several other speakers, we would like to strongly
support the efforts of the Quartet. Indeed, it is hard to
believe it was only three days ago that Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen came here and briefed us on the significant
progress made by the Quartet.

It is also noteworthy that the latest Quartet
meeting included consultations with the Foreign
Ministers of Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and
Syria, as representatives of the Arab League follow-up
committee, as well as representatives of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. At the same time, the Quartet
spelled out detailed and specific time lines and targets
within the three-phase road map. It is also significant
that the Quartet has decided to set up a third-party
mechanism to monitor and assess progress in the three
phases; the assessments will be strictly based on the
parties' compliance with specific performance
benchmarks. We look forward to receiving more details
as the Quartet develops its monitoring and assessment
mechanism.

One point we wanted to make to the Quartet was
that we hope that as the Quartet carries out its work it
will bear in mind that it must also deliver results,
because if the Quartet describes its plan of action
without delivering results, our fear is that this process
too may be damaged.

Our third point is that we hope the international
community, as well as the Quartet, will not be held
hostage by the actions of extremists on both sides who
are clearly determined to disrupt the peace process. In
this difficult moment we should not lose sight of the
larger process, which, as Mr. Roed-Larsen pointed out
to us, must be based on the parallel pursuit of the
various humanitarian, security, political tracks, as well
as on reciprocity.

The fourth point we would like to raise relates to
the humanitarian dimension, which, as several speakers
have said, is extremely important. Mr. Roed-Larsen
gave us statistics on how bad the humanitarian
situation is currently. We support immediate relief
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian crisis, including
implementation of the recommendations made by Ms.
Catherine Bertini, the Secretary-General's Personal
Humanitarian Envoy. Israel's obligations under
international law are clear: it must allow and facilitate
immediate access by humanitarian agencies to mount
emergency rescue operations in the affected areas.

My fifth and final point is that we continue to
believe that the situation demands the continued and
sustained engagement of the Security Council. Again,
as virtually every speaker has said, the best way of
addressing the situation is through implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Each of those
resolutions came about through painful negotiations.
Their words were carefully chosen, and we have them
before us. Our challenge is to implement them.

Again, as other speakers have said, long term
progress depends on the political will of both sides to
move beyond short-term security measures to the broad
vision set out in resolution 1397 (2002) where two
States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side within
secure and recognized borders.

We also believe that the Arab peace initiative
adopted at the Beirut Arab Summit offers a historic
opportunity that should not be squandered.

