Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): We join
others in welcoming the Foreign Minister of Peru to
the Council and in thanking Ms. Hoppe for her
briefing. I should also like to associate my delegation
with the statement of the European Union, to be
delivered later by the representative of Austria.

The fight against the proliferation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons must be a key priority
for the Security Council.

The spread and availability of small arms
seriously challenge the maintenance of international
peace and security by fuelling underlying tensions,
exacerbating crises and hampering peacebuilding
efforts. We welcome today's debate as an important
opportunity for the Council to discuss how it may
reinforce its efforts to deal with that issue, not least in
Africa. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report to the Council.

The Council is, however, only one actor needed
to tackle the scourge of small arms and light weapons.
The multifaceted trajectories of the supply of arms
crisscrossing the globe and the diverse motives
underlying the demand for those arms render solutions
propagated by any single actor or within any single
field incomplete at best. The Council must join forces
with a range of other actors, each with a comparative
advantage at the global, regional and national levels
and in diverse fields - security, legal, political and
development.

Let me offer a number of points within three key
action areas. The key small arms event of the year is
the United Nations conference to review progress made
in the implementation of the Programme of Action this
coming summer. To retain its position as the main
global instrument for a comprehensive approach, the
Programme needs an ambitious, forward-looking
review, the benchmark of success being its ability to
act as a catalyst for action-oriented multilateral and
bilateral measures.

In that respect, Denmark welcomes the
Instrument on marking and tracing small arms and light
weapons, but would have preferred it to be legally
binding. We encourage a determined effort on
brokering and actively supporting efforts to start
negotiations on an arms trade treaty. We call for the
adoption of measures on arms control at the review
conference.

The General Assembly, not the Security Council,
is the focus and locus of such initiatives. There is an
urgent need for progress in the coming years to
overcome and make up for the dismal failure of the
outcome document of the high-level summit last
summer to address the issue of disarmament. The
Council should endeavour to strengthen its cooperation
with the General Assembly on disarmament issues,
fully respecting the General Assembly's important
mandate in that field.

In that regard, it is clear that an arms trade treaty
would greatly strengthen the effectiveness of the
Security Council's arms embargoes. For the Council,

arms embargoes are a key instrument for confronting
the threat emanating from small arms, and while the
Council has made progress in enacting embargoes in a
timely manner, we must explore avenues for
implementing and monitoring them better.

Member States should be encouraged to bring
their own national legislation into line with the
Council's measures and to take the required legal
action against sanctions violators. The Council, for its
part, can employ targeted sanctions, such as travel bans
against individuals or entities breaching embargoes. In
order to get a fuller picture of the financial flows
involved, the Council should, as also mentioned by my
Congolese and French colleagues, request audits and
analyses of the money trail in timber, minerals, cocoa
or other commodity trading suspected of financing
arms flows. Furthermore, peacekeepers should be
provided with the necessary mandates and resources to
assist in monitoring embargoes. In all those areas,
much could be gained from a thorough study of the
lessons learned concerning the sanctions regimes
against, for instance, Liberia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Somalia.

Difficult conditions often prevail in societies
awash with small arms. Those include a collapse in the
rule of law, the absence of effective State institutions,
massive unemployment, a proliferation of crime and
impunity. Only by addressing such root causes and
effectively decreasing demand for weapons will we
succeed in curtailing the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons in the long run.

Mindful of the security-development nexus, the
Council must help ensure funding for the full
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration circle
and advance regional cooperation among peace
operations to tackle cross-border challenges from
mercenaries. Security sector reform and the rule of law,
with special attention paid to vulnerable groups, such
as women and children, must form an integral part of
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The
Peacebuilding Commission will play a strategic role in
that regard.

In conclusion, Denmark sincerely hopes the
Council will shortly be able to adopt a resolution that
spells out our strong commitment to tackling the
deadly virus of small arms and light weapons within
the Council's mandate. We see no reason for further
delay in that regard.

