Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency public meeting. I also thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.

The question of Palestine is at the heart of the issue
in the Middle East and is fundamental to achieving
peace in the region. China is paying close attention
to the recent developments regarding the status of
Jerusalem. A series of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), include provisions
regarding the status of Jerusalem. Any unilateral action
that changes the current status of Jerusalem will alter
the long-standing foundation for the settlement of the
question of Palestine. It would trigger new conflicts
and confrontations in the region.

We urge the parties concerned to bear in mind the
overall interest of peace and tranquility, as well as the
peace process in the Middle East, while avoiding any
action that might exacerbate tensions or complicate
the situation. China has always firmly supported and
promoted the peace process in the Middle East. We
support the just cause of the Palestinian people for
restoring their legitimate national rights. We support
the establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on its 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. That is the position of
China, and it will not change.
The two-State solution is the right choice for the
political settlement of the question of Palestine. As
a permanent member of the Security Council and
a responsible State, China will continue to play a
constructive role with respect to the political settlement
of the question of Palestine.

Chinese President Xi Jinping has put four proposals
for the promotion of the settlement of the question of
Palestine, namely, advancing the process of political
settlement based on the two-State solution, adhering
to the concept of common, integrated, cooperative and
sustainable security, further coordinating the efforts of
the international community, increasing synergies for
peace and taking integrated measures to promote peace
through development.

This year China received visits by the President of
Palestine, Mr. Abbas, and the Prime Minister of Israel,
Mr. Netanyahu, and has engaged with both sides.
Recently President Xi Jinping sent a congratulatory
message to the meeting in commemoration of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People in which he said that China firmly supports peace
between Palestine and Israel (see A/AC.183/PV.386).

China will remain true to its commitment and
continue to work towards the settlement of question of
Palestine and the promotion of the peace, stability and
development of the Middle East.

