The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
the French Foreign Minister for convening this high-
level debate.

I am deeply concerned about the grave dangers
facing minorities in parts of the Middle East. At stake
are millions of individual lives and the social fabric of
entire countries.

Right now, thousands of civilians are at the mercy
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also
known as Daesh. Its fighters are systematically killing
ethnic and religious minorities, those who disagree
with its warped interpretation of Islam and anyone
who opposes its apocalyptic Vision. They are targeting
women and children with heinous brutality and they
are destroying religious and cultural symbols that
constitute the heritage of humanity.

We see this spreading in Syria, Iraq and now in
Libya - and even Yemen, where the bombing of
mosques lastweek has further fuelled sectarian violence.
I condemn in the strongest terms all persecution and
violations of the rights to life and physical integrity of
individuals and communities based on religious, ethnic,
national, racial or other grounds. I urge all parties to
ensure the protection of civilians and spare innocent
lives.

The members of the Security Council - and all
those with influence - must help the people of the
region reclaim their historic diversity and dynamism.
That is essential to securing our common future.

(spoke in English)

The atrocity crimes in the region demand an urgent
response. We must end impunity for those committing
serious crimes against any and all communities. I
also stress again that abuses in counter-terrorism are
morally wrong and strategically counterproductive. The
commission of atrocities never absolves Governments of
their responsibility to honour human rights obligations.

In Iraq, the mission of investigation of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights cited information strongly suggesting that
Daesh may have perpetrated genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. My Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility
to Protect warned last August that acts committed by
Daesh pointed to the risk of genocide. Now we also see
sectarian Violence against local populations in areas
liberated from its control.

There is strong evidence that members of a number
of different minorities have been Victims of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other very serious
violations and abuses ofhuman rights. That is especially
true for women and girls. We must also remember that
violent extremism in Iraq precedes Daesh's advance.
The underlying conditions must be addressed.

I welcome steps by the Iraqi Government to further
national reconciliation, promote inclusion, strengthen
social cohesion and reform the security sector. I call on
the Government to do more to uphold human rights and
restore the rule of law in areas liberated from Daesh.
The international community must help Iraq in this
effort.

Five years into the conflict in Syria, the lack of
accountability has led to an exponential rise in war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other human
rights violations. Both Government forces and
non-State armed groups in Syria, especially Daesh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra, have committed such deplorable acts.
As we consider the plight of minority communities, we
must avoid highlighting differences and reaffirm the
values of diversity and peaceful coexistence. I urge
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, to overcome differences and seek new ways to
ensure the protection of all Syrian civilians.

In a few days, I will travel to Kuwait to attend
an international pledging conference for Syria. I
call on all countries to give generously to help the
millions of Syrians who are suffering, and to assist
the neighbouring countries that shoulder most of the
burden. Such humanitarian assistance is also vital to
the region's political stability.

I am deeply concerned about developments in Libya.
Daesh-affiliated groups are targeting minorities and
attacking religious sites. Amid widespread Violence,
religious minorities remain highly vulnerable. The
main parties must quickly reach agreement to bring an
end to the military and political conflict. That is crucial
to curb the danger of Libya falling into the hands of
terrorist groups. I am also concerned at the ongoing
tribal tensions in the South, which could ignite Violence
along identity lines. No strategy will succeed without
strong regional cooperation and an empowered Libyan
State.

The United Nations is developing a plan of action
on preventing violent extremism, which we will launch
in September. We are also strengthening our efforts to
champion and protect diversity in the Middle East. I
intend to convene a group of respected women and men
with deep understanding of the region's religious, civil,
cultural, academic and business sectors. They will
serve as an advisory panel on inter- and intra-sectarian
dynamics.

Governments and parties have the primary
responsibility for protecting minorities, but we must
engage with partners in civil society, faith leaders and
others with influence, including regional and other
actors. I especially look to religious and community
leaders to clearly remind their followers that religions
are about peace, not Violence and war.

Next month, the President of the General Assembly
and I will invite leaders from different faith communities
to a special event at the United Nations. We will build
on the experience of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations to promote mutual understanding and
reconciliation.

(spoke in French)

The Middle East is widely considered the cradle of
many of the world's great civilizations. Today, let us
resolve to empower people - especially youth - to
transform the region into the birthplace of a more stable
and secure world.

