Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica is a peace-loving country. More than half a
century ago, my country totally renounced unilaterally
the use of force and entrusted its security to
international law and the multilateral machinery for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The organ over which
you, Sir, are presiding today, the Security Council, is
the sole guarantor of stability and international security
for my nation and all its inhabitants. For that reason,
my country views the current crisis with Iraq with deep
concern.

Over the last 10 years, my country has observed
with growing alarm the repeated delays and various
obstacles that the Iraqi Government has set up against
the process of destruction of its weapons of mass
destruction. We have repeatedly demanded that Iraq
comply, first, with resolution 687 (1991) and now with
resolution 1441 (2002). We have condemned Hussain's
tyrannical regime for its countless violations of the
fundamental rights of the population, its repeated acts
of aggression directed against neighbouring nations, its
use of weapons proscribed since the First World War
and its outright scorn for democratic principles. The
disarmament of Iraq would not only promote stability
in the region but would also and above all be of
tremendous benefit to the Iraqi people. The elimination
of Iraq's proscribed weapons will make it possible for
its people to enjoy the dividends of peace.

In this regard, Costa Rica reaffirms the overriding
importance of the peaceful disarmament of Iraq
pursuant to the mandate of resolutions 687 (1991) and
1441 (2002). We demand from Iraq full, immediate,
unconditional and proactive cooperation with the
inspectors of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We require Iraq to furnish tangible and convincing
proof of the complete destruction of all of its weapons
of mass destruction and to account for the weapons
whose whereabouts are currently unknown.

On the other hand, we are heartened by the
statements of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei concerning
the growing, albeit still incomplete, cooperation on the
part of the Iraqi authorities. We would recall that
although it is true that Iraq has never fully cooperated,
inspections have yielded positive results. Under the
mandate of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) more arms were discovered than during
the Gulf war. Moreover, since last 27 November, when
inspections resumed under the unanimous mandate of
resolution 1441 (2002), we have seen tangible results.
Given these circumstances, we must fully trust and
support the inspectors. It is vital to give UNMOVIC
and the IAEA sufficient time to make a last, sustained
effort to verify Iraq's disarmament by means of
exhaustive and intrusive inspections. We should allow
the inspectors themselves to determine whether it is
fruitful to continue their work or whether its
effectiveness has been exhausted. For that reason, we
urge the Security Council to bolster UNMOVIC by
providing it with more human and technical resources
so as to make it an even more vigorous and exacting
verification mechanism. We are encouraged by the fact
that a number of countries have already offered
additional assistance in order to enhance the
Commission's effectiveness. We urge all nations to
provide UNMOVIC with all the information they may
hold concerning programmes of proscribed weapons in
Iraq.

The Security Council must always act in order to
preserve the legitimacy and authority of the United
Nations. For that reason it is essential to achieve the
peaceful disarmament of Iraq. In that regard, we call on
all members of the Security Council to explore and
exhaust all existing political and diplomatic channels
within this normative framework so as to secure
compliance with Council resolutions by peaceful
means. For the sake of the Iraqi people, we have the
moral duty to exhaust all opportunities and possibilities
provided by resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and
1441 (2002) in order to achieve a peaceful solution.

Certainly, the Baghdad regime does not deserve
another chance. However, the 26 million Iraqis do
indeed deserve one. The Iraqi people should not be an
innocent victim of the suicidal policies of the
dictatorial regime that governs it.

