Mr. Kupchyshyn (Ukraine): I have the honour to
deliver my statement on behalf of Azerbaijan, Georgia,
Moldova, Uzbekistan and my own country, Ukraine
(GUUAM).

The time that has passed since the tragic events
of 11 September 2001 has not extinguished the anger
and indignation of humankind at those terrorist acts,
nor has it soothed the pain and bitterness of the loss of
innocent lives. The world continues to suffer from
flagrant terrorist attacks perpetrated against innocent
civilians, including children, women and elderly
people. With feelings of deep sorrow, we learned of the
tragedy that happened as the result of the capture by
terrorists of a secondary school in the city of Beslan, in
the Russian Federation, which claimed numerous
victims. We have all been shocked at the many other
recent terrorist attacks all over the world that have
taken many innocent lives.

The GUUAM. States strongly condemn terrorism
in all its manifestations and call upon all countries to
engage in full cooperation, both on preventing terrorist
acts and on ensuring that their perpetrators are brought
to justice. The reason behind terrorism is to create
chaos and to disrupt the global system of peace and
security established and promoted by our Organization.
Therefore, the United Nations should continue to play
a central part in our common struggle against
terrorism. In that fight, the leading role of the Security
Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
should be preserved.

The GUUAM. States are convinced that the
Security Council should continue to use its unique
potential in mobilizing the international community to
fight terrorism. We trust that the establishment of an
effective system of information exchange on terrorism
would be helpful in preventing the spread of that evil.
The framework for a global response to international
terrorism, set by the Council, has to be maintained and
reinforced.

We share the view that the CTC provides a
valuable practical contribution to our common
struggle. The CTC helps the world community to
upgrade its antiterrorism capability and to deny space,
money and support to terrorists. In that regard,
resolution 1566 (2004) adopted by the Council earlier
this month will further strengthen the essential
coordinating role of the Council in the international
campaign against the terrorist threat. We also hope that
the Committee's Executive Directorate will be fully
operational in the nearest future.

The CTC should continue to hold its proactive
dialog with Member States. That achievement of the
Committee will certainly help the international
community to identify potential gaps and to find
effective ways to address them. We welcome the CTC's
activities in providing assistance to States for ensuring
the effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). In that context, the GUUAM
States would like to emphasize the importance of the
endeavours of the Council to begin the visits of the
CTC to States. In our view, such visits would facilitate
the work of the mechanisms to monitor the
implementation by States of their obligations and of
providing appropriate assistance to them.

Promoting closer cooperation and coordination with
international, regional and subregional organizations is
also of the utmost importance. In our View, the
Committee has had substantial achievements in that
direction.

The GUUAM. States, for their part, have
committed themselves to consolidating their efforts in
the fight against international terrorism and have
reaffirmed their determination to provide political,
legal and organizational bases for overcoming the
challenges of international terrorism and related illegal
actions. Attaching great importance to the
strengthening of the GUUAM. legal basis, the
participating States have signed an agreement on
cooperation in combating terrorism, organized crime
and other dangerous types of crime, which, we hope,
will soon come into force. Fully recognizing the danger
posed by the use of the proceeds of crime to finance
terrorist activities, the GUUAM. Governments are
examining the possibilities of establishing close
interaction between GUUAM. and the Financial Action
Task Force.

In order to enhance cooperation within GUUAM
on combating terrorism and organized crime, concrete
projects are under elaboration. Furthermore, GUUAM
has taken steps to establish interaction at the
parliamentary level. The GUUAM. Parliamentary
Assembly, which was established less than a month
ago, has defined one of its priorities as strengthening
regional security and the fight against global terrorism,
organized crime and illegal drug circulation.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the character
and scope of the CTC's mandate and working methods
represent an important innovation and open up new
possibilities for inter-State cooperation. I wish to
reiterate GUUAM's continued support for the CTC in
the discharge of its important duties.

