Mr. Baja (Philippines): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
on complex crises and the United Nations response. We
are also grateful to the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for their insightful statements on
the subject.
Simple problems call for simple solutions. But
complex problems do not necessarily require complex
solutions. The key to solving complex crises faced by
the international community today is to have a
comprehensive, coordinated and sustainable response
from the United Nations system. A comprehensive and
integrated approach would ensure that we would have a
sustained effort in addressing the complexity and
multidimensionality of each crisis.

Crises confronting the United Nations have
grown in complexity. They often have intertwining and
overlapping dimensions. The mere mention of conflict
areas - for example, Somalia, Rwanda, Haiti, Bosnia,
Liberia and Sierra Leone - is enough to conjure up in
our minds the complex nature of these crises, what the
response from the United Nations was and what it
could have been. The experience in Rwanda, for
example, continues to remind us that that so-called
preventable genocide should not be repeated. At this
stage, we are confronted by yet another complex
situation: the United Nations is called upon to engage
in peace-building in Iraq. We are in the process of
defining and refining the United Nations response and
its strategy on that issue.

Conflict prevention and post-conflict peace-
building lie at the heart of the United Nations mandate
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The activities of the United Nations in this regard are
not new. In fact, many of the programmes and projects
of this global body have a so-called preventive effect,
or at least preventive potential. Unfortunately, they are
often disparate and inchoate. We need to address the
overlapping concerns relating to conflict prevention
and post-conflict peace-building, as well as the blurred
distinction of when conflict prevention ends and when
post-conflict peace-building begins.

United Nations activities in the area of conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building are
embodied in the Secretary-General's report to the
General Assembly and the Security Council entitled
"Prevention of armed conflict" (S/2001/574). The
Secretary-General also submitted a framework for
cooperation in peace-building in his letter of 12
February 2001 to the President of the Security Council
(S/2001/138).

The Philippines believes that those documents are
central to our discussion. Allow me to highlight some
seminal elements which the Philippines considers
important and which could form part of our future
follow-up actions in the field of conflict prevention and
post-conflict peace-building.

On the conflict prevention strategy, the
Philippines agrees with many of the Secretary-
General's observations. First, conflict prevention and
sustainable and equitable development are mutually
reinforcing activities. Secondly, an effective preventive
strategy requires a comprehensive approach that
encompasses both short-term and long-term political,
economic, diplomatic, humanitarian, human rights,
developmental, institutional and other measures taken
by the international community in cooperation with
national and regional actors.

Thirdly, preventive action should address the
deep-rooted socio-economic, cultural, environmental,
institutional and other structural causes that often
underlie the immediate political symptoms of conflicts.
Fourthly, we need to address the structural and
operational aspects of conflict prevention and peace-
building. This means addressing the need to define the
mandates of the various actors in the United Nations
system and the need to ensure synergy and
coordination of those mandated functions.

As regards the framework for cooperation in
peace-building, the Philippines supports the guiding
principles and possible cooperative activities that will
help build an enabling environment for peace-building
activities. These include the need to ensure a speedy
operational response and the optimum mobilization of
human, technical and financial resources as well as the
need to direct efforts at preventing the outbreak or
recurrence of conflicts. The Philippines also supports
the idea of establishing an information exchange
mechanism for early warning analysis and a better
understanding of the root causes of conflict.

The Philippines commends the Secretary-General
for his efforts to address those concerns. We note,
however, that some of those efforts have been limited
to certain sectors and involve only certain actors. There
is no comprehensive and integrated approach that
includes the participation of all stakeholders and
addresses the multidimensional and complex aspects of
crisis situations.

For example, the Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on
Guinea-Bissau and Burundi are laudable efforts by the
Economic and Social Council. But the advisory role
and the ad hoc nature of these working groups are not
adequate. There are concerns, for instance, about what
to do after the mandate has lapsed. We therefore need
continuity and an institutional mechanism that will
integrate security policy, economic development and
institution-building in those areas.

There is a need to integrate the various
programmes undertaken by the United Nations and
other multi-stakeholders on conflict prevention and
peace-building and to mould them into a general
strategy that will address the various concerns in a
comprehensive, coordinated and sustainable manner.
We need to develop a practical road map to implement
the specific recommendations of the Secretary-General
in his seminal reports on conflict prevention and post-
conflict peace-building. More important, we need to
follow-up on those mechanisms that have already been
identified.

We also need to develop or formulate an overall
conflict prevention strategy that will ensure the
integrated and comprehensive work of the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the International Court of Justice and
the Secretary-General and the participation of other
actors including regional organizations, funds and
programmes, civil society, non-governmental
organizations, the business community and the Bretton
Woods institutions, among other players.

The best possible United Nations response in
addressing complex crises is and has always been to
root out the major causes of conflict. The big challenge
for the United Nations is how to prevent the outbreak
or recurrence of conflict. This is possible only if the
United Nations can address the root causes of conflicts
and channel scarce resources to development.
Unfortunately, while global defence and military
expenditures amount to $900 billion, only about $500
million goes to development. If we want to have a
genuine approach to conflict prevention and post-
conflict peace-building, we should address and
confront this harsh irony.

Mr. President, again, I wish to thank you and your
delegation for choosing this very timely and relevant
topic. The need for a comprehensive United Nations
response to complex crises also underlies a theme of
next month's presidency: the issue of the role of civil
society in post-conflict peace-building. The search for
an appropriate United Nations response to complex
crises should involve those who are able - and those
who will be able - to contribute to an effective
response to such crises.

