Mr. Arnault: I am grateful for this new
opportunity to brief the Council on the occasion of its
consideration of the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General (8/2005/183), which describes in
some detail the recent developments in Afghanistan.
Since the report was drafted, few new developments
have taken place, with the notable exception of the
announcement, last Sunday, by the electoral authorities
of the date of the parliamentary and province-level
elections, namely, 18 September 2005. That was not
initially our preferred time frame. As I mentioned in
my last briefing to the Council, on 10 January, we
would have liked to have been able to uphold last
July's decision by the Joint Electoral Management
Body to hold elections this spring. However, the choice
of the electoral system made last month ruled out that
option entirely, making mid-September, from an
operational viewpoint, the earliest possible date.

Indeed, under the circumstances, the timelines do
not provide any breathing space. It is anticipated that
several thousand candidates will participate in the
elections for the 249 positions in the lower house and
for the provincial councils. That will, in particular,
make the vetting of those candidates in order to check
their eligibility under the electoral law a very complex
and lengthy exercise. Similarly, the anticipated very
large number of candidates compelled the electoral
authorities to allow for a considerable period of time
for the design, production and distribution of ballot
papers.

In addition, I must acknowledge that the holding
of the elections four months later than initially
anticipated is not without several advantages. First, it
means that the electoral campaign and the election
itself will take place well after the completion of this
year's poppy eradication campaign. A thorough
counter-narcotics exercise in the most affected
provinces will, hopefully, diminish the impact of drug
money on the electoral process and, certainly,
deconflicting eradication and the electoral campaign
will have a positive influence on the security
environment for the election.

An election in September will also allow for more
in-depth civic education of the public, of the
candidates and of the parties alike, which, in turn, will
no doubt enhance the magnitude and the quality of
participation. It will also make it possible to put more
and better trained army and police units at the disposal
of the electoral process. It will give more time to
complete the process of demiIitarization that has
gained, as members know, much momentum in recent
months.

UNAMA and the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission will soon resume their joint
reporting on the exercise of political rights during the
political process, which last year proved to be a useful
tool for ascertaining the political environment of the
electoral process and for taking corrective action when
necessary.

Last but not least, a September time frame will
afford more time to prepare for the establishment of the
future National Assembly. With France in the lead, and
with support from the United Nations Development
Programme, work has already begun to train over 100
staff members with expertise in different aspects of the
legislative process and administrative support for
Parliament. A conference is scheduled to take place
next week in Paris to raise further funding for that
important project.

On the issue of funding, I must take this
opportunity to update the donor community on the
financial requirements for the holding of the
parliamentary elections, which are not insignificant.
The total budget needed is $148.67 million. Savings
from last year's registration and elections amount to
$16 million. New contributions have so far been
received from the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States for a total amount of
$24.38 million, which means that about $110 million
are still required, and I should be grateful for the
Security Council's support in urging donors to respond
generously and in a timely manner.

As can be gathered from what I have said, the
preparation of the parliamentary election, like the
preparation of the presidential election before it, offers
an opportunity not only to complete the political
transition provided under the Bonn agreement, but also
to drive progress in several other key areas of concern,
such as security, the rebuilding of Afghan institutions,
disarmament and the observance of human rights. We
are keen to take maximum advantage of that
opportunity.

With regard to security, the two roadside bombs
that killed six and injured 31 last Wednesday in
Kandahar were a reminder that, while the security
situation overall has improved since the presidential
election last October, complacency is not in order,
particularly for the United Nations, since the two
attacks were directed at convoys of the United Nations
Office for Project Services and the World Food
Programme. Protecting the life of United Nations staff
will remain a priority for us, with the benefit of the
strengthened security arrangements that have been put
in place since last year.

It is hoped that a new initiative, entitled
"Consolidation of Peace" and aimed at allowing a
number of rank and file Taliban and other fighters from
extremist organizations to disarm and resettle in their
communities, can make a contribution to the reduction
of violence this year. Mr. Mujaddedi - former
President and Chairman of the Constitutional Loya
Jirga - has just been appointed to head a national
commission to oversee the programme. It provides for
low- and mid-level fighters to enter a reconciliation
process under the responsibility of the provincial
governors and community leaders. It does not offer,
however, unconditional amnesty and does not apply to
the worst offenders among Taliban commanders and
other senior leaders from extremist groups, whose
capture and prosecution will remain a priority for
international forces and domestic security agencies.
For individuals whose status deserves special
measures, reintegration will take place under close
monitoring by security agencies.

The design of the programme did raise some
misgivings in the past, including that it was tantamount
to selective national reconciliation or that it would
provide a cover for the resuscitation of the Taliban as a
political force. With the current structure of the
national reconciliation programme and with the
oversight of the national commission headed by
Mr. Mujaddedi, I hope that those misgivings will be
allayed, and UNAMA field offices stand ready to assist
if need be.

The agenda of the next nine months is a heavy
one. It will place demands on all the human and
material resources of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including those of UNAMA. The
Secretary-General's reports submitted to the Security
Council this year have outlined the contributions of
UNAMA and the United Nations family to the Bonn
process in the political, institutional, humanitarian,
human rights, economic and social areas. A summary
description of the structure, objective, expected
accomplishments and indicators of achievement of the
Mission for 2005 is also contained in the Secretary-
General's report of 23 November 2004 on estimates in
respect of special political missions, good offices and
other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. I hope that, on this
basis, the Council will concur with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of the Mission with its current structure.

For my part, I would like to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude to the Council for the
confidence that it has placed in the Mission during the
past 12 months. This has been a very intense,
challenging and often difficult period, when sensitive
and controversial matters were decided. The
knowledge that the authority of the Security Council
was behind the work of the Mission has been a source
of motivation and encouragement for all of us. I can
assure the Council that the staff of UNAMA will
continue to do everything in their power to fulfil
faithfully the mandate that it has chosen to entrust to
them.

Before I conclude, let me say a few words about
an issue which the Security Council has retained on our
agenda since last year: the mandate of UNAMA once
the electoral process is completed. As we prepared this
year's budget, we began to discuss internally a variety
of options, ranging from maintaining UNAMA in its
current structure to returning to the regular operation
of a United Nations country team. It is clear, however,
that, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
that discussion cannot be separated from the broader
issue of the way in which the international community
and the Afghan Government will organize their
cooperation in years to come, taking into account, on
the one hand, the anticipated successful completion of
the political transition and, on the other, the obvious
need for a continued strong compact between
Afghanistan and the international community if the
gains of the past three years are to be sustained. The
features of that compact will certainly come into
sharper focus as the Government of Afghanistan and
the aid community discuss their aid programmes for
the coming years. In that respect, the Afghan
Development Forum from 4 to 6 April in Kabul will be
an opportunity to comment on those issues.

For our part, we are very keen to make sure that
future international cooperation should not only take
careful account of the lessons learned from the past
three years of State-building in Afghanistan, but also
benefit from the large pool of accumulated
international experience - sometimes good,
sometimes less good - with regard to peacebuilding in
post-conflict countries. Our own deadlines for the
formulation of UNAMA's budget for next year make it
necessary that the issue of UNAMA'S role in 2006 and
beyond be resolved by this summer. We plan, therefore,
to hold intensive consultations with the Afghan
Government, the Security Council and the international
community at large in the weeks to come, and hope to
be able to report to the Council before too long with
proposals that will encapsulate the best options for
effective United Nations support to the further
consolidation of peace in Afghanistan.

