Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations (see annex 18). We would like to thank and commend the German presidency and the other co-sponsoring members of the Security Council for organizing today's very important open debate on climate and security. Across the globe, climate change is leading to more severe and increasingly unpredictable weather events, more frequent and heavy floods, unusually long droughts, sea-level rise and natural disasters, causing water and food shortages and, in some cases, contributing to the spread of pandemic diseases. These effects of climate change may also increase the risk of conflicts, in particular over the access to natural resources, such as land and water, exacerbate existing conflicts and pose new challenges for global security. It is clear, as the concept note for today's debate states (see S/2020/725, enclosure), that the effects of climate change are threat multipliers and constitute major risk factors for international peace and security. Many ongoing conflicts, particularly in the Sahel region, are rooted in disputes over the access to natural resources, in particular agricultural land and pastureland, the productivity of which is falling due to overuse and the effects of climate change. The impact of prolonged droughts and increasingly unpredictable weather patterns in mostly rain-fed production systems is severe. Governance systems of rural-land tenure no longer seem to work in many places, where population densities have increased sharply and where local communities have started to arm themselves in order to defend what they consider their land against occupation or use by other communities. If these threat multipliers are not addressed, it is hard to see how a region like the Sahel can experience peaceful and sustainable development. Through its engagement on the issue since 2007 and more particularly since July 2011, the Security Council has been instrumental in highlighting the interlinkages between climate change and security and has enabled the United Nations to deal with those interlinkages in a more systematic and effective way. The establishment of the United Nations Climate Security Mechanism - a joint effort among the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme - has been an important milestone. Jointly with partners, the United Nations Climate Security Mechanism has developed a toolbox to advance a common approach to the analysis of climate-related security risks and to shape integrated and timely responses. It is crucial in our view to mainstream this toolbox, including, in particular, early-warning indicators, into the United Nations country teams' political, social and economic assessment framework. This will allow the United Nations to detect and assess security risks related to climate-change exposure and vulnerabilities as early as possible, as well as those related to the state of natural resources and their governance. In this endeavour, the United Nations would benefit from working with the European Union, regional and subregional organizations such as the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States, international financial institutions and other development partners, including civil society. The resulting information should feed into regular briefings to the Security Council. It should also provide the analytical basis for common responses at all levels, including for strengthening the ability of United Nations country teams and missions on the ground to integrate climate-related security risks into their preventive and reactive actions. Luxembourg supports enhancing the role and means of the United Nations Climate Security Mechanism in order to allow it to provide strategic advice to the Security Council, the Secretariat and other United Nations bodies. This could help strengthen conflict prevention and resolution through mediation and environmental peacebuilding, improved governance and sustainable management of natural resources, better adaptation to climate change and increased resilience building. Coordination is key, and United Nations agencies at the country level should be encouraged to address these challenges in a more coherent and effective manner within the respective United Nations sustainable development cooperation frameworks. At the same time, it is paramount that United Nations peace and security actors work more closely with those addressing humanitarian and development needs, climate-change adaptation and mitigation, and human rights and the rule of law. United Nations peace operations need to become more efficient in terms of resource use and should be enabled to also address conflicts over land and other natural resources, while humanitarian and development assistance as well as climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts need to become more conflict-sensitive, thereby taking into account the security and long-term development needs of all stakeholders and communities. As the world's top donor of official development assistance in proportion to gross national income, and as a reliable partner in international development and in security and defence, Luxembourg implements a "3D" foreign policy, combining the tools of diplomacy, sustainable development and defence. Consequently, Luxembourg supports the efforts of the Security Council and the international community as a whole that lead to improved governance of natural resources and increased resilience to climate change, with peace and security as the resulting dividends.
