Brazil would like to thank the briefers, and the presidency for convening this quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East. We take this opportunity to reaffirm our solidarity with all those affected by the pandemic, which has posed unexpected challenges to a region already beset by mass displacement and economic uncertainty. Brazil has heeded the call for increased contributions to the humanitarian effort, having recently announced donations to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to the Syrian humanitarian response plan. Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Brazil wishes to reiterate its support for a two-State solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace and security. We encourage the parties to seek a constructive political environment conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations and to engage in new and creative diplomatic efforts with an open mind in order to achieve a just and comprehensive settlement. On Syria, we reiterate the importance of fully complying with the ceasefire in Idlib, while ensuring that humanitarian aid can reach those in need in an agile and unhindered manner. Brazil also underscores its support for the work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and hopes to see further progress on the Geneva track, especially through the convening of the Constitutional Committee, potentially this coming August. On Yemen, we commend the Special Envoy's efforts to negotiate a joint declaration between the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah, which could pave the way for a ceasefire across the country and the urgent resumption of the political process. As for Libya, Brazil urges all parties to resume dialogue under the auspices of acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams, with a view to undertaking joint efforts against the pandemic. The arms embargo is indispensable to de-escalate the conflict, and its systematic violation remains a cause for great concern. As the crises in the Middle East and North Africa unfold, we should bear in mind that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are mutually reinforcing. At the same time, regional socioeconomic development can be achieved only through the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Safeguarding religious freedom should also remain a high priority, for minority communities often withstand violence and persecution the most. While the current situation poses immense risks and challenges to the Middle East and North Africa, it also presents unique opportunities for dialogue and cooperation towards peace and prosperity. Brazil stands ready to contribute to efforts in that regard.
