Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of your country and to
take this opportunity to congratulate you on Turkey's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to commend Ambassador
Churkin and his team for their effective conduct of the
presidency of the Security Council last month. I should
also like to welcome the Prime Minister of Croatia and,
of course, to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their briefings and their very
eloquent advocacy. I would not want to fail to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the comments he has
just made with regard to the work of the Security
Council's informal working group on international
tribunals, over which he so effectively presides.

Recent months have seen intense activity for the
ICTR and the ICTY, as well as for the Trial and
Appeals Chambers. The briefings that we have just
heard from the Presidents and Prosecutors reveal that
the Tribunals took practical steps that made it possible
to make tangible progress with regard both to the
treatment of issues and to the management of
procedures and staff and the use of judges. They have
done all that effectively and while keeping in mind the
demands of the deadlines set by the Security Council.
We encourage them to continue their outreach and
capacity-building efforts, in particular through the
establishment of information and documentation
centres.

Above all, we call on them to continue to work
along the same lines, given that the information
available to us indicates that, for instance, the ICTR is
currently facing an unprecedented rise in the volume of
its work. We believe that, in order to address that
workload, the ICTR should make every additional
effort necessary to send cases of lower ranking accused
to national jurisdictions. We believe that option to be
an important component in implementing the
completion strategy for the Tribunal that was adopted
by the Security Council.
Likewise, the international community, and the
States of the subregion in particular, should provide
unwavering support and cooperation to the Tribunal in
finding and arresting the 13 remaining fugitives,
especially high-ranking accused, who must necessarily
be tried by the Tribunal. It seems crucial to us that the
primary persons responsible for the Rwandan genocide
should be tried by the Tribunal established for that

purpose.

Statistics concerning the ICTY indicate that the
Tribunal is far along in its completion strategy. We are
very pleased at the successful transfer of cases, not
only because of its impact on the implementation of the
completion strategy but also because it will make it
possible for lower ranking indictees not to have to wait
too long for decisions in their cases. We call on the
Prosecutor to continue to follow such cases very
closely.

Given the practical problems facing the Tribunal,
we hope that the reassignment of judges and the arrival
of an additional ad litem judge will enable the ICTY to
continue to intensify the pace of its work in order to
complete it within a reasonable time frame. To that
end, it is important that the Tribunal's capacity be fully
utilized.

Although the deadlines set out by the Council are
no longer timely, the Tribunals must nevertheless keep
in mind the need for expeditiousness and must, in
particular, redouble its efforts with regard to speeding
up investigations and trials and reducing delays in the
pretrial process, without undermining the quality of its
work.

I would like in passing to raise the issue of the
status of ICTR ad litem judges, which is a clear
concern for the Tribunal's President. Although ad litem
judges were in theory elected to serve on a temporary
and ad hoc basis under a three-year mandate, statistics
indicate that many of them have worked on a
permanent basis for five years or more. It would
therefore only be fair to address the issue of the
benefits associated with being a judge, which should
normally also apply to ad litem judges, given the
conditions of their service and the new responsibilities
that have been given to them by the Tribunal in
accordance with resolution 1855 (2008).

Burkina Faso is following with interest the work
of the Security Council's informal working group on
tribunals, which has held intensive discussions
pertaining to the list of residual functions, the character
and structure of the residual mechanisms and the issue
of the Tribunals' archives. It would now be desirable
for the possible options agreed by the group's members
to be included in a draft resolution to be submitted to
the Security Council for a decision as soon as possible.
As to the size of the residual mechanism, we believe
that the working group's discussions should, as a
matter of priority, consider the issue of two separate
mechanisms, or one mechanism with two distinct arms,
so as to take into account the basic differences between
the Tribunals and the level of implementation of their
respective completion strategies. In any case,
everything points to the fact that the discussion of this
issue will not produce a result unless the Tribunals first
take steps to reduce their tasks in line with the progress
made in their respective completion strategies.

We take note of the discussions pertaining to the
issue of the management of the Tribunals' archives. We
believe that, although they are the property of the
United Nations, the archives also constitute historical
memory and, as such, are part of the patrimony of the
countries where the tragedies that led to the
establishment of the ad hoc Tribunals occurred. We
believe that the proposals of the working group with
regard to where the archives are to be housed should
take into account that basic point, as well the issues of
security and accessibility.

We believe that all the issues taken up by the
informal working group cannot be solved at once. It
would therefore be desirable to adopt a selective and
gradual approach, rather than a comprehensive one.

