The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives ofAlbania, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Kenya,
Latvia, Liberia, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates to participate in
this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/1051, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Liberia,
Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Uruguay.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.
Infavour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay.

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2396 (2017).

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.


