Mr. Kelly (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his comments.

Australia welcomes the evolution in the approach
to peacekeeping over the past decade, which has seen a
recognition of the complex, multidimensional issues that
can be associated with such missions. That recognition
has in turn led to a concerted international effort in
providing the guidance, training and capabilities
required to meet those challenges. Given that trend,
it is timely that the Council set out the broad themes
that will help direct our efforts in current and future
missions.

The draft resolution (8/2013/27) we will adopt today
serves the important purpose of not only identifying
the broad range of military and civilian capabilities
that are required for peacekeeping missions to achieve
successful peacebuilding outcomes, but also ofthe need
for the true integration of those efforts. That includes
not only in the ways and means by which different
mission components cooperate and coordinate on the
ground, but in the critical planning and preparation
phases. That has implications for the way that civilian
and military actors conceive of each other and the roles
they play. That includes those organizations that are
not formally part of peacekeeping missions but play a
critical role in moving situations towards stabilization
and development by supporting short- and long-term
economic issues, the rule of law, good governance
and local capacity-building - including funds and
programmes, international financial institutions,
non-governmental organizations, bilateral donors and
civil society.

In that respect we welcome the work within the
Secretariat to enhance integrated mission planning
and execution, including the establishment of
integrated strategic frameworks and the clarification
of roles and responsibilities. That is exemplified by
the important step forward of designating the United
Nations Development Programme and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations as the joint global focal
point for the rule of law. Australia is in the process of
developing its own integrated approach to strategic
frameworks and planning through the establishment of
the Australian Civil Military Centre. We look forward
to sharing experiences as we all strive to evolve towards
true integration.

The draft resolution (S/2013/27) should provide
those engaged in planning missions with a convenient
list of considerations. As has been stressed, all missions
have unique characteristics, but we have had sufficient
experience to tell us that there are generic aspects that
recur time and again in areas such as the establishment
of public security, the management of the displaced,
transitional justice, political transition, disarmament,
demobilisation and reintegration, and security sector
reform. Often, transitional justice will include the need
to defuse tensions over land and property disputes and
resource equity. Each situation is unique. The key, then,
will be doing the necessary analysis to tailor responses
to the cultural and specific context.

Acknowledging the relevance of such issues to a
mission means that proper allowance can be made in
the way a mission is structured and the capabilities
provided. This can help avoid serious compromises to
the standing of a mission. An example would be the
failure to provide the logistic requirements to support
proper management of detainees and the corrections
sector, along with ensuring that due process issues are
catered for.

Of course, all these types of activities must be
guided by the fundamental principle of national
ownership if they are to be sustainable in the long term.
The ultimate aim ofpeacekeeping missions, as it is with
development, is that they must constantly be focused
on their own redundancy. Missions will often result
in international capabilities being provided to address
critical points of weakness. Such measures must not
create dependency but be focused from the outset on
the means by which transition to national capacity can
be initiated and advanced.

In building national capacity, we have readily
identified the need for inclusive and transparent political
mechanisms and processes. We have increasingly also
realized the imperative of evolving national institutions
and good governance, which can minimize and, it is to be
hoped, eliminate corruption. Nothing is more corrosive
to the progress of peacebuilding. To ensure that this
erosion does not eventuate and that international aid is
deployed to maximum effect, missions must focus on
supporting accountability measures from the outset.

Two areas that we believe are central to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are the protection of
civilians and women, peace and security. The duty of
peacekeepers to protect civilians - whether through
direct activities, such as protecting against conflict-
related sexual violence or working to build local
capacities, such as through the training of the security
sector - are central to the restoration of security and
moving towards a healthy civil society. This is a central
pillar ofpeacebuilding. We also know that peacebuilding
processes involving the participation of women are
more likely to succeed. Peacekeeping missions can play
a strong role in fostering such participation, including
through the work of gender advisers and role models.

Identifying these multidimensional challenges
generates the requirement to provide the training and
expertise to address them. We need to identify, recruit
and deploy people who have the right skills. For example,
in addressing security sector reform, military and police
trainers and mentors must be properly equipped for this
role, including in aptitude for the context. Mechanisms
such as standing and rostered capacities can support
the rapid deployment of specialists to support early
planning or to fill critical gaps. We welcome efforts
to improve the deployment of civilians with the right
skillsets - including, importantly, from the global
South * through the civilian capacities initiative.

Predeployment and in-mission training are critical
to ensuring that all components - military, police
and civilian - understand what the others are doing
in the field. We encourage ongoing efforts to develop
and implement peacekeeping training in a coordinated
and complementary manner. We as Member States,
our training institutes and the Secretariat need to work
together to achieve this.

Finally, as one who has worn the blue beret himself,
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the service
of the dedicated men and women deployed on peace
operations and to honour the sacrifice of those who
have given their lives in this noble calling.

