Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the presidency
for having convened today's meeting today and the
briefers for their exhaustive comments. In particular,
I would like to thank Mr. Peter Maurer and convey to
him our country's deepest gratitude for his work and
that of the International Committee of the Red Cross as
guarantors of the Conventions.

This meeting provides us with a unique opportunity
to commemorate the adoption of one of the most
important instruments in safeguarding human security
and dignity in contexts of armed conflict and to address
the role of the Security Council in this area. We wish
also to acknowledge the presence among us of the
Minister from Poland as well as the Minister from
Germany, who have placed this issue at the heart of
their agendas.

Seventy years after their universal adoption,
the norms and principles contained in the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols remain
relevant today. In the light of these conventions, we must
reflect on the principal challenges that we collectively
face in the area of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Non-compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law continues to have unacceptable
consequences for civilian populations caught up in
conflict. In this context, we would stress the particular
vulnerability of women, children, older persons and
persons with disabilities. Failure to focus on their
specific needs can lead to ongoing feelings ofresentment
and exclusion, which can lead to situations of violence.
Be it intentionally or by omission, many States are
unable to comply with international humanitarian
law when facing conflict situations. Moreover, very
frequently it is those States that undertake offensive
actions by which they shirk their responsibility to
protect and guarantee the human rights of all living
within their jurisdiction.

The growing proliferation and complexity of
non-State actors that do not respect any principle other
than that of using defenceless populations to realize
their heinous aspiration is perhaps one of the most
complex challenges that we face. This requires urgent
action on the part of the States affected and by regional
and international organizations aimed at increasing
the capacity for prevention and conflict resolution by
peaceful means. There is a general lack ofpolitical will,
both to prevent abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law and to ensure that
those who commit such atrocities pay the price for
their actions.

I would like to make some recommendations from
our own perspective. Increasing our knowledge of
international humanitarian law and training at all levels
of the State armed forces in international humanitarian
law and human rights is critical, particularly those of
female military personnel and members of civil society,
so as to transform them into agents of change and
champions of the principles enshrined in the Geneva
Conventions. It is essential to educate actors about the
rules contained in these documents, using accessible
and comprehensive language adapted to national
cultural realities and taking into account the minority
languages of affected populations.

As the guarantor for ensuring the implementation of
the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
the Council must undertake actions that reflect the
realities on the ground, while respecting the social,
economic and geopolitical characteristics that affect
the configuration and duration of conflicts. We reiterate
that our responsibility in that regard is not limited to
protecting civilians, but includes the renewal of hope
and confidence in ourselves, our countries, legal and
political processes and the international community.

Let us unite as humankind through a renewed
commitment that translates into greater respect for
human dignity, more justice and less impunity. It
is our hope that, in 2089, when future generations
commemorate the 140th anniversary of the signing of
the Geneva Conventions, we will live in a world free of
human suffering.

