Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It
is a great honour to speak in the Council under the
presidency of Guatemala.

Let me express the thanks due to Guatemala for its
important initiative in focusing the Council's attention
for the first time on the relationship between the
Council and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The timing is apt, because this year we celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the Rome Statute's entry into
force. We agree that enough time has now passed for
us to take stock and identify pending issues with regard
to that relationship, so as to further strengthen the fight
against impunity for what the international community
agrees are the most serious crimes. The concept note
from the presidency (S/2012/73l, annex) is very useful
in its systematic and detailed focus on the issue.

My delegation believes that four topics need
especially to be discussed. First are referrals by the
Security Council to the Court under article 13 (b) of
the Rome Statute. The conditions for such a referral are
set out in the Statute and refer to a situation in which
it appears that one or more crimes falling under the
Court's jurisdiction have been committed, assuming
that the Court's jurisdiction is complementary to
national criminal jurisdictions. We therefore need
to stress that the referral of a situation to the Court
does not relieve the Council of its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
On the contrary, the Court merely contributes to the
maintenance of international peace and security in
matters within its jurisdiction.

Political considerations must not sway the Council
from referring a situation to the Court. That sends a
message that impunity is permitted - a message that
we would certainly reject if we honoured and adhered
to the principles that gave birth to the Organization.
That brings us to the matter of reforming the working
methods of the Security Council, such that referrals
are not perceived as being selective or restricting the
Court's proceedings orjurisdiction.

Our second point is about the relationship of the
Security Council with the Court and with the States
Members of the United Nations. Clearly, a referral by
the Council to the Prosecutor does not end the Council's
responsibility in the matter. Rather, it is the Council's
responsibility to follow up on the actions that the
Prosecutor and judges take within their jurisdictions.
That means that the Council should always be ready to
take concrete actions, if needed by the Court in order
to carry out its work in the field, such as in protecting
victims and witnesses, discovering and freezing assets,
capturing suspects and executing arrest warrants. Such
measures are covered under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, with which all States are required
to comply.

Our third point has to do with the financing of
referrals made by the Security Council. Until now, the
Council's resolutions have not provided for funding
on the part of the United Nations. In other words,
investigations and judgments of matters referred to the
Court by the Council are not provided with sufficient
economic means to sustain them. We should further
recall that budgetary questions fall properly under
the jurisdiction of the General Assembly, and not the
Security Council. Moreover, the concept of referrals to
the system created by the Rome Statute derives from
Chapter VII of the Charter. The Organization is no
stranger to that concept, and indeed the United Nations
no longer needs to establish ad hoc tribunals. Now is a
very appropriate time for us to act on what is provided
for in the Statute with regard to relations between the
United Nations and the Court.

Our fourth point is about the amendments to the
Rome Statute adopted in Kampala, especially on the
matter of the crime of aggression and the jurisdiction
of the Court in referrals by the Council, given that the
conditions set out in article 15 (3) of the Statute have
been met.

We must do our utmost to ensure that the
amendments are ratified by as many States as possible
so as to try to prevent any impunity for crimes falling
within the jurisdiction of the Court.

Lastly, allow me to reiterate my country's gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate in the Council. Opportunities such as this
will undoubtedly lead to a better understanding of
the relationship between peace and security - two
indissociable concepts that are not competing but
complementary. We therefore believe that we must The President (spoke in Spanish): There arc a
consider follow-up mechanisms that are comprehensive, number of speakers remaining on my list. I intend, with
in terms of both substance and parti ipation, with the consent ofthe Council, to suspend the meeting until
respect to what has been discussed at this meeting. 3 pm.

The meeting was suspended at 1 pm.
