Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin by
conveying our sincere condolences to the Government
and people of Syria on the terrorist attack in Damascus
yesterday, which caused the death of a number of high
officials, including the Deputy Prime Minister and
Defence Minister Daoud Rajha. We strongly condemn
that mindless and cowardly act of terrorism.

India remains gravely concerned at the events
unfolding in Syria, which have resulted in the death of
several thousand civilians and security force personnel.
From the beginning of the crisis, we have called for the
cessation of violence in all its forms and by all sides. We
condemn all violence irrespective ofwho its perpetrators
are. We voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
66/253, authorizing the appointment of an envoy to
engage with the Syrian parties and foreign actors for the
resolution of the crisis. We have consistently supported
the mission of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan. We also
supported resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) in
the expectation that the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) would
be able to oversee the implementation of Mr. Annan's
six-point plan and facilitate the cessation of violence
and the commencement ofa Syrian-led political process
to address the grievances of the Syrian people and meet
their legitimate aspirations.

Unfortunately, all parties have failed to comply
with their obligations under the six-point plan. Instead
of a political process, the parties have continued to
pursue a military approach that continues to cause
death and destruction in the country. There is an urgent
need for the Syrian parties to recommit themselves to
the complete cessation of violence and a comprehensive
implementation of the six-point plan.

Syria has been, both historically and in
contemporary times, an important country in the
Middle East. Its role in the Middle East peace process
and in ensuring the stability of the wider region cannot
be overemphasized. Prolonged instability and unrest
in Syria therefore have ramifications for the entire
region and beyond. Given the complexity of the ground
realities in Syria, we believe that it is necessary to retain
the presence of UNSMIS, to bear impartial witness to
events, and to assist the Syrian parties at all levels in
their search for a solution to the crisis without further
bloodshed. An UNSMIS presence is also necessary
to facilitate the implementation of the six-point plan
and the Action Group for Syria's final communique
(S/2012/523, annex), which are the only viable processes
for the engagement of the international community in
the resolution of the Syrian crisis. We have therefore
supported action by the international community that
addresses the Syrian crisis in a balanced and impartial
manner.

We voted in favour of draft resolution S/2012/538
today to facilitate united action by the Security
Council in support of the efforts of the Joint Special
Envoy. It may be noted that the draft resolution
supported the extension of the UNSMIS mandate and
the implementation of the six-point plan and the Action
Group's final communique in their entirety.

In our view, it would have been preferable for the
Council members to show flexibility so that a united
message could be conveyed to all sides in the Syrian
crisis, instead of pursuing domestic interests. It is
therefore regrettable that the Council has not been able
to adopt a resolution today and send the joint message
that was sought by Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan. In
spite of the vote today, we urge all Council members to
reconsider their approach and ensure that the UNSMIS
mandate is extended and the mission of Kofi Annan
supported, so that the Syrian crisis can be resolved
without any further bloodshed. We remain committed
to engaging with fellow Council members to that end.

