Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore
Braithwaite for her comprehensive briefing. We warmly
recall our visit to Haiti last month and appreciate her
help in facilitating it.

We acknowledge the very timely mission of the
Security Council to Haiti, which provided us the unique
opportunity to Witness first-hand the achievements of
the country made thus far despite the serious obstacles
that it has faced in terms of political instability and two
major national disasters. We were able to demonstrate
the unified solidarity and support of the Security
Council to the Government and to the resilient people
of Haiti to strengthen their country and institutions.

Kazakhstan welcomes the many positive
developments in Haiti in recent months, including
building institutional and political stability, such
as the completion of the first 100 days of the new
administration, President Moise's flagship "Caravane
du changement" initiative and the joint legislative
agenda comprising 51 draft laws aimed at improving
the business climate, reinforcing State functions and
ensuring better territorial planning. The adoption of
the five-year Haitian National Police (HNP) strategic
development plan for the period 2017-2021 is promising
and will therefore require adequate financial resources
and training support from the international community.

We also acknowledge the observation by the
Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2OI7/604)
that the ongoing withdrawal of military and police
components ofthe United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the gradual transfer of tasks
to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) have been smooth and without
disruption. At the same time, Haiti continues to face
enormous difficulties and has yet to overcome numerous
and complex challenges with regard to strengthening
democracy, political institutions, the rule of law, the
protection of human rights, promoting economic and
social development and enhancing business investment
from outside the country.

We call on the Government of Haiti to make every
effort to successfully implement the HNP strategic
development plan so as to ensure that adequate
security arrangements be put in place, in particular in
those geographical and functional areas from which
MINUSTAH troops and police have withdrawn.

The issue of cholera in Haiti must remain at the
centre of the United Nations focus. We welcome the
fact that the intensified cholera response has resulted
in a significant decline in suspected cholera cases. In
that regard, Kazakhstan joins the Secretary-General's
call to the international community and donors for
voluntary contributions to the United Nations Haiti
Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund. That
could have a direct and immediate impact on saving
lives in Haiti and address the suffering that so many
Haitians have endured.

As MINUSTAH Withdraws, we acknowledge with
gratitude its committed efforts to bringing stability and
peace to Haiti since its establishment in 2004. Our task
for today is to prepare the ground for MINUJUSTH's
mandate to advocate for constitutional, legislative,
judiciary and criminal justice reform with a view to
promoting human rights and protecting civilians. Haiti
will need help in holding its national elections. The
significantly reduced civilian staff in the new mission
calls for a highly competitive selection of both national
and international personnel. At the same time, the
United Nations country team with the entire United
Nations system and international partners will have
to assume greater responsibility for peacebuilding and
sustainable development tasks.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan's firm
commitment to supporting Haiti's efforts to peace,
progress and prosperity.

