Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Robert Serry for
his report. We welcome the presence of Palestinian
Foreign Minister Malki an Israel's Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Prosor.

So often in this Council, we say that the situation
between Israel and the Palestinians is at a crucial
juncture, and it often is. But we now seem to be facing
a decisive stage. The status quo is self-evidently
unsustainable. The prospect of a two-State solution
is quickly disappearing. It is time for a new effort to
resuscitate the peace process, but with a genuine focus
not on the process but on the objective - peace.

The conflict in Israel and Gaza in November 2012
highlighted again the fundamental risks to peace
and security of allowing the status quo to continue.
Australia condemned the rocket attacks on Israel from
Gaza. We recognized Israel's right to defend itself.
Obviously, we welcomed the ceasefire and commended
Egypt's leadership role in brokering the agreement,
with support from others.

But it is critical for the ceasefire's the effective
implementation that efforts to prevent the flow
of weapons into Gaza be intensified. And while
acknowledging that Israel has already taken some steps
in this regard, there is an urgent need for a further
relaxation of restrictions on the flow of lawful goods
into and out of Gaza so that the Gazan econony can
grow. Of course, a ceasefire does not guarantee lasting
peace. The only way to secure that, as we know, is for
both Israel and the Palestinians to resume negotiations
without preconditions towards a two-state solution.

General Assembly resolution 67/19 on the
Palestinians' status as a non-member observer State
reflected international support for a future Palestinian
State, as well as deep concern about the continuing
stalemate on the ground. Australia abstained in the
voting on the resolution, reflecting both our support
for a Palestinian State and our concern that the only
way to achieve the reality of statehood for Palestinians
is through direct negotiations. Australia urged both
Israel and the Palestinians not to exploit or overreact
to the vote. Instead, actions by both sides must be in
the interests of peace, and neither side should create
obstacles to that objective.

Australia has therefore been deeply concerned by
Israel's decisions to expand settlements. Settlements
are illegal under international law; they undermine the
prospects for peace and directly threaten the Viability of
a contiguous Palestinian State, and hence a negotiated
two-State solution. The recent announcements in
the E-l block were of particular concern and took
us further away from the path to peace, and we
continue to be deeply concerned by instances of settler
violence. We also call on the Palestinian Authority
to exercise restraint and to avoid provocative actions
at international forums. We urge the Palestinians to
resolve their internal differences, unite for peace and
cease acts of violence against Israel.

At the same time, we need to reinforce the role
of the Palestinian Authority, which is fundamental to
stability in the region. We call on those countries in a
position to do so to provide further financial support
to the Authority. Australia has made a five-year
commitment. It is also vital that tax transfers to the
Authority be resumed.
Like all of us, Australia wants to see a secure Israel
living in peace alongside a viable Palestinian State.
Lasting security for Israel and the establishment of
a Palestinian State cannot be achieved by unilateral
actions. They can be achieved only through negotiation
of a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967
boundaries, with agreed land swaps. Australia calls on
Israel and the Palestinians to return to direct negotiations
in good faith and prepared to make the compromises
required by both sides to achieve a settlement. We also
call on both sides to refrain from further actions that
undermine confidence and damage the prospects for
negotiations to resume.

The worsening conflict in Syria will soon enter
its third year. The assessment of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights that the death
toll has reached at least 60,000 should shock us. As a
member of the Security Council, Australia will work to
encourage a strong and unified response to bring about
a process of political transition. We support the work
of Joint Special Representative Brahimi, including his
call for strong backing from the Council to enhance
the prospects for transition. The Council needs to take
a fresh look at how it can best support Mr. Brahimi's
efforts. Continued inaction will only condemn Syrians
to further bloodshed and the region to greater instability.

President Al-Assad has had many opportunities to
end the brutality against his own people. We have seen
nothing that would suggest that he is willing to engage

in meaningful negotiations. His speech on 6 January
was not a step on the road to peace; it led down a
cul-de-sac. He must step down now.

Australia joined more than 100 countries at the
December Friends of Syria meeting in Marrakesh
in acknowledging the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces as the legitimate
representative of the Syrian people. We are working
with partners to ensure that the National Coalition is
a responsible representative of the Syrian people. It is
imperative that it abide by the norms of international
humanitarian law.

As we know all too starkly, the humanitarian
dimension of the conflict continues to worsen,
increasing the need for international support, including
through the current United Nations appeals. The
meeting in Kuwait at the end of this month will be
an essential opportunity to galvanize further support.
Like many others, Australia is particularly concerned
about securing adherence to international humanitarian
law and ensuring the safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian personnel. We have advanced a
humanitarian initiative for protecting medical facilities
and workers in Syria, which is a major priority for us.
We will continue to work with other countries to secure
a commitment from all sides in the conflict not to target
medical personnel, not to block access to doctors and
hospitals, and not to attack medical facilities.

To conclude, as we approach the third year of the
Syrian conflict, our collective efforts obviously must
be directed towards an immediate end to the Violence,
the realization of a political solution that meets the
legitimate aspirations of all of Syria's citizens, ensuring
accountability for the crimes that are being committed
and planning for post-conflict stabilization assistance
to help rebuild Syria. The Council must play a decisive
role in all of that.

