Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's open debate on peacebuilding
in Africa. We offer special thanks to Foreign Minister
Kishida, Secretary-General Ban, the briefers and other
Ministers for their statements. It is a great pleasure to
Ambassador Kishida here at the Security Council today.

The countries currently on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) are all in Africa.
Indeed, the PBC's primary focus remains on Africa.
Despite examples of positive change through
peacebuilding activities in countries such as Liberia
and cote d'Ivoire, Africa continues to face formidable
challenges. The PBC's work in marshalling resources,
advising on integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery, focusing attention on
reconstruction and institution-building, laying the
foundation for sustainable development, helping
develop best practices and ensuring predictable
financing has made a real difference on ground. And
Africa has benefitted from it.

Violence in Africa has destabilized Governments,
destroyed livelihoods, undermined national economies,
damaged infrastructure, led to the exodus ofpeople and
disrupted the delivery of education and health services.
One of the key messages of the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts (S/2015/490) was that peacebuilding
must include a strong emphasis on conflict prevention
with broad and inclusive partnerships. The Group's
report and the Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions last spring (resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016), respectively) identified challenges to and
instruments for effective post-conflict peacebuilding.
They referred to the need for collective efforts by
political, security and development actors in favour
of sustainable peace. Failure to prioritize could lead
to tragic cycles of relapse. Similarly, addressing
root causes of conflict remains critical to avoiding
recurrence. Let me elucidate some of our thoughts on
best practices.

First, post-conflict needs in Africa are varied,
ranging from institution-building and economic
reconstruction to judicial and security sector reform.
Peacebuilding interventions need to be tailored to
specific situations.
Secondly, success stories in the continent have
one common thread - inclusive national ownership.
We need to keep this in View while devising future
programmes.

Thirdly, the quick refocus of the PBC during the
early stages ofthe Ebola crisis showed that it is agile and
adaptable, and that it does achieve results. Emerging
crises should continue to get the needed attention.

Fourthly, when we talk about peacebuilding as
a continuum, its activities surely cannot be limited
to one phase alone. Creating conditions that provide
for security and economic welfare is as important as
conflict prevention and resolution itself. Institutional
capacity-building, training and skills development
should be directed at supporting local stakeholders and
engaging external actors in peacebuilding structures
and activities.

Fifthly, regional organizations have an immediate
interest in promoting peace. Enhancing the capacity of
the regional and subregional organizations for conflict
resolution, maintaining regional peace and security
and fostering political and socioeconomic development
remains vital.

Africa's unparalleled and untapped potential
for growth and development, its positive recent

history - according to one study, more wars have
ended than have started in Africa since the early
1980s - and peaceful transitions in many countries

are all encouraging signs. Prosperity and peace in
Africa can be achieved only when the local, national,
regional and international dimensions of crises are
addressed. Pakistan has supported Africa through its
peacekeeping contributions, capacity-building and
normative and monetary contributions in the area of
peacebuilding. We remain committed to peace, security
and development in Africa.

