Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia appreciates the briefings on the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council that were presented in
today's meeting. My Government particularly
appreciates the work of these Committees.

Colombia emphasizes the importance of ensuring
international cooperation and the commitment of each
and every Member State to honour its international
obligations in the fight against terrorism and associated
criminal activities. My country makes this appeal
based on its own experience. We, Colombians, have
suffered from terrorist acts committed by illegal armed
groups, some of them already demobilized and others
still in existence, such as the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and the Ejercito
de Liberacion Nacional.

Our firm and recognized democratic practices
give us the authority to reiterate that today the only
raison d'etre for these groups is the criminal business
of drug trafficking. These groups are not only
repudiated by the Colombian people, but are also
designated as terrorists on the lists of many countries,
including several States members of the Security
Council.

In order to overcome terrorist violence, in order
to permit increased investment, growth, social
development and well-being, Colombians since 2002
have carried out the Democratic Security Policy. That
has reduced crime and brought about progress in
guaranteeing rights and in strengthening our
democratic institutions. In making progress towards
those goals solidarity and international cooperation has
also been essential. It is clear that no country can
confront terrorism on its own.

International solidarity includes the repudiation
of terrorist groups. In resolution 1465 (2003) the
Council condemned the terrorist act that occurred in
Bogota in February 2003 and urged all States to
cooperate with Colombia, in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001), to find and bring to justice the
perpetrators. That act was one of many carried out by
FARC.

Plan Colombia, which was funded with
significant national resources and supportive
international cooperation, particularly from the United
States, has made verifiable achievements in the fight
against the global drug problem. The 2008 World Drug
Report published by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime informs us of significant declines
both in the illicit crops and the production of drugs, as
well as a sharp increase in seizures of those substances.
Those who question the effectiveness of Plan Colombia
show a deep lack of knowledge of today's reality that
we the Colombians experience.

In Colombia we have also experienced the
adverse effect of a lack of cooperation and the
interference by another country in our internal affairs.
In this regard, I must refer to the particular concern of
the Colombian Government at the lack of willingness
by the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to cooperate in the fight against criminal
groups that have inflicted great pain on my country.
This lack of willingness is reflected in several ways
and I will refer to some examples that the Government
of Colombia has already brought to the attention of
Council members.

Arms have been diverted from Venezuela to
recognized terrorist groups that operate in Colombia.
Recently, anti-tank weapons and their ammunition
were found by Colombian authorities in a camp
belonging to the illegal armed group FARC. There is a
record of the legal sale of this weaponry to the
Venezuelan Government. The Foreign Minister of
Colombia sent a dossier on this matter to the
Venezuelan Government, but to date no satisfactory
explanation befitting the seriousness of the matter has
been received.

Since the 19805, Colombia and Venezuela have
engaged in reciprocal cooperation mechanisms in
matters of border security and the fight against drug
trafficking. Nonetheless, the Venezuelan Government
decided not to continue its cooperation within the
framework of these mechanisms, which in the past had
proven to be effective in achieving greater control of
illicit drug trafficking and other criminal activities.

Moreover, the Venezuelan Government has
generated disinformation regarding international
cooperation agreements in the fight against terrorism
and drug trafficking. It has referred to the agreement
signed between Colombia and the United States of
America. This agreement resulted from a long history
of cooperation between the two countries and is limited
to the sole purpose of combating illicit drug trafficking
and terrorism in Colombia. It will be implemented in
strict compliance with the principles of sovereign
equality, the territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.
Disinformation or distortion will not alter the legal
soundness and political transparency of the actions of
the Government of Colombia.

The people of Colombia do not understand why
the Venezuelan Government insists on questioning the
national and cooperation strategies implemented to
confront drug trafficking and terrorism in my country.
The people of Colombia are committed to their
democratic institutions in the fight against those
phenomena. They also do not understand and are
dismayed by the threat of war uttered last Sunday by
the President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
about which the Colombian Government informed the
members of the Council in a timely manner.

My delegation shares the Council's concern with
regard to the connection between terrorism,
international crime, illicit drugs and illicit arms
trafficking. Colombia trusts that the Council will
continue to promote measures to ensure that, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), all States
refrain from providing any form of support, active or
passive, to groups involved in acts of terrorism.

In this regard, my Government will continue to
cooperate actively with the United Nations in the fight
against terrorism. Likewise, we will continue to
support other countries' efforts to confront crime and
drug trafficking. We will continue to contribute our
experience and good practices in this field.

My Government wishes to thank those countries
that, through effective cooperation, have contributed to
the strengthening of our capacities in this fight, and we
invite those that still have not done so to show their
solidarity with a people that repudiates terrorism and
desires to live in a country with development and well-
being.

