Lieutenant General Ke'l'ta (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to warmly thank the Council for
providing me with this opportunity to present to it, in
10 minutes or so, my Mission's views on an issue that
is of such crucial importance to the Council, namely,
robust peacekeeping.

I am fully aware of the difficulty and delicate
nature of this task, as the Security Council itself
established this concept and has been following its
difficult implementation for several years now. Thus
I am grateful for your understanding regarding this
issue and would like to touch upon, ifI may, certain
aspects that will in all likelihood lead to the appropriate
reactions on the part of the Council.

For several years now, we have been seeing
major changes in peacekeeping missions, which are
facing increasingly complex and chaotic conflicts
characterized by rising levels of violence and a
strengthened presence by uncontrollable warring
parties. The tragedies of Srebrenica and Rwanda are
still fresh in our minds, as are those in South Sudan,
Somalia and Mali, which are a challenge to us all.

In many ways, the move towards more robust
mandates was inevitable. An example is the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2013, where a
Force Intervention Brigade was established within
the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Situated somewhere between peacekeeping and peace
enforcement, the main goal of this new approach, which
combines strong political intentionality with aggressive
military action, is to give the peacekeeping missions
concerned the necessary operational credibility,
especially with respect to spoilers. This would allow
them to better protect civilian populations and ensure
that the discharge of their mandates; the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and the
political process are notjeopardized.

However, it is clear that this desire for robust
action, free from artificial constraints of neutrality and
determined to use force as and when necessary, has
fallen short of expectations.

Here I should like to comment briefly on factors that
I believe have hampered the effective implementation
ofthe concept ofa robust mandate. I will also talk about
various pathways for discussion as to how we could
make the appropriate adjustments.

It is our humble view that a robust mandate should
manifest at all levels, from the Security Council to the
troops on the ground, the armed branch of the system.
Indeed, I think that the concept of a robust mandate
has suffered from a deficiency in the original concept,
namely, that the intent to conduct robust and aggressive,
even offensive, action has seemed to take the form of
only operational and tactical action.

But logically, this desire for firm action
should have been translated equally into all of the
dimensions 4 political, legal and administrative - of
the actions ofthe impacted missions. In fact, no military
action, vigorous though it might be, can make up for
the shortcomings I have just mentioned if it is not
carried out in support of an appropriately firm policy,
established by an organized structure and operating on
the basis of tailored rules and procedures.

In fact, there is a fundamental contradiction
between, on the one hand, the declared intent to take
a more offensive stance on the basis of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations and, on the other, an
implementation framework that remains under Chapter
VI, which, as the Council is aware, involves a role that
is far less ambitious, namely, that of referee between
warring parties.
For the concept of a robust mandate to actually
lead to vigorous and decisive action, the doctrine
and structure of peacekeeping missions, their focus
and the political posture underlying them, as well as
the resources allocated to them, all must transcend
traditional peacekeeping methods. We therefore need
to finalize this paradigm shift and support this intent to
act with firmness through the necessary psychological,
organizational and doctrinal changes.

Along the same lines, there is a need to strengthen,
make credible and streamline this approach by providing
the resources necessary to ensure that the declared
goals can be effectively met. These changes should also
lead to Member States, in particular troop-contributing
countries, taking a resolute stance to protect suffering
civilian populations and accepting the political and
operational risks inherent to the application of robust
mandates.

The Security Council should demonstrate its resolve
through ongoing political support for missions, which
could also lead to the adoption of sanctions regimes
that are more tailored and aggressive with respect
to individuals and organizations acting as spoilers
in the context of the peace process. This is the same
type of strong message that has to come from regional
organizations. Rightly or wrongly, the perception
is, unfortunately, that some troop-contributing
countries are reluctant and that the Security Council
is sometimes divided because of differing strategic
interests. Those differences are even greater at the level
of regional organizations.

We also have to rethink the internal structure
of peacekeeping missions if we are to give them the
resilience and decision-making agility needed to
implement such robust mandates effectively. For
that, we should give particular emphasis to reducing
red tape and administrative regulations, which lead
to slowdowns, a lack of cohesiveness and serious
handicaps. I should underscore that the regulations that
we are dealing with end up producing logistical support
that is not well adapted to robust operations, owing to
the slowness of the processes and severe restrictions on
the operational use of essential force multipliers such as
military aviation and engineering and transport units.
And it is impossible to conduct effective operations
under such administrative regulations.

Similarly, the principles of exemptions and
flexibility for contingents in the memorandums of
understanding and statements of unit requirements
should be reviewed with a critical eye, because they
are two of the most limiting factors for the force's
effectiveness. They are, frankly, incompatible with the
intensity of engagement, capacity for rapid reaction,
unexpected changes in posture and vigorous supported
action, which are intrinsic to robust operations. Lastly,
within missions, the progress that must be made
is needed at several levels. The forces themselves,
which are at the core of the drive for robust action,
should reflect the necessary reality and consistency
in their numbers, their equipment, their operational
preparedness and their morale. Those parameters
should be thoroughly tested not just before deployment
but also during their entire deployment. Units that do
not meet the required criteria should be withdrawn,
and Force Commanders should be able to demand that
they be repatriated if they are clearly incapable of the
necessary operational effectiveness.

The rules of engagement should also be revisited
in order to enable strong offensive operations so as to
be able to properly protect populations and ensure that
missions have the freedom to manoeuvre and support
their actions. That does not mean giving missions
licence to abuse force but rather helping them make
better use of the weapons they have. While I am aware
that some changes are under way, we will not be able
to realize them fully until we mobilize the fundamental
and rapid change of mindset that I mentioned earlier.
Nonetheless, I believe that is the price we must pay
in order to ensure that the desire for decisive action
expressed in our robust mandates can lead to tangible
results on the ground.

If I may, I would like to refer to our mission,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), which has, to some extent, been able
to embody such a robust approach to peacekeeping
by preventing the slaughter of the civilian population
in a number of areas and in particular by defending
the town of Bambari against a coalition of armed
groups. That operation succeeded because we bent
various administrative rules, challenged some limiting
agreements with troops and changed morale where the
use of force was involved. Our efforts also benefited
from the unequivocal support of the Security Council,
which took targeted measures at the right time.
MINUSCA is an example, even if an imperfect one,
of robust peacekeeping, although we recognize that
we could have done better without various ongoing
complications. IfI may, while apologizing for perhaps
bypassing some of the rules, I would like to say
that I believe MINUSCA is on the road to success.
Despite that, it still needs support, and I would like to
solemnly request that the Council continue to give it
robust support.

In conclusion, I believe that getting the two parts
aligned - on the one hand, the robust mandates
and on the other, the appropriate bodies, means and
procedures - is crucial to bridging the gap between
the expectations of the parties involved and missions'
actual capacities. Only well-equipped and well-trained
troops, working in an environment free of bureaucratic
red tape and supported by firm policy positions at every
level - the Security Council, regional organizations
and partners 4 can enable us to mobilize effectively
and decisively. I know that not all of the thoughts that
I have shared with the Council can help to solve the
problem definitively and in the short term, but they
accord with the major conclusions of the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446). I hope that they will at least help to
emphasize the urgency of speeding up the consolidation
of the concept of robust mandates in order to ensure
that effective peacekeeping operations will enable us to
save thousands of human lives.

