Mr. Begec (Turkey): The Middle East is witnessing
unprecedented challenges. The Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, with its 70 years of history, is a microcosm of
what is happening in the region as a whole today.

Since the last open debate in January (see S/PV.7610),
hopes for a viable solution to the Palestinian question
have continued to fade and the situation on the ground
has deteriorated further. We are very concerned about
the latest developments. While our immediate priority
should be a rapid de-escalation, at the same time we
should all be very cognizant of the fundamental cause
of the problem, which is the illegal occupation by Israel
of East Jerusalem and other Palestinian territories.
Israel's continuing occupation and practices violating
international law hinder efforts to achieve a permanent
solution. The expansion of illegal settlements poses a
major obstacle to peace. Israel's denial of Palestinians'
right to use natural resources, its perpetration of
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests and the excessive
use of force, its suppression of the right to freedom of
association and assembly, its confiscations of land and
efforts to undermine the Islamic status and sanctity of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif fuel anger among Palestinians,
who have been collectively punished for decades.
The humanitarian disaster in Gaza, aggravated by the
continued imposition of restrictions, further deepens
the suffering of the 1.8 million people living in Gaza.
Israel should respond to our repeated calls and lift the
inhumane blockade.

The current situation is a sombre foreshadowing of
what will happen ifthe prospects for a two-State solution
vanish. We all agree that the status quo is unacceptable
and unsustainable. In that regard, the thirteenth session
of the Islamic Summit Conference, which Turkey hosted
in Istanbul on 14 and 15 April, adopted a resolution
on Palestine. Furthermore, the Security Council must
live up to its primary responsibility for international
peace and security, going beyond expressions of
condemnation to outline credible and concrete steps
for bringing peace and protection to the Palestinians.
On the Palestinian side, the need for reconciliation is
more relevant than ever. The consistent support and
encouragement of the international community is
vital in that regard. The establishment of a sovereign
and independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, continues
to be the only viable solution. Turkey's commitment
to supporting the Palestinian people to that end will
never cease.

What has happened in Syria is by any definition a
humanitarian catastrophe, and as such, a colossal stain
on our collective human conscience. No modern conflict
has been so devoid of respect for international norms.

Turkey continues to shoulder more than its fair share of
the burden of the ongoing devastation. We are extremely
concerned about the humanitarian and security impacts
of the crisis, which constitute a major national security
threat to us. The current chaos that has been created
in the northern part of Syria has played into the hands
of terrorists, targeting our citizens as well. Just today,
rockets fired from Syria hit the Turkish border town of
Kilis and killed four people. In addition, we are once
again faced with the risk of a new wave of refugees,
which has been triggered by the latest regime offensive
in Aleppo.

We are at a critical turn in Syria. The third round
of negotiations in Geneva has just started. That round
should produce a concrete outcome. The regime
should be pressured to talk about the essence of the
matter, which is political transition. The political
process should lead to a transition period with
concrete timelines, a new constitution and elections. A
transitional governing body with full executive powers
should be established. In the meantime, the Council
must ensure the implementation of all the measures set
out in its own resolutions. Unfortunately, the agreement
on the cessation of hostilities has become more fragile
owing to the systematic violations on the part of the
regime and its allies. Similarly, humanitarian access
continues to be hindered by the regime. The removal
of medical and surgical items from convoys continues.
The United Nations is unlikely to reach its targets for
the end of April in terms of the number of civilians
needing assistance in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
The lack of progress in those areas couldjeopardize the
Geneva negotiations.

Another danger facing the process is the efforts
to intervene in the opposition delegation. The high
negotiations committee, as one of the two negotiating
parties, remains engaged in the political process despite
efforts to compromise its integrity. Non-intervention
by third parties to the composition of the opposition
negotiation team is a must for the credibility and
sustainability of the process. Attempts to dilute and
weaken the opposition will only harm the process. The
current tragedy will not end unless the people of Syria
have a legitimate Government that truly represents
their will and enjoys their full consent.

I would like to conclude my remarks on two
positive notes. With regard to Libya, we welcome the
arrival and assumption of duties by the Presidential
Council in Tripoli on 30 March. Turkey's support for

that crucial step was demonstrated by the visit of our
special representative to Tripoli on 4 and 5 April, which
was the first international visit to the Presidential
Council at its headquarters. We recently hosted
Mr. Sarraj, President of the Presidential Council, on the
occasion of thirteenth Islamic Summit in Istanbul. His
participation contributed to the visibility of the Council.
We are also ready to host the Ministerial Conference on
International Support to Libya, as was decided in Rome
in March 2014. Turkey will continue to support Libya.

I would also like to express our support for the start
of the cessation of hostilities in Yemen. We hope that
the ceasefire will be observed and that the peace talks
to be held under the auspices of the United Nations in
Kuwait will succeed.

