Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
voted in favour of today's draft resolution. For many
months, New Zealand has argued that an arms embargo
on South Sudan is needed as part of the international
response to the continuing conflict. It is also a measure
that has been strongly and repeatedly called for by the
Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for over a year. We are
very disappointed that the Council has failed to respond
to those requests.

We recognize that an arms embargo will not resolve
the conflict. However, it will go a long way towards
addressing the overabundance of weapons, which are
being used against civilians. It undoubtedly further
fuels the conflict. We also recognize the concern
expressed by some that an arms embargo and targeted
sanctions would upset any political process. However,
in our view, those measures would only help create the
conditions for peace on the ground and would, in turn,
support the political process when it gets underway.
Yet, right now we are seeing a lot more fighting and
killing than talking.

We have been warned by the United Nations
of the possibility of much graver developments.
Ignoring those warnings and preserving space for a
currently non-existent dialogue seems to us to not
make a lot of sense. We are concerned that what we
are seeing today is another example of a country where
a Council-mandated mission is operating under very
difficult conditions. The country is doing just enough
to satisfy the Council - doing the minimum to avoid
the imposition of measures that the Council itself
had forecast, but not demonstrating any meaningful
commitment to changing the dangerous course upon
which it has embarked. As New Zealand leaves the
Council, we urge Council members not to allow
differences over the draft resolution to distract from
and prevent unified and effective leadership on the
critical issues that face the people of South Sudan and
the peacekeeping mission on the ground.

