Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): We are very grateful to you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on Somalia. It
is indeed a fully justified and timely initiative.

In the not too distant past, the international community
undertook a tremendous effort to help Somalia. Hope was
restored. The famine was successfully ended. Over
100,000 lives were saved. The economy started to show
slight signs of recovery. Yet the international community
failed because it was not able to contribute effectively to
solving the political problems haunting Somalia. As a
result, the country was practically abandoned.

I fear that there is no other State Member of the
United Nations where there is not a single functioning
diplomatic mission. The information on which we base our
Views comes mainly from unofficial sources, most often
located outside Somalia. The task of changing this situation
will be very difficult indeed, since there is a really high risk
involved. Memories of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia still dog the international community, which is
understandable but must be overcome.

As do many others, the Polish delegation believes that
only national reconciliation can bring peace and stability to
Somalia. It is the responsibility of the leaders of that
country to seek such dialogue and political solutions instead
of hostility and violence.

May I at this point recall the presidential statement of
6 April 1995 adopted by the Security Council, which inter
alia indicates that

"The Security Council remains convinced that
only a genuinely representative and broad-based
approach to reconciliation will bring about a lasting
political settlement and allow for the re-emergence of
a civil society in Somalia." (S/PRST/l 995/15)

These words have not lost their relevance, but today, a year
after, it is even more difficult to put them into operation.
There is nothing promising in the behaviour of political
leaders of Somalia, who leave no room for optimism.
Therefore, we keep urging the warring parties to refrain
from confrontation and to think seriously about the future
of their country and people.

But, since there are serious reasons to believe that
this will be yet another unheeded appeal, perhaps we
should give a thought to strengthening a mechanism
which would allow the United Nations to at least
effectively communicate with those involved in political
rivalries in Somalia and with the people of Somalia.
The Security Council should have an exhaustive
picture of the state of affairs in that country. Otherwise,
our debates might become meaningless. Also, despite all
difficulties, the Security Council must have the means of
conveying its messages to Somalia.

These important tasks taken up by the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, whose significant
role in facilitating peace and promoting political dialogue
among the Somali factions deserves our highest
consideration, should at this stage become our priority;
the Office would have to be given unequivocal support of
Member States in all respects.

In the meantime, special attention should be given
by the international community to the rigorous observance
of Security Council resolution 733 (1992), which imposed
the embargo on arms deliveries to Somalia.

In conclusion, may I state that we must not forget
the people of Somalia. And we have to show that we
care.

Let me also take this opportunity to say how highly
we appreciate those who, regardless of the increasing
danger and cost, keep delivering humanitarian aid to the
population of Somalia. They also need our support.

