Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I will deliver this statement on the humanitarian situation in Syria on behalf of the co-penholders, Germany and Belgium. I would like first to thank Under-Secretary- General Lowcock for his important briefing today. We also extend our gratitude to all humanitarian andmedical workers throughout Syria, specifically to those operating in the dangerous environment of north- western Syria. We are deeply concerned about the safety of the 4 million civilians in north-west Syria, especially following reports of ongoing air strikes and shelling. Over the last months, and in particular since last weekend, the ongoing military offensive has again intensified and is causing further immense human suffering, in the midst of winter. This continues to result in death, displacement and destruction, as described by Mark Lowcock just now. Once again, we would recall that there are humanitarian obligations that need to be observed and that there are rules to warfare. Civilians have the right to be protected from the horror of war, and warring parties have the obligation to ensure their protection. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has reported that more than 1,500 civilians have lost their lives since April, when the current military escalations began. We condemn the loss of civilian lives. Since 1 December, an estimated 390,000 people have been displaced. In the past two weeks alone, 160,000 have been displaced. The vast majority, about 80 per cent, are women and children. Since the beginning of this military offensive, hospitals, schools, markets and places where internally displaced persons are located have been destroyed by airstrikes; some of those places had been de-conflicted, meaning that the parties attacking them were well aware of their location. Again, over the past weeks, locations in Idlib where civilians sought shelter or care have been hit. Those attacks are unacceptable. We, the co-penholders, condemn this violence and call for accountability for those responsible. In this regard, we support the work of the board of inquiry as well as that of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. Once again, we call for an immediate cessation of hostilities. We condemn the attacks perpetrated by Security Council-designated terrorist groups; however, as stated earlier, counter-terrorism efforts can never absolve parties of their obligations under international humanitarian law, including the principles of distinction and proportionality. On 10 January, the Council prolonged the cross- border mechanism, ensuring the flow of humanitarian aid to the people of Idlib. We said it then and we will say it again today: we were extremely disappointed at the fact that the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point could not be renewed owing to opposition by one Member State. Al-Yarubiyah was an important crossing that was actively used. It enabled the flow of medical aid into the north-east of the country, with 1.4 million beneficiaries in 2019. Three weeks ago, there was no viable alternative to that crossing. The Council has tasked the Secretary General with looking into potential alternatives to that crossing point, and we look forward to the report that will be published in February. In other parts of Syria, the situation also remains dire. In Al-Hol camp, more than 65,000 people continue to receive humanitarian assistance, yet the situation remains deeply concerning. In Rukban, several thousand people remain stuck in the camp, in a desperate situation. The United Nations and its partners must be able to help them leave in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner, or to provide assistance to those remaining in the camp. Finally, resolution 2504 (2020) calls upon all parties to ensure principled, sustained and improved humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2020. That resolution was endorsed by the Council and all its members just a few weeks ago. It is high time for all parties to the conflict, especially the Syrian authorities, to live up to that obligation, and we therefore call on all Member States to fully implement it as a priority.
