Mr. Danon (Israel): I thank Ms. DiCarlo and
Mr. Lacroix for their briefings.

Two days ago, the United States recognized what
has been true for the past 52 years - the Golan Heights
is and will always be Israel's sovereign territory.
We thank the United States for its just and historic
proclamation. This step, like the many others it has
taken before, shows the willingness of the United States
to honour reality on the ground. It reflects once again
the sincere commitment of the United States to ensuring
Israel's security and right to self-defence. We implore
Member States to join the United States in recognizing
that the Golan Heights is Israel's sovereign land.

From the moment Israel was founded, the Syrian
regime has maintained a policy of aggression with the
goal of wiping Israel off the map. The Syrian army
joined four other Arab armies in attacking our newly
born Jewish State in 1948. For the next two decades, the
Syrian army rained deadly fire from the Golan Heights
into Israeli civilian areas and filled the territory with
bunkers, barbed-wire fences and minefields.

In 1967, Israel, as nations around the world
recognized, was forced to engage in a war of self-
defence. Israel must ensure that this territory will never
again be used to target our people. Since 1967, the Golan
Heights has proven critical to our very survival. Just six
years later, in a most vile act of war, Syria launched
a surprise attack against Israel on Yom Kippur, the
holiest day for the Jewish people. In that decisive
moment in Israeli history, it was the Golan Heights that
proved invaluable to Israel's fate. With the high ground
under our control, Israel was able to observe Syria's
initial act of war and successfully launch a counter-
attack. The State of Israel's sovereignty over the Golan
Heights is vital, both for preventing future Syrian acts
of aggression against Israel and for ensuring the safety,
security and stability of our region.

Addressing the Council today is the representative
of a regime responsible for one of the most horrific
humanitarian crises ofthe present day- a representative
who is complicit in the murder ofhundreds ofthousands
of his own people. The Syrian Ambassador comes here
to talk about the Golan Heights. Shame on him. Where
was he when his Government was gassing children?
Shame on him for dropping barrel bombs on his people.
Shame on him for inviting the Iranians into his country.

I ask the Council today - to whom exactly does the
United Nations want to give the Golan? To the thousands
offighters directed by Iran? To the Shia foreign militias?
To the jihadi factions? To whom? Their fighting has
repeatedly spilled over into Israel's sovereign territory,
and sniper fire and mortar shells have frequently fallen
into Israel. As Israel opened its doors to treated injured
Syrians in the Golan Heights, President Al-Assad made
clear that Hizbullah, operating in Syria, should use the
Golan Heights to attack Israel.

At Iran's command, Hizbullah has seized the
opportunity to establish a Syrian terror front from
which to attack Israel. Hizbullah's Syrian terror
network ranges from the town of Hadar, at the northern
end of the Golan Heights, to the towns of Arnah,
Khan Arnabah and Quneitra. The terror network is
currently focused on intelligence gathering. We have
that information. We are watching.
But those efforts are just the backdrop for a larger
and more dangerous Hizbullah terror operation to attack
Israel. Hizbullah's Syrian terror network is exploiting
the civilian population living near the Israeli border and
using Syrian observation points in the area as outposts
for that terror operation. The Syrian Government has
given the Iranian regime freedom of movement and
operation in its own sovereign land. It has recklessly
given up its territory for the Iranian regime to establish
military entrenchment and expand its control from
Tehran all the way to the Mediterranean.

In February 2018, an Iranian unmanned aircraft
armed with explosives was launched into Israel from
Syria with the intention of attacking Israelis. In January
this year, the Iranian regime committed a grave act of
aggression against Israel by firing a medium-range
surface-to-surface missile into northern Israel from
Syria. The situation today, here in the Chamber, is
that the Syrian regime is not even representing its
own people anymore. It is serving its puppet master
in Tehran.

No nation in the world would give up strategic
land to its most dangerous enemy. Without the Golan
Heights, Israel would find Quds Force soldiers on the
tip of the Sea of Galilee. We will never let that happen.

For years, the Al-Assad regime has slaughtered
its people. It has allowed Iran to entrench itself inside
Syria. Does the international community honestly think
Israel would give the Golan Heights to a war criminal?
The war crimes of the dictator from Damascus will
someday be stopped.

Israel's sovereignty over the Golan Heights is
forever. The Jewish people's roots in the Golan Heights
go back thousands of years. The Golan is mentioned
in the Tanakh - the Bible - multiple times. It is
home today to tens of thousands of Israelis. As Prime
Minister Menachem Begin said in 1981:

"There can be, in our country or beyond its borders,
no serious person who has studied the history of
the land of Israel who would attempt to deny that
for many generations the Golan Heights were an
integral part of the land of Israel."

International recognition of the Israeli Golan
Heights ensures the security and stability of our region.
Those States that pay lip service to Israel's inherent
right to self-defence now have the opportunity prove
the weight of their words.

