Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I join previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening today's open debate on this important topic. I also thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their very pertinent remarks earlier today. The new year has been marked by rising geopolitical tensions in the Middle East. As a small State strongly committed to the multilateral rules-based system, Singapore is deeply concerned by recent developments. There is an urgent need for all parties to exercise maximum restraint, de-escalate tensions and return to dialogue and diplomacy to resolve their differences. We fully endorse the call by the Secretary-General for parties to stop escalation and re-start dialogue in order to renew international cooperation. In the context of recent developments, the debate today takes on particular significance. There is no doubt that the Security Council has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. However, all Member States can, and indeed must, contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security. In that regard, please allow me to make a few points. First, we have to strengthen respect for the Charter of the United Nations, not only through our words but, more important, through our actions. Every Member of the United Nations, in particular the permanent members of the Security Council, have a responsibility to uphold international law and the principles of the United Nations Charter. The rules-based multilateral system requires respect for international law by all States at all times. If there is a selective approach to implementing international law or if there are unilateral actions that ignore international law, we will encourage a culture of non-compliance. Over time, repeated non-compliance will have the effect of weakening and undermining our rules-based multilateral system. It is therefore important for all members to guard against unilateral actions and selective multilateralism. Secondly, we have to place greater emphasis on preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with international law, and we need to support the role of the Secretary-General in the settlement of disputes, in accordance with Article 99 of the United Nations Charter. Preventive diplomacy may be time-consuming, but it is an effective way to enhance the prospects for peace and reconciliation. We applaud the Secretary-General's pledge to make prevention a priority of the priorities, as he put it. The International Court of Justice is an important mechanism for dispute settlement, and it is vital that all Member States support the work of the Court and respect its decisions. Thirdly, the Security Council must work harder to be cohesive and united on the key issues of our day. We know that this is not always possible. However, it is important for members of the Security Council, especially the permanent members, to work harder to build understanding and find common ground on key international issues. That is our expectation. And when common positions are adopted, it is incumbent on all Member States to respect and implement the Council's decisions in full. We cannot allow countries to selectively implement or selectively ignore Council decisions. When we disrespect a decision of the Council, we undermine the credibility of the entire Council and weaken its ability to maintain international peace and security. To be effective, it is important for the Council to work and coordinate closely with the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission and regional organizations. Notably, regional and _ subregional organizations have played an increasingly important role in maintaining peace and security in recent years. Their efforts can complement the actions of the Security Council, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We welcome the increasing number of meetings the Security Council has had with regional organizations in the past few months, and we look forward to the meeting on Association of Southeast Asian Nations-United Nations cooperation later this month, under your presidency, Sir. We also welcome the regular meetings between the President of the Security Council and the President of the General Assembly. The Security Council is at the forefront of the efforts of the United Nations to maintain peace and security, and members of the Council, especially the permanent members, must lead by example. At the same time, all of us here, as Members of the United Nations, have a responsibility to uphold the principles of the United Nations Charter, not only through our words but also through our actions.
