Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Incidents of armed violence against defenceless
populations exacerbate the vulnerability and poverty in
which millions of people live. We wish therefore to
join the Secretary-General in calling for a culture of
protection in our time, based on the elements he
mentions in his report (S/2001/33l): strengthened
criminal justice systems; regional approaches to the
protection of refugees and to monitoring humanitarian
situations that could endanger peace; greater
guarantees of access by humanitarian organizations to
the victims of conflict; and greater participation by
civil society, including the media and the private
sector, in efforts to create a broad network for the
protection of civilians. We agree on the importance of
these elements, and we are confident that the United
Nations will be able to help consolidate a culture of
protection not only at the international level but also at
the national level in close coordination with
Governments, who bear primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

In keeping with your suggestion, Mr. President, I
shall suggest a number of practical activities by which
the Security Council could contribute to the protection
of civilians in conflicts of which it is seized.

First, it is crucial that there be proper follow-up
of the impact on civilians of all Security Council
actions, such as statements on specific situations, the
imposition or lifting of sanctions, and the creation,
extension or termination of peacekeeping operations.
We do not know the real scope of the impact of all such
actions on civilians and therefore believe that, in his
reports, the Secretary-General could include brief,
focused follow-up assessments including the concrete
contributions of the Council, along with its errors,
failures and limitations, always bearing in mind the
views of the States concerned as a form of cooperation
with the Organization.

With respect to such assessments, the Security
Council must not lose sight of the fact that, as a
political body, it has structural constraints on the full
consideration of an item that is essentially
humanitarian in nature. The protection of civilians is
carried out through a variety of activities, including
humanitarian assistance, legal protection, and political
and economic arrangements, whose implementation
goes beyond the Council's capacities. But the essence
of humanitarian activity is its neutrality and
impartiality; the Council can make an effective
contribution to the full protection of those elements.

Secondly, special envoys and special
representatives of the Secretary-General should make
specific proposals to the Security Council on the item
before us today. Their information could, inter alia,
help us define more precisely the terms of reference of
Security Council missions to conflict zones, such as
those that will soon be going to the Great Lakes region,
Kosovo and Georgia, so that these can contribute to the
creation of a political context that fosters the protection
of civilians.

Thirdly, the Council should recognize that, in the
long term, the most effective way of protecting
civilians is by means of a negotiated political solution
that puts an end to an armed conflict. In each case, the
Security Council should think about the potential for
either contributing to or obstructing such a political
solution and, therefore, the protection of civilians. In
so doing, this organ of the United Nations must
consider the protection of civilians as one of the
matters for which it is responsible when dealing with a
situation that threatens international peace and security.
The protection of civilians in occupied territories is a
concrete example in which the Council could make a
significant difference.

Fourthly, it is necessary that the relationship
between the Security Council and the regional
organizations include the generation of data about
available mechanisms for the protection of civilians. In
this context, the Council must bear in mind that many
of the regional organizations, in particular those made
up of developing countries, labour under great
limitations and can be operational in this field only if
they are provided with the necessary means. However,
the Council must work with sufficient awareness of the
national interests of each country in the region in order
to avoid unnecessary political tension in handling
humanitarian situations.
Another appropriate practical measure would be
to invite various actors in international life - Member
States of the United Nations, international
organizations, members of national and international
civil society and private sector actors - to join in this
search for ways and means of improving the protection
of civilians. In bringing about this level of
participation, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and other bodies of the United Nations
system seem to have a tremendous comparative
advantage over the Security Council, as is also the case
in the promotion of social and economic development
initiatives in conflict areas with resources from various
sources - initiatives that are directed specifically at
tackling the sources of the armed conflict and the
causes of its continuation.

I would like to make some specific comments on
topics in the Secretary-General's report that have
particular relevance for Colombia. First, we must
recognize the part played not only by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, but
also, very particularly, by the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Thanks to
their great experience, they can contribute greatly at
the international political and legal level, as well as in
the field.

Secondly, it is indispensable that actions taken by
the United Nations in this area, including the
determination that a Government is not in a position to
protect its civilian population, because of a lack of
resources or de facto control over part of its territory,
have the consent of the State concerned, in keeping
with the specific circumstances in each case.

Thirdly, any action for the protection of civilians
must be guided by comprehensive respect for refugee
law, in close cooperation with UNHCR, including
assistance to displaced persons. The opinion of the
UNHCR representative on the effectiveness of the
application of refugee law and of the recommendations
of the Secretary-General found in paragraphs 34 and 35
of his report, is useful for this debate.

In conclusion, it is important to emphasize, as
paragraph 48 of the report has done, that armed groups
must comply strictly with the relevant standards of
international humanitarian law, and in particular those
pertaining to the protection of civilians. As the
Secretary-General has so aptly said, it has been
demonstrated that these groups misuse their power by
attacking defenceless civilians and blatantly
disregarding international humanitarian law. We
support the prohibition and the appeal that civilians not
be treated as targets and that no indiscriminate attacks
be perpetrated against them.

