Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2048 (2012). We
thank all delegations for the very active cooperation
that they lent us in order to draft it.

We see the resolution as another step forward in
the Security Council's response to the military coup
that interrupted the democratic electoral process in
Guinea-Bissau on 12 April. The resolution imposes
targeted sanctions on the authors of the coup and those
who support that illegal act. Today, the Council has yet
again sent a strong message of condemnation and
reiterated its policy of zero-tolerance towards
unconstitutional seizures of power.
Coups d'etat against legitimate democratic
authorities are simply unacceptable, as is the illegal
disruption of an electoral process that is internationally
regarded to have been free and fair. Political solutions
that exclude and exile those with the greatest
democratic electoral support while empowering
individuals who were electorally defeated are equally
unacceptable. That is a fundamental principle in any
democratic State based on the rule of law.

Portugal views the imposition of sanctions as an
instrument to exert pressure on those who reversed the
democratic process by illegally usurping power.

We are gravely concerned by increasing reports
of recurrent human rights violations by the so-called
military command, and recall that all those responsible
for such violations must be held accountable. In that
regard, we underline the Council's measures to
consider further measures in View of the evolution of
the situation.

The resolution that we have just adopted also
stresses the importance of mediation in seeking a
solution to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Portugal fully
supports any mediation process that ensures an
effective and credible restoration of the constitutional
order.

The resolution also underscores the importance of
effective coordination among international partners,
namely, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries and the European Union. Such
coordination should involve the active engagement of
the United Nations. Any successful solution will require
a joint effort by all. Therefore, Portugal expects the
resolution to foster greater cohesiveness and unity of
purpose among the various efforts under way. Portugal
stands ready to actively contribute to that objective.

