Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the presidency of the United Kingdom
for having convened this open debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings. We
are grateful to the High Commissioner for her tireless
efforts in the difficult task of protecting and promoting
human rights.

Chile supported resolution 2171 (2014), recently
adopted, because it reaffirms the obligation of States to
settle their international disputes through the peaceful
means provided for by the Charter of the United
Nations or by other peaceful means. That contributes
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and to conflict prevention. All such actions should take
place under the principle ofthe free choice of States and
the strictest respect for international law and existing
international treaties. That is how we should interpret
paragraph 4 of the resolution.

At the same time, we regret the fact that the
resolution did not include in its text the right to the
truth, enshrined in the International Convention for the
Protection ofAll Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
Chile knows that it is on the basis of the truth and
by dealing with the root causes of conflicts that true
reconciliation is achieved, while making it possible to
prevent future conflicts.

The early prevention and warning of conflicts should
be considered in a multidimesional approach, linking
sustainable peace and security with important objectives
such as attaining the Millennium Development Goals
and the promotion and protection of human rights as a
whole. National, subregional, regional and international
efforts must be seen as an integrated whole in order
to respond to indicators of instability and the threat of
conflict. The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must be an integral part of that approach. A
multidimensional approach to conflict prevention and
settlement must include the gender perspective, which
is key to ensuring a lasting peace. If incorporated in
the formulation of policies, programmes and laws, such
a perspective would guarantee greater cohesion and
social peace.

We reiterate the obligation of all States to resolve
their international disputes through peaceful means
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and in strict respect for international law and existing
international treaties. We highlight in particular the work

of international courts - primarily the International
Court of Justice, which is the main judicial organ of
the United Nations - given their work to resolve

international disputes submitted to their jurisdiction
and their function of issuing advisory opinions on legal
matters. We also value the work done by important
specialized courts such as the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea, by regional human rights courts
such as the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, by
ad hoc international tribunals and by the International
Criminal Court. We also highlight the work of by the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in resolving various
disputes, including territorial disputes concerning
treaties and respect for human rights and international
law.

In that regard, strengthening the rule of law can be
seen as one of the most important tools for stability. We
highlight the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), adopted on 24 September 2012, in particular its
paragraph 28, in which the contribution of the Security
Council to the rule of law at the international level is
recognized.

Cooperation is crucial to achieving everything to
which I have referred. In that connection, we reiterate
our support for strengthening political, social and
economic cooperation mechanisms, which would
finally make it possible to ensure international peace
and security.

