Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to congratulate Ambassador Nishida
on his assumption of the chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). The Chinese delegation will continue to
support and cooperate with the activities carried out by
the Committee and its Chairman. China wishes to
thank Ambassador Nishida for his briefing on the work
of the Committee over the past 90 days. We have taken
note of the fact that the Committee carried out very
effective work during the most recent reporting period,
for which we express our appreciation.

Since December 2006, the Security Council has
adopted a number of resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
issue, including resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007),
1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). Those resolutions reflect
the international community's common concern
regarding the Iranian nuclear issue. The resolutions
were adopted in the interest of maintaining the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime,
strengthening the authority and role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and promoting
diplomatic efforts aimed at reaching peaceful solutions
on the Iranian nuclear issue.

Countries have the obligation to implement those
resolutions in a full and earnest manner. However, at
the same time, it is necessary that they not implement

their provisions arbitrarily. Implementation should in
no way impede the construction and development of
Iran, nor should it get in the way of normal trade
between Iran and other countries and the normal life of
the Iranian people. It should in no way impede the
maintenance of normal relations between other
countries and Iran.

China has always supported the international non-
proliferation regime and we are opposed to Iran's
possession or development of nuclear weapons. We
support addressing this issue through a dual-track
strategy. China attaches great importance to and has
strictly implemented relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. We have submitted timely reports on
the implementation of the four relevant resolutions.
However, at the same time we believe that sanctions
are not an end in themselves. They cannot provide a
fundamental solution to the problem at hand. Peaceful
solutions through diplomatic efforts and dialogue
remain the best choice.

At present, new opportunities have emerged for
relaunching dialogue and negotiation over this issue.
The E3+3 Governments and Iran have all expressed
their desire to restart negotiations. China hopes that all
the parties concerned will fully seize this opportunity
to do so and, on the basis of equality and mutual
respect, take a more flexible and pragmatic approach
and further strengthen engagement and dialogue so as
to intensify diplomatic efforts on all fronts to reach a
peaceful settlement for this problem.

We have taken note of the latest report on this
issue submitted by the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We hope
that the IAEA will continue to play a constructive role
in finding an appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. We hope that Iran will fully cooperate with the
IAEA and clarify and properly resolve all problems at
an early date so as to build the international
community's confidence in the peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear issue.

China will continue to actively participate in the
activities of the Committee and, together with others,
we are ready to seize and make best use of all the
positive elements for restarting negotiations and
intensifying diplomatic efforts so as to build
momentum for finding solutions through dialogue and
engagement.

