Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Nicaragua aligns itself fully with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt in his
capacity as the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM).

Once again, Nicaragua reiterates its strongest
condemnation of Israel's illegal occupation of all
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories, and
demands its immediate withdrawal. We condemn the
Israeli policies and practices aimed at the construction,
rather than the dismantlement of, settlements, as well
as the inhuman blockade of Gaza and the policy of
dismembering the West Bank and other Palestinian
territories. We can no longer allow the logic of denying
the very existence of the Palestinian State to continue.
Such logic has also led to a true besiegement policy
that is based upon an undeclared determination to deny
each and every Palestinian citizen their fundamental
human existence.

Since the triumph of the Sandanista revolution, in
1979, Nicaragua has been a proud witness to the
struggle of the Palestinian people. We recognize the
substantial concessions made by Palestine in order to
achieve peace, although they have, regrettably, been
met by Israel's continued illegal settlements, increased
humiliation, increased killings, growing instances of
systematic assassination of Palestinian leaders and
greater destruction of homes and more looting,
including in East Jerusalem.

Nicaragua reiterates the need to put an immediate
end to the Israel's impunity, which has been
irresponsibly guaranteed to it by a permanent member
of the Council, in particular through the indiscriminate
use of the veto by that member, who has become
Israel's major accomplice.

We all know that the Council has at its disposal
the mechanisms necessary to demand that Israel change
its policies and practices once and for all, that it be
held accountable for its actions and that it implement
the resolutions of the Organization.

It is time to recognize the Palestinian State within
the pre-1967 borders, as well as for everyone, in
particular the members of the Council, to set aside the
double standards of requiring some, but not others, to
comply with the obligations that we have entered into
as Members of the Organization. That is the only way
that we can achieve a firm and lasting peace that
allows both peoples to effectively exercise all of their
10
rights and makes it possible to ultimately end an
inexplicable injustice.

In addition to the dangerous stalemate that has
developed vis-a-vis the Palestinian question through a
lack of political will, we have also witnessed how the
situation in the Middle East and in the surrounding
regions has worsened every day as the result of a clear
tendency to resolve conflicts through the use of
weapons and war, rather than through dialogue and
negotiation.

During the 1980s, when the same protagonists we
have today were promoting regime change and calling
for war instead of dialogue and negotiation, the
Organization, the countries of our region and the rest
of the international community raised their voices in a
strong, firm and resolute manner to call for a halt to the
war machinery, to the flow of weapons and to terrorist
actions. We called for dialogue and negotiation to
prevail over the imposition of force. It is extremely
worrying to my country that conflicts are increasingly
being resolved through the use of force by the great
Powers and their armed wing, NATO. From the very
start, the warmongering calls that we have heard over
the past 15 months have undermined weak attempts at
a peaceful settlement of the crises emerging in various
parts of the Middle East and the Arab world and its
surrounding areas.

Instead of supporting aggressive rhetoric, the role
of the Organization and all its Members should always
be to support efforts for peace, to keep channels of
communication and dialogue open and not to isolate
itself through partisan positions that alienate one of the
parties to a conflict. True to the very essence of the
United Nations, born from the ashes of the Second
World War, calls emerging from the Organization
should be for peace, not for war.

In that respect, Nicaragua resolutely condemns all
those that have put their dangerous geopolitical
ambitions ahead of ending violence through the
provision of military and financial support to armed
groups classified as terrorist groups by the Security
Council. Such illicit activities affirm that any pretext or
instrument are welcomed in seeking to impose a
change of Government by force, irresponsibly
encouraging public opposition, violating the Charter of
the United Nations and threatening the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its Member States.
12-30747
Nicaragua urges that the joint efforts of Russia,
China and former Secretary-General Kofi Annan be
fully supported by the entire Organization and all its
Members. We cherish the hope that such efforts will
succeed and that reason and peace will prevail over
force and war, the consequences of which could be
devastating for the region and the world.

In that respect, I would like to end my statement
by emphasizing that global peace can be maintained
only if it is understood once and for all that the logic of
interventionism and hegemony can never be the basis
for a new world order in which true justice for all, free
of double standards or double morals, prevails.

