Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like to begin by thanking the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
briefing. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the update provided by the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom on the latest developments in
the follow-up to the shocking chemical-weapon attack
that took place in Salisbury last month. I will make
three points. First, I will reiterate our condemnation of
the attack and reaffirm our solidarity with the United
Kingdom. Secondly, I will welcome the clarity provided
by the independent findings of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Thirdly, I
will urge the Russian Federation to change its course
and cooperate fully.

First, on the unacceptable nature of the attack.
At both the previous meetings on the matter (see S/PV.8203 and S/PV.8224), we expressed our shock
about the reckless attack with a military-grade nerve
agent on British soil. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has strongly condemned that attack in the Security
Council and on many other occasions. We stand in full
solidarity with the United Kingdom and fully subscribe
to the conclusions of the European Council on 22 March.

Secondly, last Thursday, at the specific request
of the United Kingdom, the full report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
was shared with all member States of the OPCW. That
report, containing the analysis of environmental and
biomedical samples, was carried out at the request of
the United Kingdom. In doing so, the United Kingdom
has acted in full accordance with OPCW procedures,
as has been confirmed by the Director-General of
the OPCW. We appreciate the transparency observed
by the United Kingdom in the process. The OPCW's
independent analysis confirmed the findings of the
United Kingdom's authorities that the attack on Yulia
and Sergei Skripal was carried out with the use of a
specific type of Novichok. That fact is now beyond
dispute. We welcome the clarity that the OPCW report
has provided.

Thirdly, there is a need for Russian cooperation.
The findings of the OPCW report have made it even
more evident than before that it is highly likely that
the Russian Federation bears responsibility for the
attack. There is no plausible alternative explanation. In
that light, it is not helpful that the authorities of the
Russian Federation continue to disseminate alternative,
implausible versions of the events in Salisbury. Nor do
we approve of attempts by the Russian Federation, at
the OPCW and elsewhere, to create procedural hurdles
for the United Kingdom's authorities to carry out their
follow-up to that chemical attack on their sovereign soil.

We urge the Russian Federation to change its
course and cooperate fully. We urge the Russian
Federation to provide the United Kingdom with all
information relating to unanswered questions about
the course of events in Salisbury on 4 March. We call
on the Russian Federation to cooperate with efforts to
bring those responsible to justice and to provide full
disclosure of its Novichok programme to the OPCW.
In conclusion, any use of chemical weapons constitutes
a threat to international law, peace and security that is
unacceptable. I reiterate our call for full accountability
for that horrific crime.

