Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
your competent handling of the work of the Council in
this month of August, and to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Wang Guangya of China, for
his excellent presidency of the Council in July.

My delegation would also like to commend you,
Mr. President, for this positive initiative that you have
taken in organizing this debate and for the wise choice
of the theme. The problem of conflict prevention and
resolution and the role expected of the Security
Council in that area is worthy of examination in all its
dimensions.

One single figure cited in the document on the
terms of reference for this debate (S/2007/496) -
which you were kind enough to prepare for us, Mr.
President - concerning the exponential cost of
peacekeeping operations illustrates how vital it is for
the international community to come up with a real
conflict prevention strategy that would go beyond
detecting symptoms of crises to encompass - and here
the role and responsibility of the Council would be
essential - unresolved conflicts like Western Sahara
and other conflicts. The Council should, in this respect,
reflect upon the example of the crisis in Somalia and
learn the lessons from it, becoming fully involved in
the search for just and lasting solutions, as called for in
the Charter.

In other words, we expect from this debate and
from the decision that it will sanction if it fails to come
up with a plan of action a political will that represents
a break with the indecision that has prevailed in the
past and that has been and continues to be very costly
to the international community.

In fact, the cost parameter is certainly not the
most determinative one when we evaluate the
destructive consequences of conflicts. In reality, the
true equation resides in the number of countries
devastated by conflicts, in the millions of lives lost and
in the suffering inflicted on civilian populations,
especially among the most vulnerable categories,

07-4920]
because of a crisis that we have not known how to,
been able to - or sometimes even wanted to - stamp
out at the right time and at the least cost.

Once more, it is not a matter of further
investment in analyses and in elements of a strategy
that remains to be hatched, despite the extreme
importance of these aspects. We cannot deny that
beyond common causes, each conflict situation has its
own complex dynamic. It is, however, just as true that
the United Nations has for almost two decades been
examining the phenomenon of conflicts by analyzing
their causes and by suggesting the means for their
prevention and resolution.

In fact, since the publication of An Agenda for
Peace (S/24111) in 1992, other reports and other
studies have enriched our collective knowledge of
conflicts and as a result have assisted in the
development of relevant approaches for conflict
prevention. The reports of the Secretary-General - the
most recent of which have to do, respectively, with the
causes of conflict in Africa and the promotion of
sustainable peace and development in Africa, and the
possibilities and challenges of partnership in the area
of security on a regional and a global scale - contain
an analysis and relevant proposals that only need to be
implemented.

Additionally, the General Assembly and the
Security Council have adopted decisions that,
unfortunately, have not been completely implemented.
Resolution 1625 (2005) - which Algeria had the
honour to co-sponsor with Benin and Tanzania, then
members of the Council - proposes a platform of
action and elements for a coherent, comprehensive
strategy for conflict prevention, particularly in Africa.
It specified the terms of an effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
its subregional organizations and between that
partnership and international and regional partners,
without neglecting the role and contribution of civil
society.

It is a matter of realizing the objectives of this
resolution and strengthening it, if needed, by relying on
new ideas, especially when they involve capacity-
building of the African Union in the areas of
prevention by assisting it to improve its system of early
warning, of collection and analysis of information, and
of mediation. One way that might help us in moving
forward would be the establishment of a mechanism

07-4920]
for the periodic review of this resolution, such as what
is done for Council resolutions having to do with
women, children and the protection of civilians during
armed conflicts.

From our standpoint, for any conflict prevention
strategy to be effective, it must be based on at least two
key axes. The first has to do with the coordination of
efforts to ensure that the discreet action of preventive
diplomacy and good offices might succeed in the case
of conflicts in gestation. Through his responsibilities, it
is upon the Secretary-General, of course, that this task
devolves. This coordination must also prevail in post-
conflict stabilization and reconstruction processes.

The second axis has to do with mobilizing
resources, both for building the capacity of regional
actors and for development. In fact, we must relocate
development to the center of any conflict prevention
strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Algeria is
pleased with the will expressed this morning by the
Secretary-General to make the settlement of the
conflicts in Darfur, Somalia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Western Sahara one of the priorities
of his mandate and his intention to implement a series
of measures to reinforce United Nations capacities in
the area of conflict prevention.

