Let me begin by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for his useful and frank briefing on the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. South Africa has noted with concern developments of the past days in the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as in the Gaza Strip. In this regard, we support the call by the Special Coordinator Mladenov and the Secretary-General for an immediate cessation of hostilities. The current precarious situation prevailing in Gaza is of particular concern to South Africa. The almost-daily attacks on Gaza and the use of warplanes, reportedly in retaliation for the launching of incendiary balloons, is not a proportional response and will instead serve to inflame tensions, endanger the lives of civilians and further degrade critical infrastructure. Moreover, Israel's blockade on Gaza must end. The Israeli blockade has had a devastating impact on Palestinians living in Gaza and on their livelihood. Israel's latest ban on allowing fuel into Gaza has resulted in the shutdown of Gaza's only power station, plunging the Strip into darkness and jeopardizing the lives of civilians dependent on an already-strained health sector. These actions are inhumane and are causing serious bodily and mental harm to the people of Gaza, especially at a time when the world is in the grip of fighting a global pandemic. We call on Israel to respect and honour its obligations as an occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention and to put an end to its disproportionate and hostile actions. The Palestinian people, especially those living in Gaza, cannot afford any more hurt, hardship or hostilities. We therefore call for the release of all detainees and political prisoners, especially women, children and the elderly. While all civilians everywhere are entitled to a fair and equal justice system, Palestinians living under illegal military occupation do not have access to one. In this regard, we have learned last week of yet another death of a Palestinian teenager who succumbed to his wounds in detention after being shot near Ramallah by Israeli soldiers. These brutal actions by Israeli soldiers have to stop. Israel operates an unequal, two-tiered legal system, where Israelis are subject to a civilian criminal and legal system, while Palestinians, including children, living in the same area are subject to military law, making Israel the only country that applies military law to minors. As we and many others have said before, the solution to this decades-long conflict is dialogue and negotiations culminating in a political agreement that results in an independent sovereign State of Palestine existing side by side in peace with Israel, as guided by United Nations resolutions, international law and internationally agreed parameters. Any viable peace plan must include the full participation of all parties as equal partners. In this regard, any initiative aimed at finding a lasting resolution to the conflict must take into account the needs and aspirations of the Palestinian people. For too long, the most basic rights, needs, hopes and aspirations of the Palestinians have been eroded and ignored. South Africa strongly believes that any peace plan should not allow Palestinian statehood to devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty, territorial contiguity and economic viability. In this regard, a solution must be premised on a just, rights-based settlement, with just laws, that facilitates equality and equity for all who have a right to live in the territories of Israel and Palestine. This includes the sovereign equality between States. South Africa reiterates its call for the full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The ongoing and illegal settlement construction, seizure and demolition of Palestinian land and property must be addressed. Overt violations of Security Council resolutions usually provoke stricter countermeasures on the party responsible for the infringement. However, again, Palestine is deprived of its right to see the illegal actions of the Israeli occupation brought to justice. Many of us have called for those who violate international law to be held accountable for their actions. Israel must therefore be held accountable for its persistent violations of international law, including General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). Allow me to make a few remarks on the matter of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The United States, of its own volition, unilaterally withdrew from the JCPOA on 8 May 2018, reinstating unilateral sanctions against Iran, which is in violation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). Having confirmed its withdrawal from the JCPOA and by not participating in any of the JCPOA structures or subsequent activities, the United States ceased to be a JCPOA participant and is therefore ineligible to submit a notification to the Security Council under the terms of resolution 2231 (2015). As resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA are inextricably linked and are mutually contingent, any party that, of its own volition, withdraws from the JCPOA cannot be regarded as a JCPOA participant State and therefore would not be able to invoke the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) as a participant State. In conclusion, the future of the Middle East hangs in the balance and the current forms of aggression as seen in Gaza could give way to further instability and violence in the region.
