Mr. Bordyuzha (spoke in Russian): I am grateful
for the opportunity to speak at this important and
representative forum. We welcome efforts aimed at
achieving closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations while maintaining a
logical division of labour and preserving the
prerogatives of the United Nations and the Security
Council.

We fully agree with the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "A regional-global security partnership:
challenges and opportunities" (S/2006/590). We are
sure that their implementation will enhance our
collective potential in the areas of conflict prevention,

peacemaking, peacekeeping, disarmament and
non-proliferation. We support increased cooperation
with regional organizations in resolving conflicts,
provided that there is a clear understanding that the
Security Council must play the main role in the
process, in full conformity with the Charter.

The Collective Security Treaty Organization is
taking capacity-building steps in this regard by
establishing its own peacekeeping operations, which
will contribute to United Nations peace operations.
Regional organizations can play an important role in
implementing a peacebuilding strategy, including
within the Peacebuilding Commission. We support
more extensive use of that specialized body within the
United Nations system. We also believe that key
international organizations must cooperate more
closely with regional organizations and play a
coordinating role in their respective fields of activity,
making practical recommendations, providing
information, consulting regional agencies and
providing expert and technical assistance.

At the same time, there is a need for closer
coordination of efforts between regional organizations,
especially between those that carry out similar tasks
and functions and operate in the same region. In this
regard, I would like to support the Secretary-General's
idea of establishing a web-based databank of practices
and capacities of regional partner organizations of the
United Nations and agencies in the United Nations
system in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That would help them
to more effectively coordinate and avoid duplicating
their efforts. Those efforts would also be more
effective if regional organizations considered
committing themselves to inform the United Nations as
soon as the threat of a conflict situation emerged within
the area of their responsibility. I propose the
establishment of a similar mechanism to coordinate
counter-terrorism activities through United Nations
bodies.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we are all
pursuing the same goal: to make the world more stable
and secure. Increasing United Nations cooperation with
regional organizations will contribute to the
achievement of that goal. There is no other choice for
the international community if conflict is to be
prevented.
