The President: I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Italy.

Let me first associate myself with previous
speakers in thanking President Pocar and President
Byron, as well as Prosecutor Del Ponte and Prosecutor
Jallow for their presentations to the Council. Italy
commends the tangible progress made in pursuing the
completion strategies, through the strong commitment
of both Tribunals, their Judges and Prosecutors, as well
as their staffs.

I would like to seize this opportunity to thank
Prosecutor Del Ponte for her passionate commitment,
dedication, determination and consistent prosecutorial
activities aimed at bringing an end to the culture of
impunity of the past years, and we wish her all success
in her future endeavours.

At the same time, I would like to reiterate my
congratulations to Mr. Serge Brammertz on his
appointment as Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and to wish him every success in the accomplishment
of his task.

It is with satisfaction that we note that
cooperation with the Tribunals by all relevant parties
has improved. Cooperation is now more crucial than
ever. As far as fugitives are concerned, there is little
need to recall that it is imperative that pending arrest
warrants be executed. If all of the highest-profile cases -
especially the proceedings against Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic and, as regards the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the case of
Fe'licien Kabuga - are not properly heard before
international tribunals, that could be seen as a betrayal
of the mandate assigned to the Tribunals by the
Security Council. Respect for the victims and their
loved ones demands that the perpetrators of the gravest
international crimes not go unpunished.

The mission of the Tribunals to contribute to
bringing lasting peace to communities ravaged by
heinous atrocities necessarily requires that those who
allegedly bear the highest responsibility for those
atrocities be brought to justice. The message must not
be sent that time is in favour of the culprits.

As for the future endeavours of the ad hoc
Tribunals with regard to their completion strategies,
Italy believes that the crucial issues should be: to
finalize the numerous cases being dealt with by the
Tribunals; to conduct trials against the fugitives once
they are apprehended; to continue the referral by the
Tribunals of intermediate and lower-ranking cases to
competent national jurisdictions, provided that the
national jurisdictions fulfil the human rights
requirements referred to in Security Council resolution
1534 (2004); to facilitate the reshaping of judicial
activities which will focus on appeals and on the
possible revision of judgements; and to increase, if
possible, the Tribunal's outreach and capacity-building
activities, which have been proven to have an
enormous impact on civilian populations. Any support
from the international community for these processes is
more than welcome, including support aimed at
strengthening the judicial capacity of the relevant
States to conduct criminal trials for international
crimes.

Finally, I would like to recall that the Tribunal's
legacy is under serious consideration within the
Council. A meeting of the Working Group on
Tribunals, with the participation of the principals of the
ICTY and the ICTR, has been scheduled for tomorrow
afternoon. Many delicate issues, both judicial and
administrative in nature, are at stake. We are confident
that important decisions will be made to reaffirm the
purpose for which the Tribunals were established,
namely, to punish those responsible for the most
horrific international crimes in the former Yugoslavia
and in Rwanda. International criminal justice in those
areas, as in the rest of the world, will not expire in
2010.

To conclude, I wish to request that President
Pocar further briefly elaborate on the need for the
ICTY to have more ad litem judges on a temporary
basis to contribute to the fulfilment of the Completion
Strategy.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Rwanda.

