Mr. Jessen-Petersen (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): On behalf of
Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the other members of the Council for the timely initiative
to hold this open debate. Mrs. Ogata very much regrets that
she cannot be here today.

As the international humanitarian organization
mandated by the United Nations to protect victims of forced
displacement and to seek solutions to their plight, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) welcomes the Council's increased
involvement in, and support for, humanitarian action.

In the past few years, the problem of forced
displacement has increased in scope, complexity and
political importance. In 1990, 15 million persons were
under UNHCR's mandate. Today, UNHCR is responsible
for 26 million refugees, returnees and displaced persons.
Furthermore, there are estimates of a similar number of
unprotected and unassisted internally displaced victims of
conflict.

Today's refugee movements are often massive and
rapid. At times, forcible displacement is the very objective
of a conflict, not just a by-product. Many conflicts pit one
group against another. Those fleeing are often an explosive
mix of the defeated government and army, sometimes still
armed, as well as innocent women and children.

In such situations, solutions become much more
difficult to reach. Insisting on the right of those forcibly
displaced to return may be to insist that the very goal of the
conflict be reversed. Allowing the defeated group,
collectively or individually, to return home might pose a
real threat to those who have replaced them in power.

At the same time, the flight of such groups has
resulted in increasingly politicized and militarized refugee
populations, causing serious tensions in inter-State
relations - in itself not a new phenomenon. Tensions
among rival groups of nationals in asylum countries are
exacerbated by such refugee populations and are likely to
threaten, or to be threatened by, countries of origin.

Although many lives have been saved, the responses
to the mega-crises of the 1990s have often been ad hoc
and improvised. While agencies such as ours do not have
the option of choosing when and when not to intervene,
political involvement is often selective. As the High
Commissioner said during her last briefing to the Council,
we need an integrated approach to crisis management in
which all dimensions - humanitarian, developmental
and, above all, political - are addressed in a mutually
reinforcing manner. The interface between human security
on the one hand, and national and international security
on the other, must be recognized. Humanitarian action
aimed at solving the predicament of refugees can support
peaceful efforts. In turn, humanitarian action needs
political and sometimes security action. Leaving refugee
problems unaddressed for too long may deepen, spread
and even internationalize conflict. We believe that far
more could be achieved if, next to the improved
humanitarian response capacity of the United Nations,
there were also an early political and security response
capacity.

There are a number of shortfalls in today's
international response to humanitarian crises: first, despite
the efforts of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and UNHCR's much more limited action,
there are still millions of persons forcibly displaced within
their own countries who are neither protected nor assisted.
Although primarily a State responsibility, it is also an
international responsibility to agree on more predictable
arrangements to manage and resolve such issues.

Secondly, humanitarian action is not just about
relief, such as food, water and shelter, although these are
important. It is also about ensuring physical protection,
which is much more difficult, dangerous and sensitive.
The challenge must be to bring safety to people rather
than people to safety. There are conflict situations in
which such safety can be provided only through military

 

involvement - a readiness to use force to ensure human
security if necessary.

Thirdly, it must be clear that the primary responsibility
for ensuring the survival and protection of refugees and
other victims lies with whoever is in control, be it a State
or non-State actor. Non-State actors aspiring to achieve
statehood must be held accountable for their behaviour
before, during and after reaching their goals.

Fourthly, humanitarian organizations should not be left
alone to resolve refugee situations that are clearly
politicized or militarized. Humanitarian actors are not
capable of separating the wolf from the sheep. Separation
is a political action, albeit a humanitarian necessity. There
is an urgent need to reaffirm the principle of the civilian
and humanitarian nature of refugee camps, and of the
primary responsibility of asylum countries to ensure respect
for this principle, if necessary with the assistance of the
international community. Refugees must also be located
away from borders. Refugee flows should not be exploited,
neither by exiled leaders nor by host countries. In our view,
the time has come to remind the international community
that granting asylum is a humanitarian and politically
neutral act.

Fifthly, with asylum under threat and asylum-seekers
becoming easy prey in domestic political debates, there is
a worrisome trend to force refugees back in conditions that
are neither safe nor viable. To be admitted to safety and not
to be forced back into situations of danger is a fundamental
human right. Premature repatriation endangers life and may
be a threat to fragile peace. From our experience,
repatriation on a voluntary basis is the best guarantee
against such risks. There are times, however, when UNHCR
may have to accept that for refugees, returning to
conditions of fragile peace may be a lesser evil, or provide
better protection, than remaining in conditions of physical
insecurity.

Concerted international action and attention by the
Council to these five areas of concern would strengthen
crisis management.

At the same time, three main conditions are
indispensable for humanitarian action, forming the
humanitarian space needed for our operations. These are
staff security, unrestricted access to people in need of
humanitarian protection and assistance, and respect for the
impartiality and integrity of humanitarian operations. All
three are under threat.

First, humanitarian staff are increasingly operating in
areas of conflict - alone, exposed and unprotected. As
the ears and eyes of the international community, they
may represent hope for some but obstacles and a threat
for others.

In such conflict situations, we urge that humanitarian
staff not be left alone without military support and
protection for more than a short-term emergency period.
Furthermore, we urge that political leverage, possibly
including targeted and selected sanctions, be considered
against both State and non-State actors endangering the
lives of humanitarian staff.

There is, moreover, a need to reaffirm existing
norms. Aggressors against humanitarian staff must be
held accountable through international criminal
jurisdictions. In this connection, we regret that the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel fails explicitly to address the safety
of civilian humanitarian staff of the Organization and of
non-United Nations agencies. There is no reason why they
should not be automatically covered. Why should the
security of humanitarian personnel deserve less
international protection than other categories of
international military, police or civilian staff? Today,
humanitarian staff are often exposed to greater risks.

Secondly, access to victims must be recognized and
supported as a right for those in need to receive
protection and assistance, and not as a favour or
concession granted by those in control. Access must be
free and unrestricted - not subject to conditions. There
should be a presumption that those denying access are
acting out of motives other than concern for those to
whom we are seeking access.

Thirdly, like our partners, we are especially
concerned about the difficulties in preserving our image
of political neutrality. Humanitarian action must be based
solely on the human needs of the victims. Yet in today's
inter-group conflicts, helping the victims of one group
makes humanitarian actors an immediate suspect, if not
enemy, to the other. Humanitarian action must be
depoliticized. This also means that when humanitarian
action complements international political action in the
integrated crisis response we advocate, it should not be
subordinated to it.

We hope that today's debate will help to clarify the
issues and define areas where political support from the
Council would complement and reinforce humanitarian

 

action. In our view, the Council could play an important
role in four areas: first, by setting the indispensable political
parameters for humanitarian action, in general and in
specific operations; secondly, by exerting diplomatic
pressure when necessary; thirdly, by being prepared to
consider military protection of humanitarian operations in
high-risk situations; and fourthly, by providing support to
meet the security concerns that I outlined earlier, and, in
this connection, by recognizing situations in which
humanitarian operations may have to be suspended because
of a total disregard for humanitarian space.

We in UNHCR look at the Security Council as the
centre stage of a system of global governance that preserves
the security of people as well as of States, as these two
concepts of security are increasingly indivisible. We insist
on our humanitarian impartiality, but we also need the
Council's guidance and support in order to safeguard the
integrity and effectiveness of humanitarian action.

