Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking all of our briefers. As Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto said, Afghanistan
will not stand alone. I also want to join others in
thanking New Zealand for its stewardship of an
extremely important committee and for carrying out its
very important functions extremely well on behalf of
the Council.

The year 2016 has been an important year for
Afghanistan: the Warsaw Summit in July and the
Brussels Conference in October saw the international
community pledge the military and financial support
that Afghanistan will need to meet the considerable
political and economic challenges of the coming
years. We also pledge to support the ambitious reform
commitments of the National Unity Government.

Now that the National Unity Government has a
clear signal of our support, we look forward to 2017 and
to the implementation of the reforms Afghanistan needs
for a brighter future. In all of this, the Government and
people of Afghanistan will have the United Kingdom's
support. I do not think that anyone in this Chamber
underestimates just how much there still is to do to
ensure that Afghanistan stays on the path to sustained
stability. We should focus on three specific points:
countering extremists; continuing development efforts;
and encouraging regional cooperation.

First, on countering extremists, it is clear that
Da'esh is not just a problem to be dealt with in Syria
and Iraq. They are a global threat, and Afghanistan has
sadly seen that first hand. Less than one month ago,
Da'esh claimed the lives of 30 people and left over 70
injured on the streets of Kabul.

The Taliban are compounding the security situation,
acting as another armed group in a country that has
had more than its fair share. Last week, they stopped a
fourth-year student of Kabul Polytechnic University as
he was driving home to visit his family. They hanged
him in the open, in public, evoking the darkest days
of life under Taliban control. And only last weekend,
five female security staff were murdered on their way
to work in Kandahar. Those are senseless deaths and
show that the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces, with the NATO Resolute Support Mission, have
a tough road ahead.

For our part, the United Kingdom is working closely
with the Afghan Government as its seeks to overcome
the country's legacy of conflict. As the coalition's
leader of the Afghan National Army Officer Academy,
we are proudly helping to train the next generation of
military leaders. As we seek to help ensure security on
the streets, we also recognize that Afghans must also
safe in their own homes. The sad fact is that it is not a
reality for many Afghan women. That is why British
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson pledged his support
for the elimination of violence against women when he
spoke with Mr. Abdullah recently.

Secondly, security will always be short-lived if
we do not provide a foundation of development for
all Afghan people. So we welcome the Government's
ambitious Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. The United Kingdom will be a long-term
partner in its delivery. I am proud of our support so far
for 7.2 million children, from Kabul to Kandahar, who
are going to school thanks to the United Kingdom's
support. Over 3 million of them are girls. I call on all
members of the Council to follow suit and invest in
Afghanistan's future through development.

Thirdly and finally, Afghanistan and its partners
must continue to bolster regional relations at both the
political and the technical levels. The National Unity
Government is charting a course towards stability. If
it is to succeed, Afghanistan's neighbours and partners
must further empower it, working in lockstep. We
welcome the recent Heart of Asia Summit, which
reinforced the common interests of Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Promoting cooperation across the region
through investment in infrastructure, overcoming
barriers to trade and pursuing mutually advantageous
economic development opportunities is in the entire
region's interest.

In conclusion, 2016 has been a year of progress
and challenges in Afghanistan. As it draws to a close,
we look forward to a more peaceful and prosperous
year ahead - a year that sees economic growth and
improvements in the delivery of health, education
and water, and that sees the lives of ordinary Afghans
getting better. All of that will require the sustained
political will of the Government and the effective and
coordinated support of the rest of us. In that effort, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
the Council will play a vital supporting role.

