Mr. Kolby (Norway): Children are the least
responsible yet the most vulnerable victims in all
conflicts. They are widely used as instruments of war -
inter alia, as child soldiers - and they are deliberately
targeted. This is intolerable and unacceptable. Norway
strongly supports the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
in his important role as an advocate of political and
humanitarian initiatives to benefit children at the
international level, as well as in contacts with the parties
to a conflict. We feel that the work of the Special
Representative should be followed up by all relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, as well as by other
organizations.

In his interim report to the Commission on Human
Rights, the Special Representative stated,

"the most important and pressing challenge today is
how to translate [international] standards and [local
norms] into action that can make a tangible

 

difference to the fate of children exposed to danger on
the ground." [E/CN.4/1998/119, Summary]

Norway therefore welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has included this issue on its agenda, and we
appreciate the opportunity to participate in this open debate.

As the body with primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, the Security
Council must take the interests of children explicitly into
account in its considerations. The Council should be kept
regularly informed of the activities of the Special
Representative. The Security Council can address the needs
of children in different ways when establishing the
mandates of peacekeeping and peace-building operations
and in the context of mediation of peace agreements.

In conflict areas, access to humanitarian supplies is
Vital. The Security Council must take this into account in
its consideration of conflict situations, and it must also be
willing to consider facilitating the disbursement of
necessary humanitarian relief where the needs of children
have to be given special consideration.

In modern wars, most casualties are caused by small
arms, far too often in the hands of children. Small arms
must be controlled. The Security Council should consider
whether the collection and destruction of small arms should
be part of the mandate of future peacekeeping operations,
as is the case in the ongoing operation in the Central
African Republic.

Demobilization and reintegration of soldiers must be
part of an integrated humanitarian relief and peace-building
strategy. Psycho-social rehabilitation and the reintegration
of children who have experienced the atrocities of war even
before they can read and write pose specific challenges to
which the international community should devote more
attention. We fully support the efforts of the Special
Representative to engage the United Nations agencies and
international humanitarian non-governmental organizations
to this end.
We must face the fact that women and children are
Victims of rape, sexual abuse and gender-based Violence,
which in many places have become an intrinsic part of
armed-conflict strategies. These activities are being used
systematically by certain armed forces to humiliate and
demoralize their declared enemies, as well as against the
national population in internal conflicts. This practice
cannot be tolerated. The international community should
make it clear that this is unacceptable and that the military
leadership should be held responsible for the conduct of
their forces.

Norway has supported programmes for the
rehabilitation of women who have been victims of sexual
violence in, for example, the former Yugoslavia. But
much remains to be done on this sensitive and painful
issue, and as we speak, important work is being carried
out in Rome, where the statutes for the new permanent
international criminal court are being negotiated, based,
inter alia, on input from the Special Representative.

When the United Nations, on behalf of the world
community, sends humanitarian personnel, peacekeeping
forces or other representatives to conflict areas, they must
live up to the highest standards of behaviour towards the
local population. Regrettably, this has not always been the
case. There should be compulsory training to sensitize all
peacekeepers to problems of child prostitution and
exploitation of children, as some countries have already
established. We encourage the United Nations to continue
to promote awareness of these sensitive issues in the
training of its staff.

Landmines are a threat to all civilians, not least to
children. The Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction has established an
international framework for further comprehensive action.
We are encouraged by the broad global support extended
to the Convention, and in particular the many mine-
affected countries that have signed it. We see mine action
as part of the wider agenda for peace and sustainable
development.

Participation of children in armed conflict is a tragic
and growing problem. States are in the process of
negotiating an optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on involvement of children in armed
conflict. Norway is among the States that support raising
the age limit of participation in hostilities to 18 years.
Children under this age should in all circumstances be
protected from taking part in warfare.

The challenge before the international community is
no less than that of creating a culture for protecting
children. We look forward to a continued focus and
follow-up by the Security Council on this important issue.

