Mr. Lezhnev: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council today.

I would like to focus my remarks on what the
Council and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) can concretely do to help
transform and prevent violent conflict in this often-
forgotten region.

Above all, I believe that the Council and UNOCA
should strategically focus on the financial aspect of
crises in the region. I would argue that this would be
most effectively done through enhanced engagement
with international partners on transparency reforms
that can help to prevent conflict, as well as with the
private sector and anti-money-laundering bodies, and
by refocusing sanctions to target networks of spoilers
to peace processes. These steps would help to give the
region a much better chance of achieving peace. Within
that framework, I would highlight two main challenges
and four recommendations.

The first challenge relates to conflict resources
and money-laundering. Rebel groups, criminal units
within armies and their facilitators generate hundreds
of millions of dollars each year from trading in conflict
resources such as gold, diamonds, tantalum and other
minerals. They are a key driver of conflict, as armed
commanders and their backers want to continue making
money, thereby breaking peace agreements through the
continuation of such interests.

The Council can have an impact on conflict
commodities since they are traded regionally and
internationally. The Panels of Experts on the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo report extensively on how gold, diamonds and
other minerals are critical resources for armed groups
and on how they are smuggled across to Cameroon,
Uganda, Rwanda and Chad and on to the United Arab
Emirates, among other countries.

The key to combating such interests is to follow
and target the middle-men, financial facilitators and
corrupt officials who enable the trade in those conflict
commodities. Such networks are often involved in
arms trafficking in exchange for diamonds and gold.
For example, my organization reported last year that
conflict gold from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo might well be reaching Western consumers
through an international corporate network coordinated
by a Belgian tycoon with refineries in Uganda, Dubai
and Belgium.

Together, these rogue actors make up criminal
networks, whose presence is growing in Central Africa.
Facilitators such as Dan Gertler, Aziz Nassour and
others have made hundreds of millions of dollars from
corrupt deals and continue to operate in the region,
many with impunity. Unless there are consequences
against such facilitators, they will continue to fund
armed groups and perpetuate instability.

The second challenge that I wanted to highlight
is preventing mass violence through transparency
reforms. Many presidents in the region have been in
power longer than the average age of the population,
some for up to 40 years. Meanwhile, the median age
is, for example, 18 years in Cameroon and 22 years
in Gabon.

Citizens in Central Africa are growing impatient
with non-democratic regimes. The youth populations
are increasingly vocal about the need for change and
reform, as we have seen throughout the region.

That strong dichotomy is creating serious stability
risks, as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General highlighted. Most countries in the region are
at the top of the Fragile States Index, and five countries
in the region were highlighted by the United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum last week to be in the
highest risk category for mass killings.

Arguably, the greatest factor in preventing the
reform processes is money. Every country in Central
Africa ranks in the bottom third of the Transparency
International Corruption Perceptions Index, and a
majority of countries in the region are in the lowest
20 per cent. Such corruption is starting to be exposed
by various regional reports but, in order to protect the
illicit interests, regimes often entrench themselves and
repress populations.

The best way to prevent these countries from falling
into instability is to assist them to reform. The youth and
others want to see real reforms. From the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Cameroon, young people
and civil society are tired of corruption and of seeing
their limited natural resources diminished without
any benefit to them. They are demanding that the
Governments enact transparency and anti-corruption
measures, from holding officials who have stolen funds
accountable for their actions to requiring State-owned
companies to undergo independent audits. The old
models of off-budget accounts and secret State-owned
companies that dispersed patronage are not appropriate
to the youth generation.

I would like to say a few words about solutions, for
which I offer four recommendations.

First, I would propose engaging the banking and
gold sectors. Contrary to belief, illicit spoilers ofpeace
processes do not mainly hold their money in cash.
They have bank accounts and use financial interests
in order to pay business partners and spend the money
abroad. Banks and other financial institutions therefore
play a critical role in enforcing sanctions and enacting
anti-money-laundering measures. Multinational
correspondent banks are particularly important because
they act as clearing agents for wire transfers abroad and
can take a range of actions to combat money-laundering
and conflict financing.

The Security Council and UNOCA should
proactively engage banks and other financial institutions
on sanctions implementation and other anti-money-
laundering steps. The Wolfsberg Group, an association
of 13 global banks that aims to develop frameworks and
guidance for the management of financial crime risks,
may be a good starting point. The Council could convene
a session with the Group on sanctions implementation
and anti-money-laundering/combating the financing of
terrorism issues and perhaps set up an ongoing working
group to follow up on such issues. UNOCA could also
meet regularly with banks in the region to follow up on
sanctions implementation issues, including those raised
by the Panels of Experts.

Similarly, I would argue that the Council should
engage the global gold sector on the issue of conflict
gold, since it is a major source of financing identified
by the various groups of experts. The Council played
a constructive role in helping to address the blood
diamonds trade, and could do the same with regard to
conflict gold. Specifically, I would advise the Council
to work with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
and convene key gold traders, refiners and banks to
highlight the need for better implementation of the
red flags in the 2015 FATF typology report on gold,
money-laundering and terrorist financing risks. The
FATF made excellent recommendations that have not
been properly implemented.

Secondly, I would recommend engaging
anti-money-Iaundering bodies and financial authorities.
The FATF and regional FATF bodies can play critical
roles in combating conflict finance, and the Council
and UNOCA should engage them as part of their
conflict-prevention efforts. The regional FATF bodies
are potentially very important actors in countering
conflict financing and related corruption because they
conduct mutual evaluations of countries' anti-money-
laundering/countering the financing of terrorism
regimes and their implementation. They also work to
strengthen the national financial intelligence units
(FIUs) on these issues. The Task Force against Money-
Laundering in Central Africa (GABAC) is the Central
African FATF-style regional body, but it and the F1Us
in the region need significant support and engagement
to be effective.

The Security Council can play a role here,
building on resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March,
which recognizes the essential role of the FATF. The
Council should make supporting regional anti-money-
laundering efforts part of UNOCA's mandate in order
to stem the flows ofillicit finance and conflict finance.

Specifically, I would recommend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General coordinate
with GABAC and key FIUs in the region and raise related
issues in his high-level dialogues with Governments in
the region. UNOCA should also work with GABAC,
the FATF and the World Bank to ensure that mutual
evaluations and risk assessments are conducted in a
timely, effective and non-political manner.

Thirdly, I would like to highlight sanctions issues.
Targeted sanctions are a very important financial
tool for the Council to pressure spoilers to a peace
process. However, too often, they are enacted against
individuals or those persons who are least affected
by sanctions because they do not travel or have bank
accounts abroad, such as many rebel leaders.

To be effective, based on our experience and
research, sanctions should target the networks that
spoil peace processes. Rebel leaders who break peace
accords have companies, as do traffickers, facilitators
and family members who collaborate with them, each
profiting from the spoils of war. Importantly, those
players are much more likely to have bank accounts
abroad and conduct business there, and they would
therefore be more greatly impacted by sanctions. The
Council and others use the network sanctions approach
very effectively with regard to North Korea and Iran
and should do so similarly in Central Africa.

In that vein, I would recommend that the Council
empower the Panels of Experts and other expert groups
with the mandate to investigate the networks that
facilitate the spoilers and by supporting them with an
additional expert on regional facilitators and enhancing
their mandates to investigate the networks.

My last recommendation is to work with key partners
to help Governments to enact transparency reforms. The
United Nations cannot force Governments to root out
corruption, nor should it. However, key international
partners, such as the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) and civil society coalitions, work with
Governments on transparency reforms and, in my view,
the United Nations should work closely with them. For
example, the IMF is urging the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to publish beneficial
ownership information of key companies and improve
their anti-money laundering/combating the financing
of terrorism regimes.

UNOCA can meet regularly with EITI
multi-stakeholder groups throughout the region, as
well as IMF teams and civil society coalitions, to find
out what transparency reforms are their priorities. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, not
pushing but just referencing, could then raise those
issues when speaking to Heads of State from the region.
We believe that can be quite effective. I would argue
that the Security Council should include reporting on
financial transparency in the mandates of the mission.

Similarly, the Council should engage the
Governments of destination countries on conflict
resources. For example, the United Arab Emirates,
with respect to conflict gold, can do more as it pertains
to various reforms related to transparency. Those
steps would reinforce the calls for transparency and
bring them to the attention of the highest levels of
Government. That would be an important conflict-
prevention tool, informing the Heads of State that there
are key reasonable steps that they can take and that
they can do more to prevent a much wider crisis with
disastrous human impacts.

I thank you again, Ambassador Norman-Chalet, for
this opportunity to brief the Council.

