Ms. Bensouda: We are meeting once again as
I present my Office's twenty-first report on Darfur,
Sudan, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Today's briefing also takes place over six years
after the issuance of the first warrant of arrest against
Mr. Omer Al-Bashir. To those who choose to forget
the events that have brought us here, and in particular
those who have chosen to deliberately distort facts by
alleging that the International Criminal Court (ICC)
imposed itself on the Sudan, I would like to briefly
recall some crucial facts.

Lest we forget, on 29 October 2009, the African
Union (AU) endorsed the report and recommendations
of the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur,
led by the former President of South Africa, Mr
Thabo Mbeki. This comprehensive 125-page report,
entitled "Darfur - the quest for peace, justice and
reconciliation", recommended a range of steps the
Sudanese Government ought to take to advance these
objectives. They included the creation of a hybrid court
composed of Sudanese and non-Sudanese judges and
other officials to investigate and prosecute serious
crimes committed in Darfur in violation of international
law, as well as broad reforms to the country's criminal
justice system. In particular, the Mbeki Panel opined,

"should Sudan make genuine efforts to address
the crimes in Darfur, the judges of the ICC would
be required to evaluate those steps to consider
whether they meet the requirements of Article 17
[of the Rome Statute, which gives preference to
national courts unless States in question cannot or
will not prosecute]. The final determination of this
issue, however, is for the judges of the ICC alone".

The role of the International Criminal Court in
efforts to end the atrocities committed in Darfur and to
hold those most responsible accountable, is crucial and
has a well-known history. Indeed, it is a role equally
well recognized by the African Unon at the genesis of
the exercise ofthe Court's jurisdiction vis-a-vis Darfur,
Sudan. Notably, the Mbeki Panel went on to say:

"Whilst the ICC action might be a catalyst for acts
of accountability in Sudan, Darfurians deserve
attention not because of the threat of international
action, but principally because they have a right to
justice, in their own country, on account of what
they have suffered".

The question we need to ask ourselves today is
whether the people of Darfur, Sudan, who continue to
endure the suffering widely recognized by the Mbeki
Panel and the African Union, among others, will ever
receive the justice they deserve? Will their plight finally
be answered through independent and impartial justice,
or will their cries continue to face silent inaction?

In my last briefing on Darfur (see S/PV.7337), I
stated that given the Council's failure to act decisively
on numerous acts of defiance of its resolution 1593
(2005) by the Government of the Sudan and given the
limited resources at my disposal, I was left with no
choice but to limit active investigations. My message
was addressed to the Council to encourage the exercise
of its powers to ensure justice for the long-suffering
victims of atrocity crimes in the Sudan. It was a clarion
call to the Council that it is long overdue to heed the
cries of the victims of rape, sexual abuse, torture, mass
displacement and other kinds of inhumane suffering
that Darfurians continue to endure.

As always, detractors and their spin doctors have
deliberately distorted the call for Security Council
action as a victory for Mr. Al-Bashir and other suspects
in the Darfur situation. Let me be clear. My Office's
determination to bring independent and impartial
justice to the people of the Sudan remains unshaken.
The efforts of detractors and naysayers only serve to
strengthen our resolve and spur us to double our efforts
in that regard. Mr. Al-Bashir's rapid departure from
South Africa proves that the warrants of arrest against
him are as valid as they were when issued. They remain
in full force and effect, and my Office is committed to
ensure that they are executed.

While Mr. Al-Bashir may have escaped the law in
South Africa through an unanticipated and premature
departure from the twenty-fourth African Union
Summit, the swift judicial action of South African
courts we have witnessed is a shining precedent that
must be emulated in other States. More generally,
the High Court's ruling on South Africa has also
underlined a growing recognition by domestic courts of
States' obligations to uphold their commitments under
international law and, in this case, the Rome Statute.

As the Court's own presiding Judge of the Pre-Trial
Chamber made clear on Saturday, 13 June, there
existed no ambiguity or uncertainty with respect
to the obligation of the Republic of South Africa to
immediately arrest and surrender Mr. Omer Al-Bashir
to the Court and that the competent authorities of the
Republic of South Africa were already aware of that
obligation. Mr. Al-Bashir's hasty retreats in Kenya,
Nigeria and now South Africa are also largely due to
the vigilance and tireless efforts of civil society. The
courage and commitment of civil society are to be
commended. More importantly, such selfless efforts
must humble us and remind us of the spirit of 1998,
when the hopes and aspirations of humanity combined
in a rare historical moment to create the International
Criminal Court with the promise "never again".

The International Justice Project, with the ICC at
its nucleus, demands sustained and robust support if it
is to succeed and propel us forward towards a more just
and peaceful world. We must not allow that Virtuous
undertaking of humanity to be chipped away or
ultimately sacrificed at the altar of political expediency.
It is past time for the Council and States to join forces
with the Court and civil society in devising concrete
and effective strategies for the arrest of accused
persons wanted by the Court and to give the ICC the
full support it requires and to which it is entitled in
order to implement the Rome Statute as intended.

My Office has encouraged States parties to find
innovative ways to support those among them that are
most likely to receive visits from wanted individuals
to be proactive and to make practical plans for the safe
and effective arrest of persons against whom warrants
of arrest have been issued by the Court. I encourage
States parties to plan ahead for the arrest in a targeted
and efficient manner of each individual wanted by the
Court. The longer such persons remain at large, the
greater the risk that further atrocities will be committed,
contributing to instability and insecurity.

The deteriorating security situation in Darfur
continues to be a matter of great concern, not only for
my Office, but for the broader international community
and, undoubtedly, for the Council. Innocent civilians
continue to bear the brunt of insecurity and instability,
notably as a result of what appears to be an ongoing
Government campaign to target them. The frequency
and brutality of the targeting of civilians, particularly
women, are especially troubling. The people alleged
to be most responsible for those ongoing atrocities are
the same people against whom warrants of arrest have
already been issued. Needless to say, arresting them
and bringing them to face justice is the only way to
stop those crimes.

In that context, I must emphasize that my Office's
investigations into the alleged crimes committed
in Darfur are continuing, albeit not at the pace or
intensity we would have liked. The fact remains that
my Office has finite resources and a heavy caseload
and is therefore struggling to commit to full, active
investigations of the ongoing crimes in Darfur. That
however, should not in any way be misconstrued or
interpreted to mean that investigations have been closed
or that we have abandoned the victims of mass atrocities
in Darfur - in fact, far from it. A team of lawyers and
investigators dedicated to the Darfur investigations in
my Office continues to carry out its work, albeit with a
limited capacity given resource constraints, the lack of
access to the Sudan and inadequate support and follow-
up from the Council. My Darfur team's activities have
had to be limited to monitoring and documenting
incidents as they occur and to conducting witness
interviews where possible and necessary. I urge anyone
with reliable information and potential evidence of
ongoing crimes in Darfur to contact my Office and to
proactively support the ongoing investigation.

On 26 June, the Pre-Trial Chamber ofthe ICC found
that the Government of the Sudan is in non-compliance
for its failure to arrest and surrender Abdel Raheem
Muhammad Hussein to the ICC. That is in addition
to the 9 March finding of the same Pre-Trial Chamber
that the Sudan has failed to cooperate with the ICC by
not arresting and surrendering Mr. Omar Al-Bashir.
The Judges have communicated those findings to the
Council for action. The latest judicial findings bring
the number of such non-compliance communications
to the Council to 10. I urge the Council to give urgent
attention to those communications.

Following an independent assessment of whether to
open an investigation pursuant to a Security Council
referral, if the decision by the Court is affirmative,
then the Rome Statute legal framework foresees a clear
role for the Council in the case of the non-compliance
of States. It is imperative for the Council to recognize
its crucial role vis-a-vis those States found to be
non-compliant by the Court and to assume its
responsibilities to advance the objectives of the Rome
Statute. Therefore, I reiterate the call on the Council
to ensure the Sudan's compliance with resolution 1593
(2005) and equally call on States parties to the Rome
Statute to promote cooperation and effect the arrest of
individuals wanted by the ICC in the Darfur situation.

Similarly, I urge ICC States parties to take the lead
in assessing how best individuals for whom warrants
have been issued by the Court can be arrested and
surrendered to the ICC. That dialogue is past due
and my Office encourages it to be given the urgency
it deserves. As the Judges of the Court have put it, if
there is no follow-up action on the part of the Security
Council, any referral by the Council to the ICC under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations would
never achieve its ultimate goal; namely, to put an end to
impunity. Accordingly, any such referral would become
futile.

My Office welcomes the ongoing dialogue with
States parties to the Rome Statute, through the caucus
of States parties in the Council. The caucus is an
important step towards building institutional memory
on justice issues within the Council and ensuring
that justice remains an integral part of the Council's
discussions. I encourage the leadership ofthe Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC and
their offices to continue to consider how interaction
between the caucus and the Assembly of States Parties
may strengthen the justice community's interactions at
the United Nations.

In conclusion, let me restate that there is more that
we can and must do to achieve peace and justice in
Darfur. I will continue to do my part in the exercise
of my independent and impartial mandate. The support
of partners, including civil society from the Sudan and
elsewhere, States Parties in general and the United
Nations remains crucial for my work. It must be stressed
that the Council also has a vital role to play and must
do its part.

