Mr. Francese (Italy) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to express Italy's appreciation for the
decision you personally, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council, have made today to
make possible the presence today at this meeting of the
countries most directly interested in the development
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
particularly for making it possible for Italy to
participate actively in this debate. The positive
response to our request to participate along with other
relevant actors in connection with the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a step forward towards
transparency in the work of the Security Council and
towards more active participation by countries that can
make positive contributions to peacekeeping missions.
That is precisely one of the goals that was very clearly
highlighted quite recently in the report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, led by former
Algerian Foreign Minister Brahimi.

I have taken note of the very interesting
comments that have been made around the table today,
and merely wish to add a few brief observations to
ensure that this practice, which is being given such
concrete form today, contributes directly to advancing
the work of the Council and not to hindering the
efficacy of its deliberations.

First of all, I would like to point out that during
the last five years Italy has contributed about $110
million to the social and economic reconstruction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This commitment was carried
out through decentralized initiatives at cooperation that
involved the participation of cities, regions and
representatives of Italian civil society, and their
counterparts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Along with
that, I should also mention the involvement of the
Italian army and the special forces of the carabinieri
police, which, in the context of the International Police
Task Force and the Multinational Specialized Unit are
developing a new service in accordance with the new
standards of police professionalism in international
missions. Those standards are considered as important
elements when we talk of reorganizing United Nations
peace operations.

Throughout our time in Bosnia and Herzegovina
we have always noted the great importance of the
coordinating and initiating role played by the High
Representative, Ambassador Wolfgang Petritsch, who,
along with Ambassador Klein, is one of the first pillars
of international solidarity with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In his presentation today, for which we
very much thank him, Ambassador Petritsch shared
with us some observations that inspire great hope in us
while also warning us of the need for heightened
vigilance. There is both light and shadow in the
situation, as we can see clearly in the four basic areas
he mentioned.

Like the High Representative, we are particularly
pleased with the growing success of activities against
corruption, as well as with the initiatives he has
undertaken and coordinated with regard to promoting
economic reform. The situation of refugees does not
seem as promising, but this is an area in which the will
of individuals has at least as much weight as that of
public initiatives taken by international authorities and
by those of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The main thing
continues to be strengthening institutions, an area in
which there has been clear progress but in which very
serious questions remain. In this regard, we hope that
the elections of 11 November will illustrate that
progress is possible in the strengthening of institutions.
We wish to thank Ambassador Petritsch for his very
candid and detailed presentation.

Speaking in a broader political context, we can
say once again that the light at the end of the tunnel is
represented by the prospect of integration into Europe,
as was noted by our head of Government and President
of the National Council, Mr. Amato, who, along with
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Economy, visited
Belgrade right after President Kostunica was
inaugurated. All the peoples of South-East Europe,
including President Kostunica's Yugoslavia, which has
chosen democracy, want and are able to grow closer to
the European community. The electoral process is
obviously a decisive milestone down that path,
particularly with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where we expect to see manifestations of this option at
the elections of 11 November, and further progress
later on. In particular, we hope that this will enable
Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the Council of Europe
as soon as possible.
Another step forward to which we are paying
great heed is the Zagreb summit ofthe European Union
and the countries of South-Eastern Europe, to be held
on the initiative of the French presidency of the
European Union to mark the recent beginnings of a
convergence that could also involve Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its neighbour, Croatia.

The democratic developments we have seen in
Belgrade can contribute not only to harmonious
integration of all countries of the region in a European
context, but also, we very much hope, to strengthening
State institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
democratic developments in Belgrade are a win-win
situation for the entire region, and we hope that the
democratic advances in Belgrade will have a positive
influence on inter-ethnic relations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Clearly all of us, including the parties
themselves, must each pull our weight. First and
foremost, the international community must continue
actively to address the needs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In terms of bilateral relations, the countries near
to the South-Eastern region will need to continue to
develop focused initiatives for political as well as
economic cooperation in support of this process. This
is true, of course, for the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Italy hopes that they will dedicate
themselves fully and resolutely to economic reform so
that investors who are interested in a country that could
become increasingly attractive for enterprises can
participate, in a market context, in the economic and
social progress of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that the Sarajevo authorities
will show the same commitment to inter-ethnic
integration, including inter-ethnic integration in
military structures. Here, Italy has offered to help
promote more harmonious cooperation in the military
sector, and that offer remains open.

I noted that early in his statement Ambassador
Petritsch spoke of the ideal example of intercultural
and inter-ethnic relations in Switzerland. It is my hope
that inter-ethnic relations in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will soon come to be more similar to those in
Switzerland than they are at present.

