Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): Like previous
speakers, I would like to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for calling today's open debate on such
important and multifaceted subject as the role of the
Security Council in the prevention of armed conflicts.
We are honoured and pleased to take part in this debate
under your presidency.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive statement on the subject
under discussion.
It is generally recognized that the modern world
is still characterized by the persistence of armed
conflicts, which continue to cause human losses and
mass violations of human rights, as well as economic,
social and cultural devastation. In addition, since the
1990s internal armed conflicts have been steadily on
the rise.

The root causes of armed conflicts are numerous
and complex. They originate from different political,
historical, economic and cultural backgrounds and are
based on the lack of sustainable development,
democracy, the rule of law and good governance, and
the presence of long-standing inter-ethnic and inter-
religious intolerance.

At the same time, while there is no full unanimity
among the membership of the United Nations about
approaches to eliminate the root causes of armed
conflicts, no one disputes that armed conflicts can be
avoided. We also feel that there is a widely growing
consensus that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound
of cure. In our View, it is high time to make a transition
from a culture of reaction to a culture of prevention, as
proposed by the Secretary-General in his annual report.
The strategies for conflict prevention outlined by the
Secretary-General in his report therefore have our full
understanding and support.

We also share the view that since the causes of
conflicts are often nurtured in the minds of men, the
promotion of a culture of peace is an indispensable
element of conflict prevention. In this connection, my
delegation fully subscribes to all the provisions of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace adopted by the General Assembly, and looks
forward to their implementation.

We think that the leading role of the Security
Council in the area of conflict prevention should be
maintained and strengthened. The prevention,
containment and elimination of armed conflicts
constitute a major task of this body, in view of its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. At the same time, the
task of eliminating the root causes of armed
conflicts - in particular those of an economic, social
and humanitarian nature- falls largely under the
mandate of other principal bodies and specialized
agencies of the United Nations.

In this regard, we feel that there is a need for
increased coordination of efforts and a clear division of
labour between the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies in the area of conflict prevention.
Moreover, it is obvious that the efforts of the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies will not yield
results unless they are supported by the parties to a
dispute and, of course, by all Member States.

Although there are no standard remedies for each
single conflict situation, we feel that the Security
Council's task could be facilitated through the
development of a framework document to define clear-
cut principles and criteria for its steps at different
stages of conflict prevention. Such a document could
provide a basis for decisions of the Security Council on
enforcement measures to avert the emergence of armed
conflicts within States at an early stage. Once that
document is universally accepted, it could substantially
enhance the capacity of the Security Council in taking
timely action in the prevention of armed conflicts.
Ukraine stands ready to participate in further
discussions of this subject in practical terms.

It is our strong belief that any preventive
measures by the Security Council should be based on
the United Nations Charter and on the principles and
norms of international law. We are pleased that these
principles and norms are clearly spelled out in the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today.

My delegation believes that the Security Council
should more actively employ, with the consent of host
countries, its past experience in preventive deployment
missions in areas of likely tensions. In this regard, one
can cite the United Nations mission to the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. In our View, the
unique and successful experience of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), which
remains the only preventive deployment mission in the
history of United Nations peace-support efforts, should
be further exploited and developed.

In View of the recent useful practice of
undertaking Security Council missions to various
conflict regions, we think that it is also worth
considering establishing the practice of regularly
visiting conflict-prone States or potential zones of
conflict.

Ukraine believes that the Secretary-General plays
an essential role in conflict prevention in bringing to
the attention of the Security Council any matter that
may threaten international peace and security, in
accordance with Article 99 of the Charter. The
Secretary-General is entitled to use actively all
available instruments to undertake timely preventive
political and diplomatic measures. Those include
confidence-building, early-warning, fact-finding, good
offices, mediation and citizen diplomacy measures, as
well as the naming of special representatives, envoys
and so on.

My country maintains that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
arrangement in the field of the prevention of armed
conflicts could be intensified on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter, provided that the key role of the
Security Council remains unchanged. In this context,
we believe that the African continent still requires
continuous and comprehensive assistance of the part of
the United Nations. In our view, particular attention
should be paid to the enhancement of cooperation with
the Organization of African Unity in order to facilitate
the further development of its Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution.

Ukraine also welcomes the recent G-8 Miyazaki
initiatives for conflict prevention as a demonstration of
the continued commitment of those countries to make
the prevention of armed conflicts a high priority-issue
in the coming years.

Since illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons contributes significantly to the flaring-up,
duration and re-emergence of armed conflicts, the role
of preventive disarmament in averting armed conflicts
can hardly be overestimated.

In this context, let me recall the initiative of
Ukraine to convene, under the auspices of the United
Nations, an international meeting of experts of major
arms-producing countries, with a view to elaborating
effective measures to prevent the reselling of arms
from end users to third parties. We believe that the
implementation of this proposal could facilitate further
activities of the Security Council in elaborating
conflict-prevention strategies and fill gaps in the
relevant international instruments.

My delegation is of the view that the Security
Council would be more successful in discharging its
conflict-prevention duties if it could rely on an
enhanced United Nations rapid-reaction capability. In
this regard, Ukraine would like to see the further
development of the United Nations Stand-by
Arrangements System and the earliest completion of
the establishment of the Rapidly Deployable Mission
Headquarters. Next month will mark three years since
the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding with
the United Nations on Ukraine's contribution, in
personnel and in materiel, to that System. Even as I
speak, one of the units registered in that Memorandum,
namely, a joint Ukrainian-Polish peacekeeping
battalion, is being deployed in Kosovo to serve with
the Kosovo Force (KFOR). We hope that this
battalion's practical experience on the ground will
increase its effectiveness with regard to its future
participation in the activities of the United Nations
Stand-by System.

Over the past six years, Ukraine has consistently
advocated the establishment of an effective United
Nations preventive mechanism for the global
monitoring of, and timely reaction to, potential sources
of conflict. We are confident that this challenging and
critical task has not lost its urgency. We believe that
this subject could be addressed at the ministerial
meeting of the Security Council on conflict prevention,
which hopefully will be convened next year. My
delegation hopes that the current debate and the
presidential statement that will be issued, which my
delegation fully supports, will effectively contribute to
accomplishing this important task.

