Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Since
December 1998, United Nations disarmament
inspectors have no longer been present in Iraq. For
nearly four years now, the international community has
not been able to verify whether Iraq possesses weapons
of mass destruction and whether it is pursuing
programmes to that end.

By refusing to allow the return of United Nations
inspectors, Iraq has defied the international community
and the authority of the Security Council. Even though
France does not possess irrefutable proof, there are
several indications that Iraq has used this situation to
pursue or resume its prohibited programmes, notably in
the chemical and biological areas. The behaviour of the
Baghdad authorities has given rise to strong suspicions
in this regard.

This situation cannot be tolerated. The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems, in Iraq or elsewhere, constitutes a
serious threat to international security. In the face of
this challenge, it is the Security Council's duty to place
firmness and lucidity in the service of a common
objective. For France, that objective is the disarmament
of Iraq. This implies the return of the inspectors and
the resumption of monitoring on the ground.

On 16 September, Iraq, under unanimous pressure
from the international community and thanks to the
efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General and the
Secretary General of the League of Arab States, agreed
to the unconditional return of the inspectors. During
discussions conducted in Vienna by the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Baghdad confirmed this
decision. Practical arrangements were made for
carrying out inspections. UNMOVIC and the IAEA
must now return to Iraq as soon as possible. The United
Nations must verify the sincerity of its commitments.
In the light of past experience, the international
community cannot be satisfied with words alone. Iraq
must translate its promises into concrete, verifiable and
lasting acts.

Here and there, doubts and reservations have
been expressed about the inspectors' ability to fulfil
their mission. France has the greatest confidence in the
ability of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei to achieve the
mandate entrusted to them by the Security Council with
the utmost rigor and professionalism. In any case, there
is no reason to question the effectiveness of their teams
a priori, as the inspection regime established under
resolution 1284 (1999) has not yet been tested on the
ground.

Furthermore, the outcome of United Nations
inspections has been very positive. It is a fact that
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
inspectors destroyed more weapons of mass destruction
between 1991 and 1998 than did the military operations
during the Gulf War. In 1998, the IAEA believed it had
succeeded in dismantling the Iraqi nuclear programme.

It was not the inspections that failed, but the
international community's ability to enforce its
decisions in a sufficiently firm and united manner.
France, however, is fully disposed to support measures
strengthening the inspection regime, insofar as that
proves necessary to facilitate the inspectors' work. The
question of immediate access to the presidential sites,
for example, must be examined by the Security
Council.

On the other hand, we reject measures that would
in fact multiply the risk of incidents without improving
the effectiveness of the work carried out by UNMOVIC
and the IAEA. We also set store by the multinational,
independent nature of the inspectors; any measure
countering this fundamental element would be
tantamount to repeating past mistakes and would not
have our support.

Finally, it is the opinion of Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei - that is, those who will have to lead
the inspections on the ground - that should guide the
Security Council in its choices. It is up to them to
determine what would help them achieve their mission.
Our duty is to assist them, not to complicate their task.

France attaches importance to the principle of
collective security, which lies at the heart of the
functioning of our Organization and the international
order. The Iraqi question cannot be an exception. That
is why we are proposing a two-stage approach. During
the first stage, the Security Council should adopt a
resolution clearly specifying the "rules of the game." It
would define the inspection regime with a view to
ensuring that the inspectors can accomplish their
mission fully and without any hindrance. This
resolution should also send a clear warning to Iraq that
the Council will not tolerate new violations.

During the second stage, if UNMOVIC or the
IAEA observe that Iraq is refusing to cooperate fully
with inspectors, the Security Council would meet
immediately to decide on the appropriate measures to
take, without ruling out anything a priori.

France believes that this approach, which is also
the one proposed by the Secretary-General in his
message to the Council, is the only one that can offer
us the unity, cohesion, fairness and legitimacy so
crucial to the effectiveness of our action.

The unity of the Security Council is absolutely
vital. In the past, Iraq has taken advantage of divisions
within the international community to renege on its
obligations and defy the Council's authority. Only a
united front will convince it not to repeat this error.
Only a two-stage approach will allow us to preserve
our Council's unity; any kind of "automaticity" in the
use of force will profoundly divide us.

The two-stage approach is, rather, the choice of
cohesion. United in sending Iraq a message of firmness
in an initial resolution, the Security Council will, we
have no doubt, remain united to assume all of its
responsibilities during the second stage, should Iraq
violate its commitments.

The Security Council must also demonstrate
fairness by showing Iraq that war is not inevitable if it
fully and scrupulously fulfils its obligations. This new
behaviour would open the way to the suspension and
then the lifting of sanctions, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions.

Finally, given the gravity of the situation, in
which nothing less than peace or war is at stake, it is
essential for the Security Council to remain in charge
of the process every step of the way. This is
fundamental for the legitimacy of our action and
essential for maintaining unanimous support for our
common objectives.

This debate constitutes an important, perhaps
even cardinal, moment for our Council and, beyond
that, for our Organization. What is at stake in the
ongoing negotiations is fundamental: even beyond Iraq,
we are talking about the future of the international
order, relations between North and South, and notably,
our relationship with the Arab world. An action of
uncertain legitimacy, one that does not enjoy the
support of the international community, would not be
understood and could gravely affect these relations.

By placing this action within the framework of
collective security, the French approach aims to ensure
its legitimacy and effectiveness, while respecting the
principles defined by the United Nations Charter.

