Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this very important meeting and for
giving me the opportunity to speak.

As I commence my statement, it is my pleasure,
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) group in New York, to extend sincere
congratulations to the States that have joined the
Security Council as non-permanent members, and to
wish them every success.

At the outset, the OIC group would like to
welcome the important decision made recently by the
Kingdom of Thailand to recognize the State of
Palestine on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. The OIC group urges the
States that have not yet done so to uphold their
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
by recognizing the State of Palestine and supporting
the efforts being made for Palestine to obtain full
membership in the United Nations and to take its
rightful place among the community of nations.

Our deliberations today have special significance,
given that, most regrettably, they coincide with Israel's
continuing illegal actions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.

Israel continues to disregard the mounting
international calls and efforts to enforce the relevant
United Nations resolutions that call for ending the
Israeli military occupation of the Arab lands, its
violations of international law and its denial of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. The OIC
Group remains firm in its conviction that the Security
Council must act effectively to ensure the full
compliance of Israel with its legal obligations and
commitments, and end its daily acts of aggression.

Israel is moving forward with its attempts to alter
the demographic fabric of occupied East Jerusalem by
expelling thousands of Palestinians and replacing them
with illegal settlers. That violation is accompanied by a
deliberate and conscious effort to construct and expand
such unjustifiable settlements and build the "Apartheid
Wall" around the occupied city of East Jerusalem.

Similarly, illegalities such as the appropriation
and annexation of Palestinian lands, military actions,
imposing oppressive security measures, constricting
movement and restricting access to religious sites,
including Christian and Muslim places of worship,
have become a part of the everyday oppression of
Palestinians. Even today, Israel is conducting
excavations underneath the sacred Al-Aqsa mosque,
which aim to completely alter the facts on the ground
and isolate occupied East Jerusalem from its natural
Palestinian surroundings.

That cycle of oppression and fear represents not
only a grave violation by the Israeli authorities and
settlers vis-a-vis the unprotected and vulnerable
Palestinian civilians, but also a challenge to the
international community and the United Nations, which
have a special responsibility to strongly call on Israel
to end those acts of aggression and respect
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Israeli policies and practices in East Jerusalem
are particularly alarming given the recent deliberations
of the Israeli Knesset on a bill declaring Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel and the Jewish people. Such
deliberations are not only directed against humanity's
heritage and history but also challenge international
law and international resolutions, which legitimize and
affirm the fact that Jerusalem is part of the Palestinian
territories occupied by Israel in 1967. The OIC Group
therefore has very serious concerns about this issue,
which threatens the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.

Given all those circumstances, the international
vision of a two-State solution is diminishing with
Israel's persistence in constructing illegal settlements,
with all the accompanying consequences.

The construction of the separation Wall is in clear
violation of international law and the categorical
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Those illegal and provocative actions on the part of
Israel have brought the entire Middle East peace
process to a standstill and undermined international
peace efforts.

The OIC Group affirms beyond question that an
international consensus on realizing a just and
comprehensive solution to the Middle East conflict
requires the enforcement of international law and
international resolutions. There must be full
acknowledgement and respect of the commitments and
pledges made in that regard, as embodied in the terms
of reference of the peace process, namely the relevant
United Nations resolutions; the Madrid terms of
reference, including the principle of land for peace; the
Arab Peace Initiative; and the Quartet road map. Every
effort must therefore be made, first of all by the
Security Council and the Quartet, to fulfil the
collective legal and moral responsibilities for the
maintenance of peace and justice in the region. That
will be attainable only by compelling Israel to abide by
international law and respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

At this crucial time in history, there has to be an
acknowledgement of and full support for Palestinian
State-building efforts, which are commendable. Since
the peace process, regrettably, remains stagnant, the
time has now come to recognize the independent State
of Palestine on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders.
This, in fact, is the cornerstone for the attainment of
stability, peace and security for Palestine, Israel and
other neighbouring countries in the region.

The OIC Group reaffirms that East Jerusalem
remains an integral part of the Palestinian territory
occupied by Israel since 1967, and that its illegal
annexation by Israel has gone unrecognized by the
international community. The Group reiterates the
centrality of the Palestinian cause for the entire Islamic
world; stresses the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic
character and profile of occupied East Jerusalem; and
strongly reaffirms the need to fully respect the sanctity
of the Islamic and Christian cultures.

Finally, the OIC joins the international
community in reaffirming that all actions taken, or to
be taken, by Israel to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status and institutional structure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, are to be made
null and void and have no legal effect. The OIC
demands that Israel abide fully and immediately by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of
4June 1967, and thus implement Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In closing, the OIC Group wishes to reaffirm its
full support and solidarity with the Palestinian people
in their struggle to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their right of
return, to self-determination, and to the establishment
of their independent Palestinian State on their national
soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

