Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
should like, at the outset, to pay tribute to Ambassador
Andrey Denisov on the completion of his term of office
as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Despite the brief time that we worked with him
in the CTC, we benefited greatly from his able
leadership. We congratulate Ambassador Loj on her
assumption of the chairmanship of the CTC.

We also welcome the comprehensive briefing of
Ambassador Motoc, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and
that of Ambassador Mayoral, Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999).

We are meeting following the adoption, two
weeks ago, by the General Assembly of the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/290). We believe that that is another giant stride in
our effort to deny terrorists access to the most
dangerous of all weapons of mass destruction. That
action confirms the importance of multilateralism and
the collective response to shared threats and challenges
in the international community.

The task ahead of us is demanding. It will be long
and daunting. But we must persevere together in order
to prevail in the war against terrorism. We are in total
agreement with the Chairpersons of the CTC and the
1540 Committee on the need to finish the process of
the hiring of experts. It is imperative that the
Secretariat, working in close cooperation with the 1540
Committee, should give that matter the urgent attention
that it deserves and ensure that it is given the necessary
human resources to enable it to perform its work,
bearing in mind that the mandate of the 1540
Committee expires in 12 months' time.

We are in agreement with the Chairpersons of the
three Committees that cooperation at various levels is
of the utmost importance and should be encouraged.
Just as cooperation with Member States is important in
the war against terrorism, cooperation between
Member States and the Committees, as well as between
Member States and international organizations, is
important and necessary in this endeavour.

It is gratifying to note that the 1267 Committee is
exploring diverse ways of combating terrorism by
enlisting the expertise of other institutions to
complement the work of the United Nations. My
delegation commends the current initiatives by the
Committee to develop cooperation with Interpol in
order to synchronize related collective strategies and
the exchange of information in dealing with the
scourge of terrorism.

Transparency is the key to any meaningful
cooperation between the Committees and Member
States. In this context, I would like to stress the need
for concerted efforts to make the work of the
Committees as transparent as possible, compatible with
operational requirements. Briefings by Committee
Chairpersons to Member States should continue and,
whenever possible, should be held jointly, as was the
case recently. We are also mindful of the need to
safeguard and respect human rights and civil liberties
while pursuing the war against terrorism.

In the case of the 1267 Committee, Member
States have benefited immensely from regular
interaction with the Committee's Monitoring Team,
particularly in the preparation of their submissions and,
to a certain extent, in reducing reporting fatigue.
Dialogue should be maintained and technical assistance
extended so as to ease bottlenecks and delays in
reporting obligations.

Let me hasten to point out that the visit last
February of the Monitoring Team of the 1267
Committee to my country was extremely important and
helpful. The visit enhanced the operational
effectiveness of many Government departments and
their officials whose responsibilities include combating
the menace of terrorism. Such visits should be
encouraged in future for the purpose of building the
capacity of Member States, as clearly demonstrated by
the recent Monitoring Team visit to Tanzania.

As a victim of terrorism in recent years, Tanzania
is committed to fighting that scourge. The Government
has enacted legislation that conforms with resolution
1373 (2001) regarding the prevention and suppression
of the financing of terrorist acts. In that respect, we
support the adoption, as a set of best practices, of the
special recommendation on terrorist financing of the
Financial Action Task Force.

