Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic Conference) (interpretation from Arabic): The Security
Council is meeting again today to consider how to deal
with Israel's non-compliance with internationally binding
resolutions and the agreements it has signed, in particular
those concerning the Holy City of Jerusalem.

The Israeli Cabinet unanimously adopted, on 21 June
1998, a plan on the expansion of the city of Jerusalem to
include vast areas of land and settlements, which will
require the confiscation of thousands of acres and the
construction of new roads to link the settlements
surrounding Jerusalem. Increasing the size of the city
from 108 to 600 square kilometres and increasing the
population to 1 million persons will effect a demographic
change following which the Palestinians will represent a
small minority. The Israeli Government has thus
unilaterally decided the demographic and geographic
future of the city, flouted the wish of the international
community and prejudged the status of Jerusalem.

This Israeli position is not new, though the present
Israeli Government has only hastened its implementation.
Allow me to draw the Council's attention to the following
facts.

The Council has reaffirmed in previous resolutions
the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to
occupied Jerusalem and other Arab territories occupied
since 1967. Deeming actions by the occupying Power to
change the status of the city as null and void and legally
invalid, the Council, in resolutions 162 (1961) and 250
(1968), requested that Israel desist from parading its
military power in Jerusalem, and in resolution 251 (1968)
it reaffirmed that demand. However, on 24 May 1998,
Israel conducted military parades in celebration of the
thirty-first anniversary of its occupation of the city.

The Council, through resolution 252 (1968),
reaffirmed the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by
military force. However, Israel has continued to confiscate
Arab land in Jerusalem and has brought in 70,000 Jewish
families. The process is still ongoing, and what is
happening in J ebel Abu Ghneim and Ras Al-Amud is but
additional, clear testimony to that. Holy Islamic places
were not spared, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in the
occupying Power's campaign to close the Holy City to
 

those from the West Bank and Gaza seeking to pray.
Jewish groups were allowed to enter the territory of the Al-
Aqsa Mosque, to dig tunnels and to excavate below the
various historic mosques and buildings, destroying the
Ghawanmeh gate in the historic wall of Jerusalem and
expanding the square of the Al-Buraq Wall.

Repeated condemnation of these actions by the Israeli
authorities has not led to any tangible result, and the
agreements reached in the framework of the peace process
have not been respected, in spite of appeals from all parts
of the world, including from the United States, the
European Community, the Vatican and others.

Here I should like to reiterate that the international
community considers Jerusalem an occupied city and that
the agreements on the transitional self-rule signed between
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization should have
prevented any party from taking any actions that would
affect the final status of the city.

The list of violations and instances of lack of respect
for the Council's resolutions is very lengthy, and I believe
it is but another link in a chain of further challenges and
violations. The Middle East peace process should remain
the highest goal being sought by the international
community but that process is suffering from a total
collapse on all tracks. It is time, therefore, for the Security
Council to take the necessary measures to salvage peace.
The Council, which bears responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, must take a firm stance
that is commensurate with the magnitude and gravity of the
violations and challenges by Israel, which is responsible for
this grave situation.

Any complacency in deterring Israel would be
tantamount to encouraging it to continue in its policy of
non-respect for international law and internationally binding
resolutions. It would also lead to the end of hopes
generated by the Madrid agreements and would return the
entire area to the brink of destruction.

