Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia): Allow me at the
outset, Sir, to thank you for the opportunity to
participate in this debate under your able presidency. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary General, Mr. Klein, for his
comprehensive, inspiring and in-depth briefing and
analysis.

Let me focus today on a number of important
steps that Yugoslavia has recently taken aimed at
strengthening and broadening cooperation with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. During the Visit of the members of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 22 May, full support
for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, based on the Dayton-Paris
Agreement, was reiterated. A firm commitment was
made to further promote mutual relations as the only
way to achieve lasting peace and stability in the region
and to ensure the region's gradual inclusion in
European integration processes. An agreement on the
establishment of a inter-State cooperation council for
the two countries was signed; its main goals include,
inter alia, the promotion of good-neighbourly relations
on the basis of friendship, trust, cooperation and
mutual respect. On that occasion, the President of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Vojislav
Kostunica, emphasized in particular that the
establishment of special relations with the Republika
Srpska should be understood in the context of
strengthening existing ties between Yugoslavia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole.

In this context, I would like to recall that Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, recently expressed support for the
agreement on the establishment of an inter-State
council and underlined that it poses no threat to the
vital interests of any of the constituent peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As far as the key question of the return of
refugees is concerned, Yugoslavia has proposed that a
concrete project for the intensification of minority
returns be examined for areas where such
intensification is currently possible. In addition,
initiatives have been undertaken to conclude a number
of agreements in such fields as education and culture,
the avoidance of double taxation, protection of
investments, dual citizenship and several other fields. It
was also agreed to settle such issues as the restoration
of rail transport and border crossing without
formalities.

Another recent important event in the area of
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Yugoslavia was a Visit of the Serbian Prime Minister,
Mr. Zoran Djindjic, to Sarajevo on 12 June. He was
accompanied by a number of ministers and
representatives of the business community. Concrete
measures concerning development and trade were
discussed. It was decided to set up joint working
groups, at the ministerial level, to speed up the process
of economic cooperation.

In connection with the report of the Secretary-
General that was presented today, I would like to
emphasize in particular the reference to the
commitment of the new democratic authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to work for the
establishment of constructive bilateral and regional
relations, based on respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of each of these States.

Indeed, in their joint statement of 8 June 2001,
the Presidents of Yugoslavia and the Republic of
Croatia stressed their agreement that a stable and
democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina, built upon the
Dayton/Paris Agreement, is in the lasting interests of
the two countries and of the region as a whole.
Furthermore, they confirmed that Yugoslavia and
Croatia had no claims on any part of the territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Let me add, as Mr. Klein and other previous
speakers have said, that Yugoslavia, under the auspices
of UNMIBH, signed a regional agreement with the
Republic of Croatia and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
entities on combating illegal migration and organized
crime. In the Secretary-General's report, this agreement
is characterized as a positive step in ongoing efforts to
fight smuggling, organized crime and money
laundering. We fully share this View.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that
Yugoslavia stands ready to step up its efforts to
promote further cooperation with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in all areas, thus contributing to the
consolidation of peace and stability in the region. In
this respect, I wish also to reiterate, once again, the full
commitment by Yugoslavia to a consistent and full
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement
in its original form, without any revisions or
alterations.

