Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We commend you, Sir,
for hosting this open debate of the Security Council
on peacebuilding in Africa and for your country's
continual support for Africa's development agenda.

The Security Council is charged with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, particularly on the African continent,
form part of that mandate and, indeed, the mandate of
the United Nations in general. South Africa believes
that the key to sustainable peace consolidation lies in
the strengthening of political approaches, including
preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
management, mediation and peacebuilding. That would
ensure that countries not only seek to avert conflict but
also address the challenges that could prevent countries
from sliding back into conflict.

Consequently, South Africa agrees with the
assertion in the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts for the 2015 Review of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Architecture that peacebuilding
"must be the principle that flows through all
the Organization's engagements, informing all
its activities - before, during and after violent
conflicts - rather than being marginalized."
(S/2015/490, p. 3)

In some way or form, the majority of Member
States have been affected by conflict. What prevents
those conflicts from having a disproportionate impact
on Member States is the capacity of States, economies
and societies to withstand such threats to their stability.
That is the central tenant underlying the peacebuilding
agenda: ensuring sustainable development and good
governance in order to avoid relapses into conflict.
Guarding against the spiralling of instability into full-
blown conflict therefore becomes critical. In that regard,
the sustained attention of the international community
to countries emerging from conflict and the positive
contributions from the international community to the
stability, economic growth and development of such
countries are fundamental to the global peace and
security agenda.

In order to strengthen States in the continent
emerging from post-conflict situations, the African
Union (AU) has developed a post-conflict reconstruction
and development policy. It is a guide for the development
of comprehensive policies and strategies that seek to
consolidate peace and prevent a relapse into conflict
violence. In 2014, the AU also launched its African
Solidarity Initiative, aimed at mobilizing support from
within the continent for peacebuilding measures. All
of those initiatives contribute to the ambition of the
African Union's "Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want"
in promoting dialogue-centred conflict prevention, so
that by 2020 all guns will be silent.

We welcome resolution 2282 (2016), as well as
the identical General Assembly resolution 70/262,
adopted in April, which considered the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Those
resolutions recognize the important work of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as a body presiding
over and ensuring strategic coherence in international
peacebuilding efforts. As is always the case, the
development of national policies in the aftermath of
conflict will not succeed without the positive provision
of adequate, predictable and coherent funding, which
in turn increases the possibility for sustainable peace.

South Africa, like other Member States, is intensely
aware of the various challenges that the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) faces as a result of restricted funding.
Therefore, the Security Council should welcome the
announcement made by the African Union on Mandela
Day, 18 July 2016, in Kigali, regarding the establishment
of an African Union Peace Fund. We believe that that
process will help balance and build on the actions of
the PBC. The operationalization of the AU Peace
Fund will be complemented by the establishment of a
0.2 per cent levy on eligible imports so as to address
the previous financial challenges faced by the AU.
The AU Peace Fund will, among other things, address
factors regarding mediation, preventive diplomacy,
institutional capacity-building and peace-support
operations.

We must not lose sight of the sterling work that the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
have undertaken and continue to do. We are mindful of
the fact that all of the countries on the PBC agenda are
from Africa and that those countries have also received
an estimated 80 per cent of the allocations granted
by the Peacebuilding Fund between 2007 and 2014.
Even at present, the Peacebuilding Fund is assisting
in supporting the African Union Commission's efforts
to provide peacebuilding initiatives in Burundi, which
serves as a practical example of an action that illustrates
the strengthening of cooperation between the AU and
the United Nations in sustaining peace.

The lack of State authority and weak State
institutions are conditions conducive to conflict. South
Africa therefore supports strengthening the governance
institutions of countries emerging from conflict and the
promotion of good governance. It should be noted that
the AU has adopted an African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance, which sets out the continent's
vision for good governance, which, in turn, ultimately
supports peacebuilding and sustainable peace.

Finally, we call for the broadening of the concept of
peacebuilding support to include not only financing for

development, but also, in keeping with the idea behind
the African Solidarity Initiative, in-kind support,
such as the training and capacity-building of State
institutions. Such in-kind initiatives will go a long
way towards rebuilding State capacity to ensure peace,
stability and development in a given country.

The idea of peacebuilding is based significantly
on the understanding that peace cannot exist without
development and that development cannot thrive
without peace and stability. We believe that should
underpin the United Nations approach to fulfilling its
central mandate of the maintenance of international
peace and security, which is strongly dependent on a
prosperous and peaceful Africa.

