Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his update on the
latest developments and would like to make the
following observations.

Kazakhstan condemns the rocket firings from
Gaza towards Israel on 29 May, which further erode
prospects for peace. We have followed with the utmost
concern reports of the overnight missile launches from
Gaza targeting Israeli positions, including the site
where a mortar shell from Gaza hit a kindergarten in
southern Israel, near the border with the Strip.

We want to make it clear that such attacks can cause

lasting damage to the peace process in several different
ways. We agree that the uncertainty and volatility of the
current environment are hardening diverse positions
and sharpening the rhetoric on all sides, which may
well play into the hands of extremists. Astana urges
an immediate halt to all hostile acts and provocative
actions in order to avert a fresh conflagration in the
region, which is already embroiled in brutal conflicts,
resulting in the immense suffering of civilians. We must
prevent incidents thatjeopardize the lives ofIsraelis and
Palestinians and urge both sides to exercise maximum
restraint and abide by their obligations under the
relevant United Nations and international conventions
and resolutions on the protection of civilians.

Both sides and the international community
must consolidate our collective efforts for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. We should ensure that words
are translated into concrete action. My country also
underscores the importance of intra-Palestinian unity,
so as to bring all factions together and unite them under
a legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority.

My delegation also appreciates the efforts of the
Russian Federation and Egypt to ensure intra-Palestinian
consolidation and urge all Palestinian political parties
and movements to integrate into one national political
structure. It is critical that the Palestine Liberation
Organization take control of the Gaza Strip.

Kazakhstan calls upon the Middle East
Quartet 4 the United States, Russia, the European
Union and the United Nations - to intensify its efforts
to resume negotiations, with a view to defining mutual
borders and the principle of the peaceful coexistence of
two States on the basis of international law and Security
Council resolutions.

We note that the difficult humanitarian situation
in Gaza, which further contributes to instability and
frustration, could lead to a resumption of conflict and
an increase in terrorist activities. We therefore urge
the official authorities of Israel and Palestine to help
resolve the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip. At
present, the nearly 2 million Palestinian residents of
Gaza, more than half of whom are children, live in dire
conditions that are deteriorating daily. The future of the
sector's young people is being shaped today, and we are
afraid that it is not the future that Palestinians or Israelis
or anyone of us in the international community would
want to see. It is clear that we need confidence-building
measures in the economic area, with the support of
the international community, for durable peace and
stability to take hold.

Finally, Kazakhstan supports the proposals of
Nickolay Mladenov and, as always, stands for the
early resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiation
process, especially in a bilateral format, of a two-State
solution. The immediate start of the deliberations and,
as a result, the speedy implementation of agreements
will allow us to solve the problem of confidence deficits.
It will also enable us to move to a more open dialogue
between the two sides upon mutually identified issues.
Only steps such as these can bring us closer to the goals
we have set for ourselves.

