Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My country is particularly
pleased to participate in this historic debate on Angola,
which comes at a turning point in the turbulent history of
that country. The journey in the search for a lasting and
durable peace in Angola has been a long and arduous one.
The people of Angola have endured more than 25 years
of devastating civil war. They have lived with the
darkness of despair and sorrow. They have seen their
loved ones die or be maimed and the promise of hope
denied them for too long.

It is against this background that we celebrate with
the Angolan people as they usher in a new era filled with
the possibility of lasting peace, as witnessed by the
inauguration of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation on 11 April 1997.

Kenya's involvement in the peace process goes back
to the period before Angola's independence. The leaders
of the three Angolan liberation movements, the Popular
Movement for the Liberation of Angola, the National
Front for the Liberation of Angola and UNITA, chose
Kenya as the venue for their peace talks under the
chairmanship of the late founding father of our Republic,
President Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, who helped broker the
first peace accord after six days of crucial talks on
21 June 1975 in State House Nakuru.

Addressing the gathering after the signing ceremony,
as the three leaders, Mr. Agostinho Neto, Mr. Holden
Roberto and Mr. Jonas Savimbi, hugged each other and
shook hands amidst wild cheers from Kenyan ministers
and local and overseas journalists, President Kenyatta
appealed to the Angolan leaders to unite at home in order
to implement measures they had agreed upon to bring
about peace, security and freedom in Angola. The three
leaders agreed, among other things, to stop fighting and
to create a climate of political tolerance and national unity
within the political and ideological diversity of Angola.

Following this agreement, they proceeded to the
coastal city of Mombasa, where, with the late President,
they planted a fig tree to symbolize hope and renewal -

 

a prayer for peace. Sadly, the fruits of that happy ending
did not see the light of day.

Just as the planting of the fig tree then symbolized
hope, the formation of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation now represents the hope, faith and
aspirations of the Angolan people for a durable peace in
their country.

The important agreements reached between the parties,
including the swearing in of UNITA deputies, mark in our
View a crucial step towards the full realization of the
Lusaka Protocol, and, indeed, a momentous milestone in the
Angolan peace process. Kenya fervently hopes that the
leaders of Angola will now give something back to their
people, by moving decisively away from an era of
confrontation and manoeuvring, into one of tolerance,
compromise and brotherhood. We strongly encourage them
to do so.

The achievements reached thus far could not have
been possible without the collective, painstaking efforts and
encouragement by many. We single out, and highly
commend, the superb role played by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative in Angola, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye. His diligence and persistence in the face of
numerous odds and trying conditions, coupled with the
unyielding efforts of the troika of Portugal, the Russian
Federation and United States of America, the Organization
of African Unity and all other actors, finally won the day.

Let me temper my cautious optimism by urging all
interested parties not to relent in their efforts to ensure the
complete resolution of the conflict. The same energy we
expended in the search for peace should be exerted to
ensure that this process becomes irreversible. We are on the
last lap of a long race. Let us redouble our efforts and not
lose sight of the finishing tape.

Notwithstanding these hard-won, commendable
achievements, my delegation is aware that a lot more needs
to be done. We hope that the prevailing spirit of
reconciliation will accelerate the pace towards
implementation of the remaining aspects of the peace
process. The speedy incorporation of selected UNITA
soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces and the Angolan
National Police will soon be considered by the Joint
Commission. We wish them success. We are concerned that
the proposed rapid demobilization programme of excess
UNITA personnel in the central and southern regions has
not been quickly implemented, which has resulted in even
more hardship for UNITA soldiers and their families.

The resumption of the exercise of disarming the
civilian population should be carried out in tandem with
this. The large number of absentees and deserters from
the selection and demobilization centres continues to be
of concern to us because of the potential for random
flare-ups. The removal of all the illegal checkpoints
maintained by both parties, taken together with the other
measures, will help in the normalization and extension of
State administration throughout the country. In this new
spirit we believe that a meeting between President Dos
Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi in Angola will represent an
important confidence-building measure towards further
strengthening national reconciliation.

The progress that has been achieved is political. In
our View, the more difficult journey, that of social and
economic reconstruction, must now begin in earnest. The
war that our sisterly country suffered resulted in great
loss. The infrastructure of Angola is in tatters. Schools,
hospitals, waterworks, roads, railways - the hardware of
a civil society - need to be completely rebuilt.

It is for these reasons that we have to help Angola
now. The peace that has been woven so delicately must
be supported, and we encourage those in a position to do
so to be generous. It is incumbent upon the international
community to respond. My delegation believes that the
post-conflict reconstruction of Angola is the last piece of
the puzzle.

We are convinced that the United Nations should
continue to play an active role in Angola. We concur with
the Secretary-General's recommendation contained in
document S/ 1997/304 of 14 April 1997 that the mandate
of UNAVEM. III be extended for a final period until 30
June 1997. We also agree that there is need for a
follow-on arrangement, which would help consolidate the
new peace and national reconciliation among the Angolan
people. Accordingly, my delegation will support the draft
resolution before us.

Finally, we wish the people of Angola all the best,
and appeal to their leaders, as brothers from the same
continent, to give peace a chance. I echo the words of our
founding father 25 years ago when he expressed
confidence
"that Kenya and Angola will continue to cooperate
and strengthen their fruitful relations for the mutual
benefit of the peoples of the two countries".

 

