The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Bangladesh, Canada, cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, Fiji,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, Serbia and Montenegro, South Africa, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Ukraine, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno , Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Expression of farewell to Ambassador Inocencio
Arias


The President: I understand that this is the last
occasion that Ambassador Inocencio Arias will
participate in the Council's deliberations in his current
capacity as Permanent Representative of Spain. On
behalf of the members of the Council, I wish to take
this opportunity to express the Council's deep
appreciation to him as a colleague and a friend.

Ambassador Arias' sense of humour and jovial
demeanour has made him popular among his
colleagues. Members are well aware of his effective
stewardship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), which he has lead as Chairman, as well as his
pivotal role towards enhancing the support structures
of that Committee, which led to the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1535 (2004). He will also
be remembered for his passion for soccer, and
particularly for Real Madrid, which he led as General
Manager from 1993 to 1995.

Armed with his leadership skills from the CTC,
Ambassador Arias might be tempted to return to the
Spanish capital to prepare Real Madrid for another run
at the championship "La Liga". In bidding him a fond
farewell, the members of the Council and I wish him
every success in his new endeavours.

I now call on Ambassador Inocencio Arias.


