Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, allow me to begin by thanking the Assistant
Secretary-General, Ms. Angela Kane, for her briefing
and to express my appreciation of and support for the
statement made by the delegate of Algeria on behalf of
the Arab Group and the statements to be made by
Zimbabwe on behalf of the African Group and by
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Security Council meets today as the occupied
Palestinian territories are witnessing grave escalation
by Israeli military forces. That escalation threatens to
widen the scope of violence and counter-violence and
diminishes the prospects for security and stability for
both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. This escalation
undermines the peace process, in whose success we all
have a stake and which is aimed at the establishment of
an independent, sovereign Palestinian State, living side
by side with the State of Israel.

In recent days, Israel has been carrying out a
succession of military attacks against the Palestinian
people, killing many civilians, in particular children.
Those attacks escalated to the full-scale operation that
Israel launched two days ago against the Palestinian
territories, in particular the Gaza Strip, from which it
had recently unilaterally withdrawn. Infrastructure has
been targeted, including power plants, bridges and
water pipelines, thereby threatening humanitarian
tragedy for more than 1.5 million Palestinian citizens
in Gaza. The occupation force did not stop there. It has
detained many Palestinian officials, including cabinet
members and members of the Palestinian Legislative
Council, who were elected an electoral process that
was certified by the international community as being
fair.

In legal terms, these attacks can only be viewed
as a flagrant violation by Israel of international law and
international humanitarian law. The Security Council
must therefore do everything possible to provide the
Palestinians with international protection, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention, of
1949. Israel, as the occupying Power, must be held
responsible for its actions.

The current situation requires that the Security
Council assume its responsibilities for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It must take
immediate measures to stop the situation from
deteriorating further, as that could widen the scope of
the conflict regionally, especially given that Israeli has
begun to provoke neighbouring Arab countries, in
particular Syria, thereby risking an expansion of the
confrontation.

Egypt therefore believes that we must take
immediate steps to defuse the tension. First, the Israeli
and Palestinian parties should adopt mutual measures
to calm the situation and return it to the status quo
ante. Secondly, Israeli must immediately withdraw
from the territories that it entered in the Gaza Strip and
put an end to its military operations in all of the
occupied Palestinian territories. It must release the
Palestinian officials that it has detained and make a
commitment not to commit acts of aggression against
civilians in future.

Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority must commit
itself to making every effort to guarantee the
immediate release of the kidnapped Israeli soldier and
to put an end to the launching of missiles into Israel,
provided that Israeli ends its military operations and
withdraws its forces from Gaza.

Fourthly, the Quartet should undertake immediate
measures to build confidence between the two sides in
preparation for final status negotiations on the basis of
the terms of reference of the peace process, the
principle of land for peace, the Oslo Agreement, the
Sharm el-Sheikh understanding, the road map and all
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.

The Arab peoples have truly lost patience with
the international community's failure to confront
repeated violations by Israel, which it commits with
impunity. We have had enough of the double standards
that are applied in this situation, whereby a Palestinian
person and an Israeli person are not given equal value.
Our crises and tragedies do not arouse any interest.
Some would promote Israel's right to self-defence even

if it leads Israel to renege on all of its international
commitments, to reoccupy parts of the Gaza Strip and
to violate the most basic human rights of the
Palestinian people. Those rights are guaranteed by
international law, and we are all working to enhance
the role of the United Nations and its ability to
guarantee respect for human rights, which all people
should be able to enjoy.

The Security Council, the Quartet and every State
member of the Security Council must understand that
the solution consists in an end to the occupation, the
achievement of stability and the establishment of a
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, through
negotiations. That is the basis of the Arab peace
initiative, launched in 2002. That initiative remains the
only realistic basis for a just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East.

