Judge Meron: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council again as the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I congratulate His Excellency Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, upon his country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. The United Kingdom
has long been a strong advocate ofinternationaljustice,
and I wish it every success in its presidency.

As was the case last December (see S/PV.6880), I
am appearing before the Council today in two capacities
and will accordingly deliver two reports: one on the
ICTY's progress in relation to its completion strategy
and another on the ongoing work of the Mechanism in
preparation for the launch of The Hague branch of the
Mechanism in a few short weeks.

Written reports concerning both institutions were
presented to the Council last month. In addition, the
Council will recall that a confidential report in relation
to the ICTY was submitted in April, in accordance with
resolution 2081 (2012). In my remarks today, I wish to
provide an overview of a few key issues contained in
those written reports, and I will not repeat the contents
of the reports in detail.

Before doing so, however, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, operating under the excellent leadership
of Guatemala, for the Working Group's sustained
support for the work of the Tribunal. I would also like
to recognize the invaluable assistance provided to the
ICTY and the Mechanism by the Office of the Legal
Counsel.

Allow me first to update the Council on the progress
being made by the ICTY towards the completion of its
mandate and its closure.

The Tribunal has achieved much since I submitted
a written report to the Council last fall. The Tribunal
has completed the trials in three cases: those of
Haradinaj et al., Tolimir, and Stanisic' and Zupljanin.
Since my written report was submitted in May, two
more trials have been completed, with the issuance of
trialjudgements in the cases of Prlie et al., and Stanisie
and Simatovie at the end of May.

As detailed in my May report to the Council, the
Tribunal has also completed the appeal proceedings in
two cases: Lukie and Lukie, and Perisic'. Other cases
on appeal are moving ahead, with appeal hearings held
in the complex, multi-appellant case of Sainovie et al.,
as well as in the Bordevie case and in the rule 98 bis
appeal in the Karadeic' case.

Only four trials concerning the core statutory
crimes now remain to be completed. Three of those
trials involve the late-arrested accused, Karadzie,
Hadzie and Mladie. The Hadiic' case remains on track
and is expected to be completed by the end of 2015.
The Mladie trial is likewise proceeding apace and
is expected to conclude by mid-2016, as previously
forecast.

The Karadeic' case, originally anticipated to
be completed by the end of December 2014, is now
anticipated to be completed by July 2015. As detailed in
my written report submitted in May, there are numerous
factors leading to that recalculation.

The only other remaining case at trial is the Seselj
case. The Trial Chamber has now scheduled delivery
of the judgement in this case for 30 October 2013,
three months later than forecast in my written report
last November. The reasons for this delay include
the departure of senior staff members as well as the
simultaneous involvement of all Judges on the bench in
other, ongoing cases.

Turning to the Tribunal's appellate cases, I wish
to first pause and express my gratitude to Security
Council members for their recognition of the need to
restore the ICTY to the full complement of permanent
Judges and the work that they have done in relation to
this matter.

A judgement in the rule 98 bis appeal in the
Karadeic' case is anticipated by July 2013. It is also
expected that the multi-appellant case of Sainovie et
al. will be completed by December 2013, as previously
projected. The appeal judgement in the Bordevic' case is
now expected by December 2013, two months later than
the previous forecast. That postponement is attributable
to the need to replace a Judge on the bench due to her
resignation from the Tribunal, the heavy workload of
the other Judges on the bench, and other factors, as set
forth in my May report.

There has also been a small delay in the
projected completion of the appeal judgement in
the multi-appellant case of Popovie et al., which is
now anticipated to be completed in October 2014. As
explained more fully in my written report submitted
in May, that change was occasioned by complexities in
the case which have required additional preparations in
advance of the appeal hearing.

For those cases that have experienced changes in
projected end dates, a number of different measures
have been adopted to minimize delays, including the
reassignment of additional legal staff members to assist
in judgement drafting.

As previously reported to the Council, it is currently
anticipated that appeals in three cases are expected to
go beyond 31 December 2014. In two of those cases,
Tolimir and Stanisic' and Zupljanin, the forecasted
completion dates for the appeals are just a few months
past the target date. We continue to look for ways to
bring the projected completion dates for these cases,
and, indeed, all of our cases, forward. However, any
appeals in the third case, that of Prlic' et al., are only
expected to be completed in mid-2017.

With respect to the Prlic' et al. case, I note that there
is still a possibility that any appeals filed in that case
may go to the Mechanism, rather than the Tribunal. We
will have to see what happens. Similarly, it is not yet
clear whether any appeals in the Stanisie and Simatovie
case will go to the Mechanism or to the ICTY.

In sum, while the Tribunal has made tremendous
progress in many respects, there have been some delays
in certain proceedings, as fully explained in my report
to the Council. I deeply regret those delays. But I hasten
to remind the Council that many of the factors leading
to the delays are not uncommon to judicial and criminal
proceedings the world over.

More importantly, while unexpected developments
may give rise to delays in any criminal case, the impact
of such developments on the efficient completion of
proceedings is magnified by the unique situation and
mandate of the Tribunal. Thus, for example, the typical
difficulties and unpredictability involved in identifying,
preparing and presenting evidence are multiplied many
times over in a Tribunal situated far from the site of the
alleged crimes, when most Witnesses must be brought
from thousands of kilometres away to appear in
court, and when the official languages of the Tribunal
differ from those of the accused and most witnesses,
necessitating constant translations of witness testimony
and extraordinary amounts of documentary evidence.

The breadth and complexity of the crimes and
modes of individual criminal responsibility alleged in
the Tribunal's cases only compound those challenges
further. As I have previously explained to the Council,
the pending closure of the Tribunal also produces its
own challenges, primarily that of retaining the highly
qualified and experienced staff members so necessary
for the Tribunal's expeditious and orderly closure.

I wish to underscore that all efforts are being
made on the part of the Tribunal to complete its
pending judicial work as quickly as possible while
fully respecting the fundamental rights of the accused
and the appellants to due process in accordance with
international standards. As set forth in the 15 April
written report to the Council, the Tribunal has also
developed a consolidated, comprehensive plan that sets
forth the processes and procedures for the Tribunal's
eventual closure. In the meantime, my colleagues and
I at the Tribunal remain grateful to the Council for
its continued support, just as I remain grateful to the
Judges and all of the staff of the Tribunal for their deep
commitment to our work.

I would now like to turn to the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

At the outset, I am very pleased to advise that all
arrangements are in place to ensure a seamless transfer
of functions from the ICTY to The Hague branch of
the Mechanism on 1 July 2013, in full compliance
with the requirements of resolution 1966 (2010). I have
every expectation that, as the Mechanism officially
becomes a transcontinental institution, it will continue
to operate as smoothly as it has done since the opening
of the Arusha branch last July. In that respect, I wish to
express my gratitude to the Mechanism's Registrar and
Prosecutor for helping to make that possible.
Upon the opening of The Hague branch in July and
in accordance with its mandate, the Mechanism will
assume responsibility for a variety of functions inherited
from the ICTY, including the enforcement of sentences,
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions and
the protection of Victims and witnesses in completed
trials of the ICTY. The Mechanism will also assume
the authority to hear appeals against judgements or
sentences handed down by the ICTY where the notice of
appeal is filed after 1 July 2013, as already mentioned;
the authority to conduct reviews of judgements
handed down by the ICTY and to try contempt cases;
and the authority to decide on requests for pardon or
commutation of sentences. The Mechanism has already
taken on responsibility for managing the archives of
both the ICTY and the ICTR, although the latter retains
responsibility for the preparation of its records for
transfer to the Mechanism.

From an administrative standpoint, all is going
well. The Mechanism has issued a number of practice
directions and promulgated other policies, thereby
developing further its legal and regulatory framework.
Work on the Mechanism's permanent premises in
Arusha is on track and funding is in place. The
Mechanism is grateful for the support and cooperation
of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
in relation to that project.

Turning to the Mechanism's judicial work, I note
that there have been a number of rulings, as set forth in
more detail in my written report (S/2013/309, annex I).
Since my previous report to the Council, the Mechanism
has received its first appeal from judgement, in the
Ngirabatware case. As I mentioned earlier, additional
appeals from ICTY trialjudgements are expected in the

future, including potential appeals in the cases ofSeselj,
Karadz'ic', Hadfic' and Mladic'. The Mechanism has also
been seized of a number of motions and requests in
relation to certain contempt allegations. That litigation
is an example of the sort ofunanticipated ad hocjudicial
activity that may arise before the Mechanism.

Finally, in my role as President, I have issued
decisions in relation to the enforcement of sentences
and on a request for review of an administrative
decision. Meanwhile, ICTR President Vagn Joensen,
who has been serving as the Mechanism's Duty Judge
in Arusha, has likewise ruled on a variety of matters. I
am very grateful to President Joensen for his work on
behalf of the Mechanism, and for being such a collegial
and effective partner of the Mechanism in his capacity
as President of the ICTR.
In addition to its responsibility for its own cases,
the Mechanism is also responsible, with the assistance
of international and regional organizations and bodies,
for monitoring cases referred by the ICTR to national
courts for trial. As explained in my written report, two
cases were referred by the ICTR to France for trial
there. Pending finalization of arrangements with an
international organization to assist in the monitoring
of the two cases, the Mechanism has made interim
monitoring arrangements. I am most grateful to the
French authorities for their cooperation in relation to
the matter.

The ICTR has also referred a number of cases for
trial in Rwanda. Although some of the cases involve
individuals who are still fugitives, in the case of
Uwinkindi a trial is expected to commence later this year.
Pending the finalization of monitoring arrangements,
the ICTR staff has been conducting interim monitoring
of the ongoing pre-trial proceedings.

I wish to thank the Rwandan authorities for their
cooperation in facilitating the monitoring, which is an
important aspect of the Mechanism's mandate, and,
more generally, for the warm welcome I received upon
my first official Visit to Kigali last December. I am
most grateful for the open and frank discussions I had
while there and for Rwanda's ongoing cooperation with
the Mechanism. Following the opening of The Hague
branch, I look forward to building on existing relations
with States in the former Yugoslavia to develop
similarly productive and cooperative relationships with
those States.

Turning to the issue ofthe enforcement ofsentences,

I would like to express my concern regarding the
situation in Mali, where 17 persons convicted by the
ICTR are serving their sentences. Those 17 individuals
are now the responsibility of the Mechanism, and the
Mechanism's Registrar is monitoring the security
situation closely. The Mechanism is also taking steps to
implement recommendations made by an independent
penitentiary expert whom the Registrar hired to review
enforcement practices in the two countries currently
enforcing ICTR sentences, namely, Mali and Benin. At
the same time, the Mechanism is looking to increase
its capacity to enforce sentences in Africa and is
actively taking steps to enter into the enforcement of
sentences agreements with new States. The cooperation
and leadership of the Council and its members in that
regard would be much appreciated.

Since the opening of its Arusha branch, the
Mechanism has received and addressed a number of
requests from national authorities for assistance in
relation to national investigations, prosecutions and
trials of individuals charged in relation to the genocide
in Rwanda. On 1 July, the Mechanism will assume
similar responsibilities in relation to requests related to
events in the former Yugoslavia.

Finally, I would remind the Council that the
Mechanism is responsible for the trial of three
individuals who were indicted by the ICTR. The arrest
and transfer of those three fugitives to the Mechanism's
custody remains a top priority, and Prosecutor Jallow
has primary responsibility in that regard. But as we
have learned from experience at the ICTY, where the
last two fugitives were finally arrested in 2011, thanks
to the work of Serbian authorities and ICTY Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz, Member States play an invaluable
role in ensuring that fugitives are apprehended.

The United States recently reaffirmed its
commitment to offer financial rewards to individuals
who provide information leading to the arrest or
transfer of certain fugitives, including all nine ICTR-
indicted fugitives, through its War Crimes Rewards for
Justice Program. We are very grateful to the United
States for its initiative in that regard. I call upon other
Member States to take steps to ensure that all of the
remaining ICTR-indicted fugitives, whether they end
up being tried by the Mechanism or by Rwanda, are
arrested and brought to trial. Thanks to the dedication
and cooperation of Member States, the ICTY has been
able to account for all 161 of the individuals whom it
has indicted.

It is vital for the ICTR's legacy, and indeed for the
cause of internationaljustice, which we all hold so clear,

that we ensure a similar result for those indicted by the
ICTR.

Before closing, I must acknowledge an important
milestone: 25 May 2013 marked 20 years since the
Tribunal's establishment by the Council in resolution
827 (1993). The Tribunal's principals, Judges and staff,
together with dignitaries representing a large number of
Member States and a host of others, commemorated this
occasion in the presence of His Majesty the King of the
Netherlands and the United Nations Under-Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs and Legal Counsel, Patricia
O'Brien.

I am grateful to the Council for its statement
recognizing this important milestone and the Tribunal's
contributions over the past 20 years. I am equally
grateful to it for recognizing that the Mechanism plays
an essential role in ensuring that the impending closure
of the ICTY and the ICTR will not leave the door open
to impunity. As Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
remarked on the occasion of the ICTY's twentieth
anniversary, a new "age of accountability is becoming
a reality". That is in good measure due to the work of
the ICTY over the past two decades. With the sustained
support of the international community and the Council
in particular, the Mechanism will carry that strong
legacy forward in the years ahead.

