Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
confess that I am very pleased to see that a number of
delegations will be accompanying me in making official
statements before the Council. Without prejudice to the
statements that they might want to make in the informal

consultations. I understand that making statements in
public contributes to greater transparency in the work
of this Council.

Allow me first to express my delegation's gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), Ms. Ellen Laj. We commend her for her
work over the past two years and wish her every success
in her future endeavours. We would also like extend our
thanks to the Secretary-General's Special Adviser for
the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for his
resounding briefing. We also thank Ambassador Seck
for his briefing on the sanctions committee.

My delegation expresses its deepest concern
regarding the current situation in South Sudan. I will
start my remarks by referring to those who are suffering
most from the conflict - civilians. The intensification
of violence, particularly since this past July, has had
devastating consequences for civilians. There have
been violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including extrajudicial executions,
forced disappearances, rapes and other instances of
sexual assault, arbitrary imprisonment, attacks on
civilians, attacks on medical facilities, humanitarian
aid workers, medical personnel and journalists.

Those Violations of human rights are taking on
an ethnic aspect. Hateful rhetoric is increasing across
the entire country, which is entirely alarming given
that such rhetoric could produce mass atrocities. The
humanitarian crisis continues to grow in intensity and
magnitude as a consequence of the armed conflict in
various regions of the country, the deterioration of food
security and the worsening of the economic situation.

The figures coming from the United Nations
are concerning: more than 1 million refugees, more
than 1.5 million displaced persons, close to 5 million
people who are severely food insecure. We note, as
mentioned by Mr. Dieng, that the degree of inaction
in the implementation of the peace agreement, the
humanitarian crisis and the proliferation of arms in the
country are all ingredients that may lead to a dangerous
escalation of violence. My delegation is concerned about
a scenario in which the lives of civilians are in imminent
danger and in which weapons are proliferating. We are
seriously evaluating measures that could be taken to
mollify the risk of more lost lives.

I urge all those involved in the conflict and the
entire international community to help end the suffering
of the civilian population of South Sudan. In that sense,
we ought to continually remind the South Sudanese
Government that it is its principal responsibility to
protect its own citizens. The Government must offer
that protection regardless of the ethnic background or
political affiliation of its citizens. Furthermore, the
political leaders of South Sudan must act responsibly
by rejecting any incitement to Violence and opting for
the path of dialogue. We continue to call for such action
despite the fact that the actions taken by the Government
seem to fall directly contrary to what we advise.

It is critical that immediate measures be taken in
order to resume the political process and seek a peaceful
solution to the conflict. My delegation believes that such
measures would include the following three aspects.

First, the parties to the conflict must immediately
establish a ceasefire. Secondly, the parties to the conflict
must commit to resuming a dialogue, which should be
transparent, inclusive and in good faith. The Security
Council should play a more active role in the process
of dialogue in South Sudan and serve as a pillar of
support for the African Union, The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and other interested parties
that might be involved. Thirdly, urgent measures must
be taken to put an end to impunity. It is important
to maintain efforts to implement chapter V of the
peace agreement with respect to transitional justice,
accountability, reconciliation and healing. On that
point, we take note of the African Union's intentions
to establish a hybrid court as soon as possible. We
believe that the establishment of such a tribunal would
be a positive, given that accountability for the grave
violations of human rights in South Sudan is lacking
and does nothing but perpetuate the conflict.

In another area, we are struck by the letter sent
by the Government of South Sudan to the Council,
with an annex contaiing the agreement between the
Government of South Sudan and the Security Council
about the implementation of the joint communique of
4 September. It would be helpful if the authorities of
South Sudan were more careful with respect to the
precision of their official communcations with the
Council.

Finally, I would like to reference the work of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS), which has a very ambitious and bold
mandate and which works in an extremely complex and
dangerous operational theatre. It is fundamental that
UNMISS be able to fulfill its mandate, and we therefore
urge South Sudan to lift any restrictions on the Mission
in keeping with the commitments undertaken in the
status of forces agreement.

As mentioned by Mr. Ladsous on a number of
occasions when he has spoken on the topic of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, I am pleased
to learn that the conclusions of the special independent
investigation on the Violent events that took place
in Juba between 8 and 25 July and the response of
UNMISS with regard to the protection of civilians has
been taken into account by the Secretariat and will be
implemented with oversight by a task force led from
Headquarters.

It is also unavoidable and necessary to mention that,
for the third time, we are seeing low-level results from
UNMISS in terms of protecting civilians. This would
appear to indicate that it is also very likely that there
were also low-level results in the actions that should
have been taken to prevent the problem from being
reproduced. In that sense, we understand that there are
three aspects that require special attention in order to
avoid new failures in the protection of civilians.

First, we must review the processes for selecting
leaders for the most relevant positions. Secondly, we
must review the operational concept of UNMISS, the
orders and operational procedures provided by the
Mission for the protection ofcivilians and the use offorce
as required. Thirdly, we understand that it is necessary
to require, as is done in situations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, that the criminal and disciplinary norms
of contributing countries take action in situations in
which there is a failure in the protection of civilians, so
that accountability does not end in simple repatriation,
but reaches its furthest consequences. We especially
believe that this last measure contributes to achieving
an effective protection of civilians, which is the most
sensitive job of peacekeeping and that there must be
zero tolerance for failures in that regard.

In conclusion and as expressed by Ambassador
Samantha Power a few moments ago, I would like to echo
the Secretary-General's special report (S/2016/951) to
the effect that United Nations peacekeeping operations
are not equipped with the scope, staff or capacities to
put an end to mass atrocities from occurring.

