Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As this is the first time
I take the floor in the Chamber this month, I should
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the Council presidency and to
thank you for having convened this meeting. I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/ 127) and Mr. Le Roy for his comprehensive
briefing.

Today marks an important step in the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community.
For the first time since 2001, we are debating a
mandate that focuses on a transition to Afghan
ownership, Afghan leadership and Afghan
responsibility. This transition is not an end - not an
end game - but a new beginning. With dedication,
patience and realism, we have the opportunity to put an
end to the ongoing violence, to build a State capable of
protecting our citizens and meeting their needs, and to
strengthen the trust, unity and leadership of the Afghan
people.

The Afghan Government has taken up that
challenge. In the coming year, our priority will be
Afghanization. In every area, Afghans and Afghan
10-27766
priorities should take the lead. We face a busy calendar
that will test our strength and resolve, but, with the
support of the international community, it can also set
us firmly on the path towards success.

The first step is to reverse the Taliban's
momentum and improve security across the country.
General McChrystal's new strategy, which was recently
put to the test in Marj ah, will begin to turn the tide. At
the same time, the Afghan National Army and Police,
with intensive training, equipping and resourcing, will
gradually replace the international community in
leading the defence of the country and ensuring the
security of its people. That handover will begin as soon
as possible, and, with the help of the international
community, Afghans will bear full responsibility in
five years.

The military efforts will be complemented by
political and economic efforts. We have the plan and
the initial resources for a reintegration programme, and
it is beginning to offer an alternative life for many of
those fighting against us.

The second step is reconciliation, which has
increasingly become the focus in our efforts to promote
peace and stability in Afghanistan. In Istanbul and in
London, our plans were widely supported by the
countries of the region and the international
community. Since then, we have engaged with regional
partners at a high level to explore ways in which the
region could help facilitate reconciliation and to build
confidence and trust in new stabilization initiatives.

The cooperation of the region and the unity of
international support will be essential, but this process
must be Afghan-led and guided by Afghan priorities. In
this regard, the next milestone will be the consultative
national peace jirga at the end of April, which will
bring together Afghan elders, community leaders,
Government officials and civil society groups. The
conference's agenda will revolve around three goals:
first, to have consultations, understanding and
agreement among the Afghan people on the need for
sustainable peace; secondly, to reach an agreement on a
framework for understanding with the opposition; and
thirdly, to create a mechanism to pursue that
understanding.

However, the security dimension is only the first
part of this transition to Afghan ownership.
Afghanistan and the international community have
already laid out a plan to Afghanize security,
governance and development and to create a stronger
framework for regional cooperation. The next step will
be in the Kabul conference this summer, where we will
move beyond strategy to focus on a detailed plan of
implementation.

The Government of Afghanistan is concentrating
on building capacity, rooting out corruption,
encouraging participation, and promoting justice and
the rule of law. We are also working to ensure the long-
term sustainability of those changes through
developing agriculture, infrastructure and natural
resources, regional initiatives and improved
coordination. In all of those areas, Afghans will
increasingly take the lead, with the support of our
partners and friends.

Finally, in September, Afghanistan will hold its
parliamentary elections. As in other areas, the elections
and the electoral bodies must be driven by Afghans and
Afghan priorities. Afghanistan is learning from past
experience to undertake short- and long-term electoral
reforms to ensure that these and future elections will be
transparent, credible and fair.

However, Afghanistan will need time to build the
capacity to run an election alone. Therefore President
Karzai has sent a letter to the Secretary-General
requesting the technical and logistical assistance of the
United Nations and has determined that two of the
seats on the Electoral Complaints Commission will be
occupied by foreign experts. Likewise, the
international community's assistance will be necessary
in supporting the elections with resources and ensuring
they are held in a safe and peaceful environment.

The importance of the central United Nations role
in supporting Afghanistan and coordinating
international efforts cannot be overstated. Afghans still
view the United Nations as an impartial force working
for the benefit of the Afghan people and as a guarantor
of our stable, peaceful future as a democratic country.
Our common mission will require a great deal from all
of us: realism about our own abilities and the abilities
of our partners, understanding of our different
perspectives and the pressures on us, and recognition
that we have different timelines and different
expectations. Only the United Nations can balance this
relationship and ensure that the views of both Afghans
and the international community are heard and taken
into account.
The Afghan Government fully supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and we welcome
the appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of Staffan de Mistura, who arrived
in Kabul last weekend to begin his work. We look
forward to working closely with him in the months and
years ahead.

Nine years ago, Afghanistan was a broken
country. The assistance and support of the international
community has been a crucial crutch as the country has
slowly begun to heal. Afghanistan is eager to stand
solidly on its own feet, but we must walk before we
can run. It will take time for the Government and
security forces to build the capacity to ensure peace
and good governance across the country. The
continuing commitment of the international community
will therefore remain vital in the years to come. But we
are on the right path. We have set a clear goal, and, in a
strong partnership with the international community,
we can succeed.

