Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join previous
speakers in thanking Secretary-General Guterres for
his comprehensive briefing on the dire situation of the
Rohingya people who have been forced to flee Rakhine
state of Myanmar to neighbouring countries.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned about the mass
exodus from Myanmar, with almost half a million
Rohingya crossing the border into Bangladesh within
the short span of a month following the violence that
erupted on 25 August. The saddest part of the tragedy
is that children comprise approximately 60 per cent of
those refugees. Unfortunately, there have been reports
that a fresh influx of 14,000 refugees crossed the border
into Bangladesh as recently as 24 September. The lack
of measures to stop the flow of refugees calls into
question Aung San Suu Kyi's statement that "there have
been no clearance operations since 5 September". That
serves as an additional justification and rationale for
dispatching a United Nations fact-finding mission to
assess objectively the current situation in Rakhine state.

Kazakhstan is closely monitoring the crisis in
Rakhine state of Myanmar through its embassies in
the region and wishes to underscore the following
key observations.

First, we urge the Government of Myanmar
to suspend all military operations and halt acts of
persecution and discriminatory practices against
Rohingya Muslims. It is the obligation of every State
to ensure the safety and security of all communities
without discrimination and to uphold the rule of law
and public order.

Secondly, my delegation urges the Government of
Myanmar to provide unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance to the affected population. While the
launch of the Myanmar Government-led mechanism,
in cooperation with the International Committee of
the Red Cross, to deliver humanitarian assistance to
all displaced inhabitants without discrimination, is a
welcome step, we believe that their joint capacities for
emergency relief are rather limited. We therefore call
on the Government of Myanmar to allow unfettered and
safe access to United Nations funds and programmes,
including the World Food Programme, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, which can provide emergency assistance
and alleviate the suffering of the victimizedpopulation.

Thirdly, we urge the Government of Myanmar to
take urgent measures so that the Rohingya refugees are
able to return to their homeland of Rakhine state. That
should be done safely, securely and in a dignified manner,
with prospects for them to enjoy decent livelihoods, as
was stated by the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in Astana.
The question of Myanmar was discussed during the
first OIC Summit on Science and Technology, held on
10 September in Kazakhstan. My country endorses
the OIC view on the need to ensure an inclusive and
transparent citizenship verification process that leaves
no individual unregistered and does not hinder access
to education, health care and essential social services.

Fourthly, Kazakhstan is of the firm View that
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, headed by former United Nations
Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan, are valuable. We
urge the Government of Myanmar to fully implement
those recommendations in a swift and timely manner so
as to promote sustainable peace, stability and prosperity
in Rakhine state.

We have taken note that Myanmar has already
established a ministerial Implementation Committee
to implement those recommendations and has held
two ministerial-level meetings in the capital. We hope
that the Implementation Committee in Myanmar will
profoundly address the problem and make every effort
to eliminate its root causes, including the loophole in the
1982 Citizenship Act, which has led to statelessness and
deprivation of the rights of the Rohingya community.
Unless we work towards a just and sustainable solution
for the citizenship issue, there will be no durable
peace in Myanmar. That was one of the important
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan.

Kazakhstan is of the view that inter-ethnic
and interreligious strife, as well as the growing
problem of refugees in the neighbouring countries of
Myanmar, could serve as fertile ground for domestic
and international terrorism. That could spread beyond
Myanmar and become a source of threat to regional
and, over time, even international peace and security.
As a country that has developed a unique model of
inter-ethnic and interconfessional accord, including the
Assembly of People of Kazakhstan and the Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions,
Kazakhstan calls on the authorities of Myanmar to
take all necessary measures to restore peace and
intercommunal harmony through interfaith dialogue
and a comprehensive reconciliation process. Every
individual, including, those who have been unfairly
discriminated against for years, should have the right to
live and move without fear or persecution, irrespective
of their religion or ethnicity.

We commend the efforts of the Government of
Bangladesh in hosting almost half a million new
Rohingya refugees and providing them with shelter,
medical care, food and other forms of assistance.
The timely help of United Nations agencies and
donor countries is crucial for Rohingya refugees. We
appeal to all States to extend the necessary support to
Bangladesh in order to enable it to cope with the influx.
Nevertheless, the issue is not a matter of providing more
help. Ultimately, we will need to address the issue of
the voluntary return of refugees to Myanmar to resolve
the crisis.

Kazakhstan calls on the Myanmar authorities
to cooperate more actively with the international
community - including the United Nations system,
OIC, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and
other international and regional organizations - in
order to stabilize the situation as soon as possible.

Finally, Kazakhstan is ready to contribute
positively, as part of the larger multilateral action, to
resolve the crisis in Myanmar, giving all of its people
hope for a better future.

