Mr. Kim Yong Song (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): My delegation would first like to
thank Mr. Robert Serry for his detailed briefing this
morning. My delegation also aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Egypt on behalf of the States members of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The resolution of the Palestinian issue in the
Middle East is a top priority among efforts to ensure
peace and safety in the region. For that reason, the
international community continues to devote its
attention to the Palestinian question and to make every
effort towards its resolution.

I would like to particularly underline a positive
development that may decisively affect the resolution
of the Palestinian question, with the strong support of
the international community. It is noteworthy that the
Palestinian people's struggle for an independent,
sovereign State is gaining momentum now more than
ever before. The key to victory in this struggle should
be in the hands of the Palestinian people, as it is certain
that key is the unity of the Palestinian people
themselves. The adoption of a final reconciliation
agreement between Palestinian political forces in May
will surely serve to strengthen the unity of the
Palestinian people and firmly encourage their struggle
for an independent, sovereign State.

Notwithstanding the positive developments,
obstacles and challenges to the Middle East peace
process still lie ahead. Israel has not withdrawn from
the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, in spite
of increased denouncements by the international
community. Israel has continued to further expand its
settlements in East Jerusalem and the Arab territories,
directly challenging international demands. Settlement-
building is part of Israel's ambitious effort at territorial
expansion, and its impact is now having serious
consequences. It is because of the expansion of the
Israeli settlements that the Palestine-Israel talks,
arranged after a laborious process of twists and turns,
are now deadlocked.

Support for the founding of an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine is becoming a trend of
international society that no one dares to stop. Many
countries recognize Palestine as an independent,
sovereign State, and their number has now reached
more than 120. The Palestinian people's struggle to
regain its occupied territory and set up an independent,
sovereign State is more than justifiable; its victory is
ensured.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express our full support to and solidarity with the
justified struggle of the Palestinian people to recover
their legitimate sovereign rights, including the
founding of an independent, sovereign State.

