Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to thank the Secretary-
General most sincerely for having submitted his report
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET).

We welcome Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
UNMISET. We thank him for having introduced and
exhaustively summarized the report. We also welcome
the Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste to the
United Nations.

The essential role of the international community
in ensuring independence and peace in Timor-Leste
makes the Security Council's responsibility a dual and
particularly onerous one. The efforts to consolidate
Timor-Leste's independence demonstrate that those
made to ensure security, development and progress
there, despite all the obstacles, are indeed succeeding.

The Secretary-General's report of 3 March
highlighted those obstacles, in particular a series of
incidents affecting security that were most alarming
and which led to adjustments to the downsizing plan
for UNMISET to allow the Mission to accomplish its
mandated tasks within this changed environment. The
Security Council assumed its responsibilities in
unanimously adopting resolution 1473 (2003), by
which it established measures to adjust the downsizing
of the Mission's police component and supported a
revised schedule for the downsizing of the military
component. In so doing, the Council showed its resolve
to continue to provide all necessary assistance for the
success and long-term development of Timor-Leste.
My delegation therefore supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the mandate of
UNMISET be extended for a further year, until 20 May
2004.

The developments in the political situation in
Timor-Leste, as described in the report, reflect
developments at all levels, in particular those in its
relationship with Indonesia, which is based on the
political commitment of the two parties. It deserves our
support and admiration. We hope that these positive
developments will continue, leading to the settlement
of all outstanding issues between the two parties.

Finally, I should like to reiterate the importance
of providing the financial resources necessary to ensure
the economic and political development of
Timor-Leste. Such resources will be based on the
generosity of the donors. We believe that the country
status report on the Millennium Development Goals
that Timor-Leste is to submit to the United Nations
during its celebration of independence in May will
allow the international community and the donor
community to continue to help that country consolidate
progress and development.

