Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
compliments the Philippines for a most skilful
leadership of the Council during the current month and
for the apt choice of the topic for today's deliberations.
In our view, your presence, Madam President, has lent
a special significance to our current debate. We recall
most warmly your recent successful visit to my
country. We congratulate you on a good start to your
tenure as Foreign Minister. My delegation also
welcomes the participation in today's discussions of
the representative of CARE International and the
International Centre for Transitional Justice.

As a nation of 135 million, which values
pluralism so greatly, Bangladesh is one of the largest
democracies in the world. We take pride in the fact that
our country hosts and promotes a vibrant and globally
proactive group of civil society organizations, all of
which are homegrown and products of our indigenous
ethos. Support to civil society organizations and
forging partnerships with them in pursuit of common
goals is at the heart of Prime Minister Khaleda Zia's
Government's policies.

Numbering over 20,000, some of the Bangladeshi
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are the largest
in the world and have had the greatest global impact.
Grameen and BRAC are household words in most parts
of the world. Even as I speak, a network of these civil
society organizations are providing primary education
to one more girl child, giving microcredit to one more
woman in a post-conflict society and making available
to another poor woman the wherewithal of
empowerment. They are immunizing or rehydrating
one more child born in conflict, ameliorating the
sufferings of one more sick person by extending her
basic medical care and generating employment for one
more ex-combatant, helping his social rehabilitation.
These activities bring solace and succor to millions
around the world and replace their sense of despair
with the promise of hope.

In this positive spirit, let me reflect with you on
how we could facilitate the role of civil society through
collective efforts in assisting and buttressing post-
conflict peace-building.

There exists a wide recognition that NGOs and
civil society organizations can and do play a significant
advocacy and operational role in multilateral efforts to
assist post-conflict societies in achieving sustainable
peace and stability. They have a well-recorded
potential to connect grassroots to global governance,
mobilize public opinion and add a fresh voice to global
decision-making. They have acted collectively in
global campaigns, influenced the outcomes of global
conferences, reacted promptly to grave humanitarian
crises and fought for justice and reconciliation. The
United Nations Charter has envisaged their role in the
Organization's work; yet little progress has been
achieved in creating institutional mechanisms for
making their voices heard in the United Nations and its
principal bodies. We must therefore translate the
rhetoric into concrete action and develop permanent
mechanisms for fostering a United Nations-civil
society organizations partnership. This is my first
thought.

Secondly, the Economic and Social Council, as
the principal intergovernmental body mandated to
promote policy processes in addressing deep-rooted
socio-economic, cultural, environmental or structural
causes of conflict, should be the lead institution in
involving civil society organizations in post-conflict
peace-building policy recommendations. It should
engage NGOs effectively through its consultative
mechanisms, its subsidiary commissions and its ad hoc
advisory groups on post-conflict countries. It must act
as a United Nations system-wide conduit for the
transmittal of early warnings and best practices to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly. Now is
the time for greater involvement of the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly in conflict
prevention and in peace-building, with a system-wide
coordination involving the United Nations agencies,
the Bretton Woods Institutions, the private sector and
civil society organizations. As a member of the
Economic and Social Council, Bangladesh will leave
no effort unexplored to achieve this goal.

Thirdly, the field experience of NGOs involved in
the operational delivery of rule of law, human rights,
justice and humanitarian services, as well as social
rehabilitation of ex-combatants and child soldiers, must
be incorporated, where appropriate, in the integrated
planning process for new peacekeeping missions. Also,
NGOs with well-known credentials for women's
empowerment and gender justice must be involved in
post-conflict peace-building policy development, as
empowering women economically and politically helps
marginalize extremist thought and action. Bangladesh
also advocates that for peacekeeping to lay a strong
foundation for long-term peace-building, the two
processes must evolve in tandem in a coherent and
comprehensive manner involving all partners,
including the United Nations, the intergovernmental
bodies, the private sector and the civil society
organizations.

Fourthly, it is essential to develop a bond of
mutual trust and confidence among the NGOs, civil
society organizations, the United Nations system and
intergovernmental and governmental processes in order
to have an effective collective partnership and to
achieve a consensual approach to peace-building. We
encourage the NGO community to explore their
potentials and to ensure that their own mandates focus
on prevention of conflicts and post-conflict rebuilding.
Also, the debate over the NGOs lacking the legitimacy
and accountability of elected Governments must be
tempered by fostering an institutional mechanism for
greater NGO accountability, transparency and a code of
conduct in their governance.

Finally, the significantly low representation of
NGOs and civil society organizations from developing
countries enjoying consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council or association with the
United Nations Department of Public Information must
be improved. Bangladesh fully supports global
coalition and networks of issue-based civil society
organizations for strong global advocacy. We also
encourage a regional or a South-South perspective in
NGO networking in post-conflict peace-building. After
all, social transformations must come from within and
cannot be imposed from outside. Cultural sensitivities
and local values must be taken into account in peace-
building. Examples from comparable societies must be
shared.

As a country deeply involved in the shepherding
and implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace, it is our firm belief,
indeed faith, that the civil society is the voice and the
ears of the grassroots. It has the capacity to educate the
masses about the value and dividends of peace and
non-violence. It must be embraced as an equal partner
if our common aspiration for peace and prosperity is to
translate from hope to fruition. We call upon the
Security Council to garner the political will to invest
today in the civil society, a tested partner in peace and
development, to avoid costly wars tomorrow. That is a
categorical imperative that we would ignore with great
peril and sad consequences.

