Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely open debate on the
implementation of the presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507. Let me join other delegations in
expressing our appreciation for Japan's contributions to
improving the Council's working methods. Under your
able chairmanship, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions has
been looking into ways to enhance the Council's
transparency, accountability and efficiency. Such
efforts, which my delegation actively supports, will
benefit from further interaction and dialogue with the
wider membership today.

Under Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter, Member
States confer on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and agree to carry out the decisions
of the Council in accordance with the Charter. These
two aspects - that the Council's authority is delegated
and that its decisions bind sovereign States - explain
and justify the interest of all delegations in the working
methods of the Council.

Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter also provide
indispensable parameters for the interaction between
the Security Council and Member States at large. They
establish the right of concerned parties to participate
without a vote in the deliberations of the Council on
matters affecting their interests.

The Council's constant dialogue with the wider
membership on method and substance is therefore a
political imperative. It is also beneficial to this organ,
as it helps to make its decisions more inclusive and
potentially more effective. Efforts must continue to be
made to increase meaningful access for non-members
in accordance with the Charter. This must apply to
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council as well. They
should seek the views of Member States with a
legitimate interest in their areas of work or directly
affected by their decisions, including by inviting
representatives of such members to participate in
meetings as appropriate.

Security Council consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries are another aspect of the
organ's working methods that are especially important
to the wider membership. Significant progress has been
made in that area, but more can be done. For example,
consultations should be held as early as possible in the
negotiation of mandate renewals for peacekeeping
missions so that the views of troop- and police-
contributing countries can be considered by the
Council fully and in a timely manner. Such interaction
would be made easier and more effective if
contributing countries had access to reports of the
Secretary-General and draft resolutions as early as
possible in the process.
Closer interaction between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission should be pursued. Let me
express our support for the proposals made in that
regard by the Permanent Representative of Austria.

Credible and systematic information sharing is
key to consistent dialogue between Council members,
non-members, interested parties and regional and
subregional organizations. I would like to echo the
words of the Permanent Representative of Nigeria in
stressing the importance of more frequent dialogue
with the African Union, taking into account the
importance of such interaction to deliberations on
many issues on the Council's agenda.

Private meetings may be needed, and often are, to
help to effectively address an issue being considered
by the Council. However, the Council should continue
to strive to hold as many public meetings as possible,
in line with the letter and the spirit of rule 48 of its
provisional rules of procedure.

Those and other relevant issues are being
currently discussed in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions as we
assess the implementation of presidential note
S/2006/507. We hope that the Council will be able to
agree on the text of a revised comprehensive
presidential note. By doing so, we would provide
Member States and the general public with a single
user-friendly updated text comprising relevant
practices relating to the working methods of the
Council.

As Brazil has said in the past, improving the
working methods of the Security Council is not
sufficient to ensure its long-term transparency,
accountability and legitimacy. For that to happen, its
composition must reflect cotemporary political
realities. The overwhelming support expressed in
December 2009 for moving the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform to a text-based
phase shows that the United Nations membership fully
understands that political need.

Brazil continues to hold the view that the Council
should be expanded in the permanent and non-
permanent categories of membership, with the
inclusion of developing countries in both. We also
believe that there is ample support for that position. We
will continue to work with like-minded delegations, in
constant dialogue with all Member States, in favour of
a solution that can garner the widest possible political
acceptance.

