Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2265 (2016), guided by its main objective to
promote a political settlement in Darfur. In particular,
we continue to consider targeted limitations as an
important tool for bringing pressure to bear on rebels
who refuse to join the talks on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. If it were not for the
duplicitous positions held by some Security Council
members, the sanctions mechanism could be used more
effectively. We have been raising this issue for many
years, but honestly nothing can be done.

Instead, we would like to express our serious
concern over the working methods used in putting the
draft before the Council by the delegation of the United
States, which abused its power as penholder and most
inconsiderately inserted its own national priorities into
the document. Under the pretext of the good intention
of establishing peace in Darfur and by arbitrarily
interpreting the recommendations of the sanctions
experts, the sponsors sought to increase the pressure on
Khartoum by depriving it of one of its largest sources
of income. At the same time, they also ignored the
positions of other delegations.

Those tactics undermined the unity of the Council.
Consequently, the United States delegation was forced
to proceed with a strictly technical extension of the
sanctions resolution and put the text to the vote.
The document does not include important language
suggested by the Russian delegation, among others,
condemning the violations of the arms embargo by
illegal armed groups, the recruitment of rebel child
soldiers, attacks on peacekeepers and a call for a
full - not a selective - implementation of the Doha
Document. The responsibility for those omissions lies
entirely with the American side.

We hope that this situation will serve as an
important lesson for the United States representative
and that, in the future, when drafting resolutions and
other Security Council documents, the United States
delegation will demonstrate a more reasonable and
constructive approach.

