Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to express
my appreciation to the President for convening this
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We take
this opportunity to extend our support to the newly
appointed Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, in his efforts,
as well as to express our appreciation for the work of
the outgoing Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert Serry.

In his briefing to the Council last month (see S/PV.7417), Mr. Serry said,

"It remains the primary responsibility of the
Council to play its role in developing a new peace
architecture for resolving the conflict at long last."
(S/PV.74]7, p. 5)

In pointing out that resolution 242 (1968), which
embodies the key principle of land for peace, was
nearly a half-century old, he rightly wondered whether
the time had not come for the Security Council to lead.

The question of Palestine is one of the long-
standing issues before the Council and the international
community. While we reiterate our support to the
amicable resolution of the issue, we are concerned that
the Security Council has not been able to achieve the
objective ofa peaceful solution. At best, the Council has
been a bystander and witness to the cycles of escalation

and relative calm that have come to characterize this
unresolved issue. The Council's effectiveness has
consequently been brought into question. We therefore
join others in urging the Council to step up its efforts
and take the lead in resolving this problem.

India's deep association with, and continuing
commitment to, Palestine is rooted in our own modern
history, which goes back to our own struggle for
independence. India's position on the issue of Palestine
is very clear. India reaffirms its support for the cause of
Palestine and its solidarity with the Palestinian people
in their struggle for a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State within secure and internationally
recognized borders, living side-by-side at peace with
Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Apart from political support to the Palestinian
cause, India continues to promote Palestinian
development and nation-building efforts by consistently
offering technical and financial assistance. It also
contributes $1 million annually to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. India has pledged $4 million in response
to the Palestinian National Early Recovery and
Reconstruction Plan for Gaza. Within the framework
of the India, Brazil and South Africa Trust Fund, with
our partners Brazil and South Africa, we are also
implementing development projects in Palestine and
have pledged $1 million for a new project to rebuild the
Atta Habib medical centre in Gaza.

India remains firmly convinced that dialogue
remains the only viable option for effectively addressing
the issue. We are particularly worried that last year saw
a downward tendency in the peace process. Efforts
for serious negotiations between the parties were
inconclusive. In addition, we faced the resumption
of the tragic, escalated conflict in Gaza. Subsequent
developments included unilateral actions by the parties,
which unfortunately moved them further apart. There
is a critical imperative for restraint in order to avoid
provocation and unilateral actions, and for a return
to the peace process. Diplomacy and statesmanship
must prevail over hatred and violence. There is no
other road to a lasting peace. We remain hopeful and
urge both sides to resume the peace process soon for a
comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian issue.

We express our deep concern about the activities
of proscribed militias and radicalized and extremist
groups in the Middle East, especially in the northern
parts of Iraq and Syria, where such forces are
critically impacting regional peace and stability. The
violence perpetrated against civilians, in particular
against women and children, on the basis of religion
and ethnicity, along with sectarianism, strikes at our
common humanity. Efforts must be made by all parties
and stakeholders in the region to curb those dangerous
trends. We believe that the consolidation of political
processes and solutions and the establishment of
durable State institutions will be the most effective way
to address extremism and radicalism in the region.

We note that a proscribed terrorist group has twice
targeted United Nations peacekeepers from the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. We also regret
the death of a United Nations peacekeeper from the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Security
Council resolutions that proscribe terrorist groups
operating in that region need to be implemented.
The early and effective prosecution of such groups is
essential. Only such action, endorsed by the Council,
will deter such groups in other parts of the world from
committing acts of terror.

As a nation that took proactive and effective steps
by evacuating and safeguarding the lives of thousands
of our citizens, as well as those of many nationals from
48 other countries, including four ofthe five permanent
members of the Council, we urge all parties in Yemen
to return to the negotiating table forthwith. As I stated
earlier, dialogue remains the effective solution to
resolve all problems.

On Syria, we reiterate our support for a Syria-led
comprehensive political solution to the ongoing crisis,
in alignment with the Geneva communique' of 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). The humanitarian crisis arising out
ofthe situation has to be addressed effectively. It is with
this conviction in mind that we pledged and contributed
$2 million to the United Nations 2014 Syria Response
Plan and pledged another $2 million during the third
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
Syria, recently held in Kuwait. We would like to urge
all parties to demonstrate the requisite political will,
exercise restraint and commit to seeking common
ground in accommodating their differences.

