Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate. At the outset, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and for
his introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/159). I would like also to extend to Mr. Kai
Eide our warmest congratulations on his appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).

In his report, the Secretary-General says that two
years after the adoption of the Afghanistan Compact
the political transition continues to face serious
challenges. We are deeply concerned over the current
security situation in Afghanistan, where, as reported by
the Secretary-General, in 2007 alone there were 8,000
conflict-related fatalities, of which 1,500 were
civilians. We condemn all acts of violence aimed at
destabilizing the country, in particular those targeting
innocent civilians, including the terrorist attack that
took place on 17 February near Kandahar, which killed
over 100 people.
The difficulties and challenges that Afghanistan
is facing today are not only those of a security nature.
In reaffirming our support for the efforts of the
Government and the people of Afghanistan aimed at
stabilizing and rebuilding the country, and given the
specific situation in Afghanistan, which has gone
through long decades of internal conflict and division,
it is our view that besides measures to enhance
security, the need to promote national reconciliation
and a political process aimed at ensuring lasting
Afghan and regional peace and stability should be duly
recognized. Because of all the suffering they have
endured and because of their earnest aspiration to move
forward, the people of Afghanistan deserve the
continued support and assistance of the international
community in their cause of national rebuilding, the
success of which depends on success against both
major enemies: terrorism and drugs.

In that connection, we find it worrisome that
Afghanistan remains one of the largest suppliers of
cannabis in the world. While agreeing that there is an
urgent need to strengthen enforcement activities aimed
at eradicating and interdicting illicit drug trafficking
and at dismantling production facilities, we believe that
it is vital to address the pervasive poverty which is the
root cause of this situation. Parallel to enforcement
measures, in-depth action-oriented study is needed to
come up with initiatives on building alternative
livelihoods for the people so that they can enjoy a
better life without engaging in drug-related activities.

While commending UNAMA for its work in
Afghanistan and while supporting the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the current mandate of
UNAMA be extended for a further 12 months, we are
of the opinion that, in the context of the complex
security situation still prevailing in Afghanistan,
UNAMA should focus on carrying out its present
mandate, although I agree with Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno that the mandate should be
sharpened. We support UNAMA in its willingness to
play a role in supporting the electoral process by
providing technical assistance and channelling
international funds earmarked to support Afghan
electoral institutions. However, this must be at the
request of the Government of Afghanistan, in
accordance with the principle of respect for the
independence and sovereignty of the country.

With the people of Afghanistan, we share a
special bond of traditional friendship. We have always
followed with keen interest and concern the situation in
Afghanistan. Viet Nam has participated in the
international conferences on the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. With our limited resources, we have
extended to the people of Afghanistan our modest

assistance. With our post-war reconstruction
experience, we are ready to join Afghanistan's
reconstruction efforts, bilaterally and in tripartite
frameworks with the participation of donor countries
and the Afghan Government.

