Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (Spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Special Representative Tanin for their
efforts in implementing the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) under resolution 1244 (1999).

For almost two years now we have been arguing
in the Security Council about whether we should be
meeting two, three or four times a year. All this time,
however, the situation in Kosovo and Metohija has
been going from bad to worse. Unfortunately, it is clear
from the current situation that the decision to reduce
the number of meetings was premature. However, I do
believe that we are now done with the procedural issues
and can begin to address the core issues and ensure
that our meetings are productive. Despite the claims
of some that our deliberations are often antagonistic
and unconstructive, the Council's consideration of
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija represents a
vital opportunity for providing the Security Council
and the international community with regular and
transparent advice on the situation on the ground and
the key political and security challenges that we face in
Kosovo, however difficult they may be and despite the
fact that it is evident that our positions differ.

At the outset, I want to reiterate my call for a
dialogue and for a solution to the decades-long problem
of Kosovo and Metohija through peaceful means and
compromise. I hope that the entire Council subscribes
to that and is Willing to state loudly and clearly what is
required for a successful dialogue. What we need are
two countries that behave reasonably and sensibly and
that are ready to talk and then to implement what they
agree on. In the European Union-facilitated negotiations
in Brussels, one of the parties to the dialogue has done
so since the very beginning. The other, regrettably,
has not.

Last week we heard from Pristina that it was not
planning to implement any part of what was agreed
to six years ago, including the establishment of a
community of Serb municipalities. That statement by
Hashim Thaci makes us wonder what we have been
doing all this time. Because if an agreement is reached,
signed and guaranteed, including by the European
Union, but goes unimplemented by Pristina for six
years and is eventually rejected outright, we have to
ask if there was ever a dialogue at all. It was not just
Serbia that was deceived. The entire international
community encouraged us to continue the dialogue.
We were asked to be patient in the face of Pristina's
constant prevarications about implementing any
agreement. This also represents a serious dent in the
credibility of the European Union, which is a signatory
to the Brussels Agreement and thereby a guarantor of
its implementation.

Let me once again remind the Council that in August
2013, as the then Prime Minister of Serbia, together with
Hashim Thaci and Catherine Ashton, I signed the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina, known as
the Brussels Agreement. The negotiations that preceded
the signing were very difficult for Serbia, but as a
responsible partner, my country has implemented all
the obligations it assumed. We signed the Agreement
only because it guaranteed the establishment of a
community of Serb municipalities.

However, the representatives of Pristina, without
mincing their words, have said that they are not going to
implement what was agreed to. Dissatisfied with their
treatment, they threatened the European Union that
they would consider unification with Albania and annex
three other municipalities in southern Serbia to boot.
Can Pristina be considered a serious and responsible
party with which we should continue to negotiate? Who
can convince us now that it will not behave in the same
way in this process in the future? We have also heard
a litany of threatening messages from Albania's Prime
Minister Edi Rama on the possibility of the unification
of Albania and Kosovo. Yet those messages are being
dismissed without a response and glossed over as trivial.

Two weeks ago, a so-called anti-corruption and
anti-organized crime operation was carried out in
northern Kosovo and Metohija. Kosovo's special
police Regional Operations Support Unit arrested
more than 30 people. Serbia supports the fight against
organized crime throughout its territory, but the
use of long guns and excessive force, along with the
televised spectacle that followed, were indicative of a
different goal altogether - intimidating the remaining
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. More than 70 combat
vehicles were deployed and Serbs were brutally
beaten, while Albanians were apprehended without
any forceful measures. If that unacceptable act is not
widely condemned, including by the Council, it will
have served its purpose, and the Serbian population of
Kosovo and Metohija will continue to be intimidated
and terrorized.

Following the signing of the Brussels Agreement,
I attended a meeting with Catherine Ashton, Hashim
Thaci and Aleksandar Vucic at NATO's headquarters
in Brussels. It was agreed at the meeting that no
Kosovo security force would enter the North without
first complying with two conditions - notifying the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and advising the representatives
of the Serb communities in northern Kosovo and
Metohija, neither of which condition was met on this
occasion. On top of that, two United Nations personnel
were brutalized and arrested, although they did not
attempt to resist and were not armed. I spoke about it
with Special Representative Tanin, who informed me
officially that they were in fact there on duty. Mikhail
Krasnoshchekov was beaten, unlawfully arrested and
subsequently declared persona non grata, contrary to the
relevant United Nations convention. Not even members
of the United Nations Mission are safe in Kosovo. How
can we expect the Mission to carry out its mandate
if its personnel can be attacked at will and declared
undesirable if they do not happen to be to Pristina's
liking? What will it be next - the expulsion of the
entire Mission? And Pristina, which has no shame, is
now offering to negotiate UNMIK's future presence in
northern Kosovo with the Secretary-General. I would
like to point out that it is the Council that decides on
the Mission's mandate and that it was established by
resolution 1244 (1999).

The developments in Kosovo and Metohija over the
past several weeks and months are telling evidence that
the international community should be much more alert
and invest much more effort, and that the international
organizations in Kosovo and Metohija should be much
more active. We have recently witnessed some Security
Council members calling for a so-called strategic
review of UNMIK's mandate and for its reduction and
even withdrawal. At this point in time, however, it is
difficult even to conceive of making any kind of change
in direction, let alone taking action on it. Surely we
all understand how far we are today from a stable and
secure situation in Kosovo and Metohija that no longer
warrants the Council's attention. The risk of the situation
worsening on the ground could prove costly, and in the
context of recent developments I am sure that no one
wishes to run that risk. Unfortunately, the authorities
in Pristina are turning a deaf ear to discussions of the
matter. They think that they can reduce the Mission by
beating up its members and expelling them.

On this very day, 20 years ago, the illegal bombing
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the aggression
by NATO, without any decision of the Council, came to
an end. We are all aware of the negative effects that
this precedent has had on international relations and
on various events that have happened in the world over
the past 20 years. However, I cannot let the occasion
pass without mentioning the numerous civilian victims
and their tragic fate, and how Serbia was ravaged in 78
days of bombardment with depleted uranium. I want
to remember the 666 Victims who died in Kosovo and
Metohija after the war ended on 10 June 1999, and
following the arrival of the United Nations Mission
and KFOR. Of the 666 victims, 562 were Serbs, and
7,391 of the 8,134 attacks were against Serbs. Twenty
years later, the only thing that we can say with certainty
is that the primary victims of the conflict in Kosovo
and Metohija and the bombing of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia were innocent civilians who were either
killed or expelled, regardless of whether they were
Serbs, Albanians or some other nationality. Despite
the differences in positions on the issue, it cannot be
denied that all sides committed crimes and that there
were victims on all sides. Regrettably, we cannot bring
back the victims, but we can learn from our mistakes
and make sure that they are not repeated. It is therefore
important to condemn all the crimes, mourn all the
Victims, rule out war as a means of resolving conflict
and embark on a path to compromise and a sustainable
settlement while achieving lasting reconciliation and
economic and political stability.

Twenty years ago to the day the Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999). I will try to describe the way
in which its provisions dovetail with the facts on the
ground, because the way they do that says a great deal
about the validity and relevance of the resolution and
UNMIK, as well as the task ahead of us. In crafting
the mandate of the international presence in Kosovo
and Metohija, in its tenth preambular paragraph the
resolution reaffirms

"the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the other States of the
region, as set out in the Helsinki Final Act".

However, many have taken a Sledgehammer to that
provision in order to conceal the fact that an ethnic
minority - the Albanian minority, whose mother
country is Albania - tried to secede from and take
with it a part of the territory of a sovereign country.

In paragraph 5 of annex 2 of the resolution,
among other things, the Security Council calls for the
"[e]stablishment of an interim administration to
ensure conditions for a peaceful and normal life for all
inhabitants in Kosovo." In paragraph 9 (c), it also calls
for the establishment of"a secure environment in which
refugees and displaced persons can return home in
safety". Efforts have been made in that regard and some
refugees and displaced persons have indeed returned.
But only 1.9 per cent of Serbs have returned for good,
While 200,000 of them have remained away from home
for 20 long years and it is not likely that they will go
home any time soon. And we all know why. What can
they expect if year after year they are met by organized
attacks with sticks and stones even when they come to
pay their respects to their dead on Christian holy days?

The catalogue of human rights violations in Kosovo
and Metohija goes on and on, and we cannot list them
all. It is not the subject of our deliberations today, but
according to the United States Department of State, in
its 2018 report on human rights in Kosovo,

"[s]ecurity incidents against Kosovo Serbs
persisted In the first seven months of the year,
there were more than 100 incidents involving thefts,
break-ins, verbal harassment, and damage to the
property of Kosovo Serbs and the Serbian Orthodox
Church Ethnic minorities faced varying levels
of institutional and societal discrimination in
employment, education, social services, language
use, freedom of movement, the right to return to
their homes (for displaced persons), and other
basic rights."

The brutal truth is that, after 20 years, multi-ethnic
Kosovo and Metohija has become almost mono-ethnic.
Let me once again bring some facts to the Council's
attention. Of the 427 towns and villages in which the
Serbs lived prior to 1999, they now live in only 116.
In other words, in the past 20 years, 311 settlements
previously inhabited by Serbs have now been ethnically
cleansed - that is, they are exclusively Albanian. What
is that, if not ethnic cleansing? It is stark evidence of
the falsehood of an alleged genocide against Albanians.
After all, more Albanians live in Kosovo and Metohija
today than did before 1999, while more than 200,000
Serbs have been expelled and 311 of their settlements
have been ethnically cleansed. Those are the official
figures from the Kosovo census. To cite just a couple
more examples to illustrate my point, in 1999 there
were more than 40,000 Serbs living in Pristina. Today
there are fewer than 100. In 1999, there were more than
10,000 Serbs living in Prizren, the Serbian capital in
Tsar Dusan's reign in the fourteenth century - the
town where I was born, incidentally - but today only
23 remain. Unfortunately, and very sadly for Serbs,
those are the exact numbers.

Paragraphs 11 (i) and 14 of resolution 1244
(1999) call for "[m]aintaining civil law and order' and
'[d]emands full cooperation by all concerned with
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia."
We truly believe that all who committed crimes should
be brought to justice, and we have complied with our
obligations. The results of the Tribunal, however, have
left much to be desired. The full force of international
justice was employed in the attempt to prosecute Serbs,
and they paid the price, personally and politically,
While the token few who were tried and sentenced on
the other side were quickly released, and some of them
are walking the corridors of power in Pristina today.
In a recent statement, Philip Kosnett, the United States
Ambassador in Pristina, expressed deep concern about
the appointment of unqualified individuals to senior
positions in the Kosovo Government, including people
convicted of war crimes, under active indictment for
serious crimes or suspected of serious abuses of power.

We continue to hope that justice is attainable.
The Specialist Chambers and Office of the Specialist
Prosecutor recently began their work and have a
massive caseload. Among those under investigation,
some are suspected of heinous crimes, including the
abduction and killing of Serbs, as well as Albanians
whom they considered disloyal, in order to harvest
their organs. There is ample evidence of that in the
Marty report. We want to believe that they will be
brought to justice despite the time that has passed, the
destruction of evidence, the intimidation of witnesses
and their families, and even the deplorable killings of
protected witnesses.

Resolution 1244 (1999) states that the international
military presence will provide security for all the
inhabitants in Kosovo and Metohija. However, last
December Pristina violated it once again by taking the
unilateral decision to establish a Ministry of Defence
and begin the process of transforming the Kosovo
Security Force into the Kosovo Army, despite the
admonitions of the United Nations, the European Union
and NATO, in a dangerous manoeuvre that threatens
security in Kosovo and beyond, and further aggravates
the situation of Serbs and other non-Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija. Pristina has taken similar steps
in the past, that some members of the international
community regrettably have not adequately condemned.
It seems to have created a perception in Pristina that
it can take such unilateral actions with tacit approval
in some quarters. That is exactly why these unilateral
acts should be unequivocally condemned. KFOR must
act preventively and deter any attempt by the Kosovo
forces to threaten civil peace and security, which has
the potential for destabilization.

From the platform of this leading organ of our
world Organization, I want to warn the Council
that, according to our information, the authorities in
Pristina are planning an attack on northern Kosovo
and Metohija. Everyone here should take note of that
and put a stop to Pristina's war machine before it causes
more bloodshed. I also want to remind the Council that
KFOR's task is safeguarding the peace and security of
all, including the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. I want
to ask the Council if it will or will not, because I am
sure that it can. This is a very serious warning.

It is evident that because of Pristina's failure to
implement the resolution and outright violations of
it, the continuation of UNMIK's mandate is crucially
important to the fate of many in Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia believes firmly that the Mission must remain
fully engaged on all issues relevant to the consistent
implementation of its goals and objectives, with its
scope undiminished and its mandate unchanged.
Anything else would send a message to Serbs living
in Kosovo and Metohija that they will not be able to
stay in their ancestral land and to those who have been
displaced that they are not welcome to return, a message
that fits in with Pristina's intentions and goals. If that
is permitted it would be tantamount to an admission
by the international community, the United Nations
and the Security Council that they are powerless and
have no means to implement the decisions they made
to maintain peace and create an environment conducive
to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We hope and
believe that is not the case and that UNMIK will remain
in Kosovo and Metohija in its full capacity.

Serbia has done everything possible to normalize
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija, and we firmly
believe that negotiations are the only way forward to
address all outstanding issues. However, if we are the
only ones to commit to dialogue or to a constructive
approach to reaching a sustainable compromise
solution to the question of Kosovo and Metohija, that
is not enough to enable negotiations to continue at this
time. As I said, we have no partner for a serious and
responsible dialogue, and yet both sides, Belgrade and
Pristina, are being called on to resume negotiations.
The implication is that both are responsible for the
impasse in negotiations even though the responsibility
is Pristina's alone. How can we negotiate if rather than
removing obstacles, the other side is doing everything
it can to create new ones?

In November, in its frustration at not being made a
member of INTERPOL and at 13 countries' revoking
of their recognition of Kosovo's unilaterally declared
independence, Pristina imposed 100 per cent tariffs on
goods from central Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a step unprecedented anywhere in the world. Six
months later, and in the face of condemnation by
almost all international actors and of calls to take
back that senseless decision, Pristina is in no mood
to do so. It is not only dismissive of those calls but
is piling on provocations and unilateral acts that can
only lead us to conclude that it is taking systematic
steps to make dialogue impossible. How else are we
to understand its adoption in March of its so-called
platform for dialogue, which asserts that the only goal
and outcome of the dialogue is Serbia's recognition of
Kosovo's independence?

With regard to the open protests from Pristina and
some Security Council members about the 13 countries'
revocation of their recognition of Kosovo, and their
accusations that Serbia's activities are undermining
dialogue, I would like to remind the Council that
23 countries have recognized Kosovo's unilaterally
declared independence since the Brussels dialogue
began, following intense lobbying by Pristina and
pressure exerted by some Security Council members. In
addition, Gent Cakaj, Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs of Albania, who was born in Kosovo and
Metohija, said that Albania had set up a special team
to lobby for additional recognitions and for Kosovo's
membership in international organizations.

I have been participating in Council meetings for
seven years now, and in that time, right in my face,
some Council members have loudly urged all countries
to recognize Kosovo and vote in favour of admitting
it to INTERPOL, UNESCO and other international
organizations. Why do they have the right to make
those demands and we do not? And why does the issue
upset Pristina, Tirana and certain Council members
while Serbia's grievances meant nothing? Apparently
the Council considered that normal. Pristina also goes
around complaining that Serbia prevented its admission
to INTERPOL, but the fact is that at the INTERPOL
General Assembly in Dubai last year, only 75 of its 194
members voted in favour of Kosovo's admission. What
happened to the 116 countries that Pristina claims have
recognized it? Some Council members would have us
believe that little Serbia is so powerful that it could
influence the decision of many INTERPOL members.

The authorities in Pristina also recently adopted
a resolution on Serbia's alleged genocide in Kosovo.
Such measures are tantamount to playing games with
international law. They increase tensions among
communities and contribute nothing to a climate of
reconciliation or dialogue. The scandal regarding
the allegations made by Flora Brovina, a member of
Kosovo's Parliament, are also very illuminating in
that context. She was sentenced in Serbia for intent
to commit a terrorist act, but in an act of goodwill on
the part of my country, she was pardoned in 2001. She
showed the media a photograph in the so-called Kosovo
Assembly as proof of the alleged rape of an Albanian
woman by Serbian forces and said that the woman,
whose identity was known, was still living in Kosovo.
Upon investigation not by Belgrade but by the Kosovo
Specialist Prosecutor's Office, with expert analysis
by the Kosovo Forensics Agency, and based on other
evidence, it was concluded that the photograph was a
fake. The media in Pristina reported that the photograph
had nothing to do with Kosovo but had originated in Iraq
and been downloaded from the Internet. Does anyone
really think thatjustice for victims and survivors can be
achieved through the crude misuse of tragedy and the
presentation of false evidence? Ms. Brovina's callous
act was a deep offence to the victims and their families.
The United States Ambassador to Pristina was explicit
when he said that Kosovo's leaders should be helping
victims heal, not exploiting them for political gain.

Where this sensitive issue is concerned, I want
everyone to fully understand that Serbia condemns
each and every act of sexual violence in conflict and
calls for justice for all victims. To achieve that we need
a rational, documented approach without politicization,
and that is a precondition for protecting the rights of
each individual victim. I want to reiterate that the
number of victims does not diminish the horrific effect
of this form of violence on each individual. However,
manipulating numbers is detrimental to justice, leads
to politicization and slows the reconciliation process.
Based on the data provided by the commission
responsible for the verification and recognition of the
status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence,
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/461) says
that 982 applications have been submitted, of which
308 have been accepted. Pristina's representatives,
however, continue to talk of 20,000 raped Albanians as
if there were no Serbian victims of sexual violence. In
that regard, Fatmir Limaj, among others, was indicted
based on the testimony of the Mazreku brothers,
Albanian witnesses and accomplices to his crime. And
I would like to point out, if I may, that according to a
decision of the Government and Parliament of Kosovo,
Fatmir Limaj heads the Pristina negotiation team in the
dialogue with Belgrade.

As I said in my statement to the Council in
February (see S/PV.8459), I am not here for rhetorical
one-upmanship. I am here to help bring lasting peace
and normalcy to the people of Kosovo and Metohija.
We must not let them down. We must pursue dialogue
and achieve compromise. Our disputes will not bring a
better life and prosperity to either Serbs or Albanians
in Kosovo and Metohija. They will not provide security
to Serbs, enable them to return home, see their property
restored, prevent physical attacks on them or allow them
to live in peace and dignity. We must be bold, strong and
inclusive of all. We must make sure that what is decided
in the Council is respected and reflected on the ground,
for it concerns the condition of many and speaks to
who we are. This topic must not be allowed to cool or
be superseded by some other acute political problem
facing the international community because, contrary
to Pristina's assertions otherwise, nothing has yet been
resolved with respect to the question of Kosovo.

I therefore call on Pristina once again to revoke
the senseless tariffs and return to dialogue, which
is the only alternative for the Serbian and Albanian
peoples. Serbia is ready to achieve a lasting solution
through negotiations.

