Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Today marks the end of an
important chapter with the completion of the mandate
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the beginning of another significant
chapter, with the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We thank Special Representative Sandra Honore for her
briefing on the latest situation in Haiti and for the steps
taken to implement the withdrawal of MINUSTAH and
ensure a smooth transition to the new Mission.

Over the past 13 years, MINUSTAH has played
an important role in ensuring security and stability,
restoring the rule of law and promoting national
dialogue and institution-building in Haiti. It also
supported recovery efforts after the 2010 earthquake
and the devastating impact of six major hurricanes,
although its image was tarnished by its handling of the
cholera outbreak. We realize that there is now a new
approach to deal with the issue and address the suffering
of the victims. It is important that the international
community support the Haitian Government in its
efforts to eliminate the disease.

We welcome the continued progress made in
Haiti in consolidating its democracy and institutional
stability, as indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/840). We also take note of the progress
made in the overall security situation in the country,
which remains relatively stable. As we mark the end of
MINUSTAH's mandate, we recognize its contribution
in that regard.

Nevertheless, Haiti continues to face enormous
challenges and vulnerabilities. There is therefore a
need to take decisive steps towards creating greater
social and political cohesion and reinforcing State
institutions so as to sustain the gains made in recent
years. The conduct of a successful national dialogue
to address socioeconomic grievances and to bridge
communication between the Government and other
stakeholders in the country would be very significant in
forging a common vision and ensuring greater stability
and development.

The sustained and coordinated engagement of all
bilateral and international partners is critical to securing
sufficient and timely assistance for the sustainable
development of Haiti in a manner that respects its
sovereignty. We hope that Ms. Josette Sheeran will
build the necessary partnership with a wide range of
stakeholders to support the work of the United Nations
in Haiti.

The establishment of MINUJUSTH is indeed very
important to consolidate peace by strengthening the
institutions of justice and the rule of law, as well as
supporting the institutional and operational capacity
of the Haitian National Police. We appreciate the work
that has been done to ensure a smooth transition to
MINUJUSTH, in line with resolution 2350 (2017). We
also recognize regional and subregional organizations,
in particular the Organization of American States, the
Union of South American Nations and the Caribbean
Community for their important roles in the process of
the stabilization and reconstruction of Haiti.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
to Ms. Sandra Honore for her dedicated service
and to all departing MINUSTAH civilian staff and
uniformed personnel for their steadfast commitment
and contribution in carrying out the Mission's
mandate. Ethiopia is pleased to have made a very
modest contribution through the deployment of police
personnel. I wish to conclude by once again reiterating
our solidarity with the brotherly people and Government
of Haiti as they continue to strive to consolidate the
progress made in recent years and address the multiple
challenges that their nation is facing.

