Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting,
and the briefers for their valuable briefings. We would
particularly like to welcome Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
the newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
and to wish him every success in his work.

We want to begin by underscoring the commitment
and efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic in implementing the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation, which shows that
Central Africans are determined to put an end to
more than five years of conflict. We are encouraged
by the recent progress made in the political arena,
such as the formation of an inclusive Government,
the establishment of monitoring and implementation
mechanisms and the signing of reconciliation
agreements at the intercommunal level. Nonetheless,
we reiterate that the peace agreement's true impact will
be in its full implementation. Its results must lead to
tangible improvements in the country's security and
socioeconomic development, as well as in the serious
humanitarian situation. We would like to mention
some aspects that we believe should be prioritized in
that context.

First, on the political front, it is essential to ensure
as soon as possible that the relevant authorities can
complete the drafting of an electoral code that provides
the guarantees and legal framework for preparing
and holding the presidential, legislative, regional and
municipal elections in 2020 and 2021. It is also vital
that the Government of the Central African Republic
work for gradual decentralization, which has the
potential to promote the country's development,
starting with the involvement of communities that have
been marginalized by the conflict. We also reiterate
the importance of implementing a gender parity law,
which is an effective way to ensure that Central African
women can play a key role, together with young people,
in determining the kind of society they wish to build.

Secondly, with regard to security, we are concerned
about the fact that the signatory armed groups continue
to violate various provisions of the agreement, and we
believe that the Government should consider possible
measures to counter such conduct. We consider it
particularly important to address the difficulties of
redeploying the national defence and internal security
forces throughout the territory of the Central African
Republic, since they are needed to tackle the ongoing
violence against the civilian population, illegal taxation
and the obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian
aid. We want to commend President Touadera's
establishment ofthe Unites speciales mixtes de securite
and to emphasize the importance of continuing to
work to accelerate the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme.

Thirdly, with respect to development, it is vital
to work to provide basic social services and establish
infrastructure across the national territory. The peace
agreement places particular emphasis on recovery
and development programmes to complement the
political and security reforms. We welcome the efforts
made to align the implementation of the agreement
with the national recovery and peacebuilding plan.
At the same time, we consider it essential to work
towards establishing the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission, which by ensuring access
to justice and accountability will make it possible to
assist victims of sexual violence and address the issue
of the recruitment of children by armed groups, among
other things.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
participation of the African Union, the various
subregional and regional bodies, neighbouring countries
and the United Nations in seeking to overcome the crisis
in the Central African Republic and reach a solution to
it. We hope that the recent peace agreement will be the
first step in the joint effort to achieve sustainable peace
in that country.

