Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the holding of this debate and we are pleased
to see Minister McCully participate in it personally.

This debate, taking place in the context of the
consideration of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/768) on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace security, affords
us a new opportunity to look into the situation in
Afghanistan, which is more worrying than ever. In that
regard, I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for this excellent
briefing. I also take this opportunity to wish him every
success in his new duties. Of course, he will be able to
count on the full support of the delegation of Senegal.
Since our previous meeting (see S/PV.7722) here
in the Chamber a few months ago, some progress has
certainly been achieved in Afghanistan. However, we
are forced to note, taking stock ofthe past threet months,
that the political situation remains rather fragile, while
the security situation continues to deteriorate. That
has resulted in a number of difficulties in terms of
human rights violations and also at the humanitarian
level. However, fortunately, the combined efforts of the
Afghan Government, its regional partners and of the
international community, especially UNAMA, continue
to attenuate the negative impacts of this complex crisis
and provide us with a glimmer of hope.

Following the recent political and security
developments, the situation remains quite concerning.
At the security level, continuing clashes with the Taliban
and other armed groups have claimed an unprecedented
number of civilian lives since the United Nations started
to systematically count the deaths in 2009. That has
also led to a great many displaced persons, as indicated
in the report under consideration, while armed clashes
continue and suicide attacks unfortunately proliferate.

This unfortunate picture has been corroborated by
the attack on 23 July against a Hazara demonstration
in Khorasan province, which was claimed by Da'esh.
Furthermore, prospects for a possible peace process with
the Taliban have remained limited. Their determination
to continue their attacks and to continue to expand
their territorial gains remains almost intact. However,
it is more important than ever to transcend the current
impasse in which the peace negotiations between the
Afghan Government and a number of armed groups
find themselves. NATO's support to Afghan troops
turns out to be crucial to weaken radical elements and
prompt them to come to the negotiating table.

This is also the right time to encourage the Afghan
Government in its efforts in favour of the protection of
women and children, in a context where violations of
human rights continue to take place.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, it remains
more disquieting with the increase in the number of
displaced people. We pay tribute to the humanitarian
community for its commitment in Afghanistan, where
it continues its work to help impacted populations,
especially the most disadvantaged and vulnerable
segments of the population, sometimes at the very risk
of their own lives.

Faced with such an alarming situation, we
should welcome the continuing support shown by the
international community, including NATO forces,
and their continued cooperation with the Afghan
Government. We also pay tribute to the spirit of
cooperation and understanding that has prevailed
between Afghanistan and Pakistan following the June
incidents on the border in Torkham. We welcome the
relaunching of regional cooperation in the diplomatic,
security and economic fields between Afghanistan
and its partners, such as India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the People's
Republic of China, Tajikistan and the Russian
Federation. We welcome the Afghan Government's
continuing preparations for the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan planned for 5 October and the elaboration
of its National Peace and Development Framework. We
hope that the Conference will facilitate the process that
has been launched aimed at achieving lasting peace
and that it will lend momentum to economic and social
development, which will require a bolstering of efforts
in the fight against corruption, as initiated by the
Afghan Government.

In conclusion, my delegation encourages the
Government of Afghanistan and its partners and
neighbours to step up their efforts in favour of a peace,
which we hope will be lasting and to the benefit of all.

