The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Egeland for his comments.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council, recalling its
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) as well
as statements made by its Presidents on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict,
reiterates its commitment to address the
widespread impact of armed conflict on civilian
populations.

"The Council reaffirms its strong
condemnation of the deliberate targeting of
civilians or other protected persons in situations
of armed conflict, and calls upon all parties to put
an end to such practices. It expresses in particular
its deep concerns at the use of sexual violence as
a weapon of war. It calls upon all States to put an
end to impunity also in this regard.

"The Council is gravely concerned about
limited progress on the ground to ensure the
effective protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict. It stresses in particular the urgent
need for providing better physical protection for
displaced populations as well as for other
vulnerable groups, in particular women and
children. Efforts should be focused in areas where
these populations and groups are most at risk. At
the same time, it considers that contributing to
the establishment of a secure environment for all
vulnerable populations should be a key objective
of peacekeeping operations.

"The Council invites, accordingly, the
Secretary-General to include in his next report
recommendations on ways to better address the
persisting and emerging protection challenges in
the evolving peacekeeping environment. Upon
receipt of this report, it expresses its intention to
take further action to strengthen and enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
including, if necessary, a possible resolution in
this regard."

That statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/25.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
