Mr. Arriola Ramirez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): Today is exactly 30 days since the previous
meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8452). We must ask
ourselves why we are gathered here again at the Security
Council. The answer is obvious - the continuation in
power of Nicolas Maduro and the fact that his illegitimate
regime has generated a humanitarian crisis that poses
an unprecedented threat to the security, peace, freedom
and prosperity of the people of Venezuela and affects
the entire region.

On this occasion, we once again express our
concern about the deterioration of the political, social
and humanitarian situation of Venezuela, as well as the
systematic breakdown of the rule of law, democracy and
the fundamental freedoms of the citizens of Venezuela.

On 23 February, we observed the criminal acts of
the illegitimate regime of Nicolas Maduro, who blocked
the entry of international humanitarian aid in defiance
of the demands and suffering of the people of Venezuela
and the call of the international community. We reject
and condemn those violent repressive acts, which left
many dead and injured and thus increased the risk to the

life, integrity and dignity of the people of Venezuela,
who are victims ofa cruel and merciless oppression.

We ask the International Criminal Court to consider
the petition submitted by a group of countries, including
Paraguay, on 27 September, asking for the Court to
consider the grave humanitarian crisis in Venezuela, the
criminal violence of Maduro's regime against civilians
and the denial of access to international assistance as
crimes against humanity.

The presence of President Mario Abdo Benitez in
the Colombian city of Cdcuta, which borders Venezuela,
is a clear display of Paraguay's firm commitment to,
and solidarity with, the brotherly people of Venezuela
in safeguarding values, ethical and moral principles,
the rule of law, human rights and public liberties.

We recall that Paraguay was the first country to
break off diplomatic relations with the illegitimate
regime of Nicolas Maduro. In that regard, we reaffirm
once again in the Security Council our full support for,
and recognition of, the National Assembly, which was
legitimately elected in December 2015, and Mr. Juan
Guaido, as interim President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. Likewise, we resolutely support the
agreement for the promotion of a national rescue plan,
adopted by the National Assembly on 29 January.
We also reiterate that the process of democratic
transition and the institutional, economic and social
reconstruction of Venezuela must be led peacefully by
the Venezuelans themselves in accordance with their
national Constitution and respect for international law
and supported through political and diplomatic means,
while eschewing the use of force and violence. The
Venezuelan people must be the protagonists in their
own liberation. We urgently call for the holding of fair,
transparent and credible elections.

Lastly, we extend a special greeting to the brotherly
and courageous Venezuelan people on behalf of the
Paraguayan Government and its people, who support
and encourage them and hope that this process will
renew the example that Venezuela provided for us
in the past as a beacon of democracy enlightening
Latin America.

