Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for your initiative to convene this
meeting so that we might consider together the ways in
which we undertake the United Nations most essential
mission - that of maintaining international peace and
security.
We must be clear-headed. Peacekeeping
operations are often criticized, even rejected, by host
countries, as we have witnessed recently. Sometimes,
they struggle to fulfil their mandates. They are
expensive. They are not always as responsive as they
should be. And we were all appalled by the impunity
with which, even very recently, mass rapes were
perpetrated in the Kivus, despite the deployment of a
United Nations operation with significant assets. All of
this is true. But do not let the trees hide the forest.
What would we do without peacekeeping operations?

No other international organization enjoys the
legitimacy, the capacity and indeed the will to do what
the United Nations does on a daily basis throughout the
world. Clearly, even if all of us clearly favour
prevention, and despite the system's imperfections, we
have not yet found anything better with which to assist
and strengthen nascent and therefore fragile peace
processes; to assist States in need to restore their
capacities, administer their territory and thus avoid a
return to conflict; to guarantee the international
community's vigilance and ensure that the most
vulnerable are not left all alone in facing the hangman -
in a word, to involve the entire international community
in the settlement of crises from which we do not want to
avert our eyes.

This mission is extremely bold, perilous and,
some would even say, utopian. If the United Nations
does not meet this challenge, no one can do it in its
place. It is thus imperative that the Council 4 which
bears, I repeat, the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security -
learn from both its successes and its failures and adapt
its decisions accordingly.

You, Mr. President, rightly voiced the hope that
this meeting would cover all aspects related to the
maintenance of peace, whether it be the prevention of
conflicts, or peacekeeping or peacebuilding when they
have ended. Indeed, increasingly, we need to consider
all of this together.

At the very heart of this process, we have
peacekeeping itself. Of course, we are especially
wedded to this, because this is one of the major
responsibilities of the United Nations, and because the
lives of millions of women, men and children depend
on peacekeeping operations. Thousands of French
soldiers and over 150 gendarmes and police officers
serve as Blue Helmets - as Hillary Clinton said
earlier, thinking of our berets - and my country
contributes to the tune of $585 million to the budget
for peacekeeping operations.

We have experienced failure. We have
experienced success. In certain cases, we have reached
the limits of what we could expect of the missions. We
have also witnessed tragedies: in Rwanda, in the
former Yugoslavia and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We must remember these. We have learned
those lessons.

We are now striving to ensure that peacekeeping
operations be based on specific, clear and prioritized
mandates, with a clear timeline when possible, and that
they be supported by appropriate and sufficient
financial, human and technical resources. I am looking
across the Chamber at the head of peacekeeping
operations, who is looking at me dubiously.

We have also adapted the United Nations actions
to ensure better protection for vulnerable populations
and achieve lasting results. Have we been successful?
Not always. Today, the success of the United Nations
must be gauged by the yardstick of the protection of
civilians. Our credibility is at stake here.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) illustrate the challenges we must
face. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
protection of civilians remains the priority for the Blue
Helmets' mandate. But the situation is not under
control, as the Council is well aware, particularly in the
east, as shown by the recurrence of terrible violence
against civilians, of which I just spoke - in particular
against women, since it is easier.

The training of the police and army must lead to
law enforcement forces being redeployed to liberated
areas, without a security vacuum, and to the authority
of the Congolese State, including in the judicial field,
being lastingly restored throughout the Territory.

In Darfur, attacks against civilians do not take
place by chance. They are organized and have been
described as crimes against humanity by the
International Criminal Court. In the climate of
impunity that prevails in that battered region,
UNAMID is repeatedly exposed to attacks, which
prevents it from protecting civilians sufficiently, even
in the camps. The Security Council should reflect on
how to respond to that situation.

Apart from the primary need to protect civilians,
it is also necessary to draw up strategies for emergence
from crisis that ensure a lasting return to peace, in
particular with regard to the economic, social and
political recovery of communities often ravaged by
conflict.

In line with those developments, we have taken
steps to restore the effectiveness of the Security
Council. Change is under way. We must welcome that
and welcome the commitment of the Secretariat, which
was able to adapt to the new modus operandi and the
new relationships that the Council wished to establish
among all actors. However, there remains much to do.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting. We must continue our work to
ensure a stronger chain of command in operations,
which has started, in order to improve cooperation
among troop-contributing countries and also to ensure
stricter political, military and financial supervision of
peacekeeping operations. We should improve our work
on resources and implementing budgets, as Celso
Amorim has just said, by ensuring that when it takes
decisions, the Council has a sound understanding of
their operational and financial impact and of their
future. We should also regularly review the strategy,
balance, composition and size of operations.

Peacekeeping operations are the expression of the
international community's commitment. I pay tribute to
all those who are in charge, involved and sometimes
victims. Such operations must establish lasting peace.
That is easy to say, but they are not meant to last
forever. It is necessary to then secure those
achievements and ensure the implementation of a true
transition strategy.

That is why it is critical that we learn to better
manage the transition and withdrawal phases in
peacekeeping missions. At that level too, considerable
effort has been made in recent years and there have
been successes, seen in the gradual transfer of
responsibilities to national authorities and the orderly
withdrawal of several peacekeeping operations. I am
thinking of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Cambodia.
Faced with legitimate criticism, we forget the
successes.
However, we need to make more progress. We are
counting on the Peacebuilding Commission, which has
been mentioned, to come up with a response to the
need to ensure better coordinated activities of the
international community in the phases of emerging
from a conflict. One thinks that once the operation has
ended, the problems are over. They are just starting.

The stakes in peacebuilding must be taken into
account from the first stages of crisis management in
order to anticipate the conditions and mechanisms to
emerge from the crisis. That compels us today to assess
the risks associated with new threats, such as drug and
human trafficking, organized crime and even
corruption, which are very likely to destabilize fragile
countries.

Finally, it must be said, the efforts undertaken by
the international community in mandating a
peacekeeping operation require resolute commitment
by the host State. The political contract entered into
must be severed only once lasting peace has been
restored. It is never acceptable for a Government to
give notice to a United Nations mission or decide on its
withdrawal without consultations, in particular without
providing credible assurances that it is capable of
taking over. I know that it is not easy and that we are
faced with similar situations.

This debate, which you, Mr. President, have taken
the initiative to organize and which will be
complemented by an outstanding statement, affords us
another opportunity to reiterate our commitment to
peacekeeping and our desire to further improve its
effectiveness. Rest assured that France will spare no
effort in advancing the implementation of our common
road map.

