Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We welcome
and thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the
report (S/2016/407) of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation of Mr. Ivica Daeie, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia. We also welcome the participation of
Ambassador Vlora Citaku.

Based on our principled position that unilateral
options are the wrong approach to resolving
international controversies and until a settlement is
reached by the contending parties, we reaffirm the
validity of resolution 1244 (1999) as the applicable
legal framework for reaching a comprehensive and
peaceful solution of the Kosovo issue through dialogue
and negotiations, based on the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and relevant
Security Council resolutions. We therefore support
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia
and understand the country's legitimate concerns on
that issue.

We underline the fundamental role that the United
Nations has been playing in Kosovo through UNMIK
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, its cooperation with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union (EU) Rule of Law Mission, and its continuous
and constructive engagements with Pristina and
Belgrade and all communities in Kosovo.

We continue to closely follow the situation in
Kosovo. Taking note that the overall security situation
remains stable.as outlined in the Secretary-General's
report, we are particularly concerned with the tense
and divisive political climate that has prevailed over the
past six months. We consider absolutely unacceptable
and condemnable the opposition party's continued
disruptive and violent tactics against the Assembly of
Kosovo, which are deliberately aimed at obstructing the
normal performance of its duties.

The implementation of agreements between
Belgrade and Pristina and the high-level European
Union-facilitated dialogue has been facing consistent
obstructions that have created a contentious political
climate between the Government and the opposition and
impeded meaningful progress in the implementation
of major agreements, in particular regarding the
establishment of the association/community of Serb
majority municipalities.
We regret the prevailing climate of distrust and
mutual accusations of delays in the implementation
of agreements that have been reached, aggravated by
tensions and fictions related to trade and development.
That is even more regrettable considering that a
positive note in the previous reporting period was
struck by the initiatives of business leaders within
the Chambers of Commerce in Belgrade and Pristina
aimed at strengthening cooperation among the
business communities. We expect that the political
leaders of Belgrade and Pristina will be able to fulfil
their commitments to implementing the concluded
agreements, and that the high-level European
Union-facilitated dialogue process will proceed in good
faith and yield results.

On a positive note, we welcome the entry into
force on 1 April of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between the European Union and Kosovo
concluded in October 2015 and ratified by the European
Parliament. Following the conclusion of an identical
agreement with Serbia in 2013, we fully concur with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that:

"For Pristina and for Belgrade, integration
is closely interlinked with the high-level Europe
Union-facilitated dialogue process. The capacity to
meet the standard of integration directly reinforces
the capacity for productive political dialogue and for
other important channels of mutual cooperation".

We greatly value the EU-facilitated dialogue
regarding, concerning which, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General noted,

"All possibilities should be on the table and should
be debated openly if this framework of discussion
is to make swifter and meaningful progress. This
moment, with electoral processes nearly concluded
on both sides, appears to be a propitious time to
re-energize the talks and build new momentum."

The rule of law still faces outstanding challenges.
The Secretary-General's report identifies a number
of prominent issues related to the judicial and law
enforcement systems and the little progress made in
the integration of judges and prosecutors from the
Serbian judiciary into the Kosovo system, pursuant
to the agreements reached through the European
Union-facilitated dialogue.

Regarding cultural and religious heritage, despite
the difficult relations between the Serbian Orthodox
Church and the Kosovo authorities, some concrete
instances of dialogue have been reported, such as
the conference organized by Kosovo authorities on
interfaith dialogue and heritage protection, with the
participation of the main religious creeds in Kosovo. It
is our hope that such initiatives will take hold in Kosovo
society, thereby contributing to fostering reconciliation
and mutual understanding.

On human rights, it is key that the Kosovo human
rights strategy be swiftly adopted and that the Joint
Working Group on Missing Persons step up its efforts in
resolving that painful issue for Kosovo society. Still, on
human rights issues, young people are showing the way
ahead. A good example was the signature on 14 February
by 32 non-governmental youth organizations from the
western Balkans and the Republic of Moldova of a
"Balkan club" cooperation agreement establishing an
information network to coordinate youth-related civil
society engagement in the region.

The issues of youth radicalization, violent
extremism and the presence of extremist organizations
are ever-present challenges and matters of utmost
concern. The adoption of a strategy by the Kosovo
authorities on violent extremism and radicalization
underpins the resolve of the authorities to pursue
policies and implement energetic measures to counter
such negative and dangerous trends.

We take note of the Secretary- General's observation

that much work remains to be done to promote greater
tolerance and reconciliation among the Kosovo
communities and to ensure the protection of minority
rights, facilitate the return of displaced persons, uphold
their property rights and safeguard religious traditions
without impediment or stigma. It is our hope that the
wounds ofthe past will be overcome as soon as possible
and that peace, tolerance and mutual understanding
will prevail, permitting the building of a better future
of economic and social progress for all of the people of
the Balkans.

Finally, we commend UNMIK for its role in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and for its constructive engagement
with Belgrade and Pristina, and the efforts ofthe Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in stabilizing
and normalizing the situation in Kosovo.

