Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): As
this is Ambassador Osorio's first such briefing to the
Council, I wish him well in his time as Chair of his
important Committee. As he begins that role, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) is well equipped to continue to fulfil its
important mandate. The Panel of Experts appointed last
year has already begun to play a vital part in promoting
the implementation of resolution 1929 (2010). The
work of the Committee and its Panel is critical as we
pursue the dual-track strategy to resolve the Iranian
nuclear issue.

Iran's behaviour is correctly identified in today's
report as part of a pattern of deliberate circumvention
of sanctions. The two transfers of the proliferation-
sensitive goods seized that came before the Committee
during the period covered by the report are clear
violations by Iran of paragraph 3 of resolution 1737
(2006). We are also extremely concerned by Iran's
violation of the arms export ban imposed by resolution
1747 (2007). Earlier this month, NATO confirmed that
weapons seized in a recent operation by Afghan and
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) forces
in Nimroz, Afghanistan, were supplied by elements
within the Iranian regime and were destined for the
Taliban. The detailed technical analysis, together with
the circumstances of the seizure, leave us in no doubt
that the weaponry recovered came from Iran, despite
the fact that it was crudely doctored to make it look as
though it had originated in a country represented on
this Council.

This is completely unacceptable and not the
behaviour of a responsible neighbour. Supplying
weapons of that sort, clearly intended to provide the
Taliban with the capability to kill Afghan and ISAF
soldiers, is at odds with Iran's claim that it supports
stability and security in Afghanistan. The Committee
and its Panel of Experts should examine that case.

Moreover, there has been a recent report of the
seizure of an arms shipment believed to have
originated in Iran. This was the 15 March seizure of the
anti-ship weaponry on board the ship MV Victoria. I
commend the action taken by the authorities of the
interdicting State, and look forward to the Committee
and its Panel investigating the cases further.

These persistent violations demonstrate the
importance of the 1737 Committee in ensuring
implementation both by monitoring implementation
and by advising States. They also emphasize the Vital
role of its Panel of Experts in managing its full agenda,
investigating the recent reported violations and
travelling to key regions to focus on implementation.
We support the Committee's wider outreach efforts to
promote implementation. We are pleased that the
Committee is considering open briefings to the wider
United Nations membership and plans further guidance
for States on submitting further implementation
reports.

While many Member States have acted promptly
to adjust their laws and procedures, we would remind
those yet to report to the 1737 Committee on measures
taken to do so as soon as possible. More complete
11-27294
reporting would help the Panel of Experts to identify
any key gaps in implementation.

Today's briefing follows the publication on
25 February of the IAEA's latest report on Iran. The
report reinforces the point that Iran continues to defy
multiple Security Council resolutions and documents
Iran's failure to cooperate fully with the IAEA. Like
previous reports, it makes clear that Iran has not
suspended its enrichment-related activities or work on
its heavy water-related projects. Iran does not need to
enrich uranium itself, and the way it is doing so is
manifestly inconsistent with the needs of a peaceful
nuclear programme.

The latest report again shows that the IAEA is
still concerned about the possible existence of past or
current undisclosed nuclear-related activities involving
military-related organizations, including activities
relating to the development of a payload for a missile.
Iran continues to fail to answer a range of outstanding
questions about these issues. The report also says
clearly that Iran has not cooperated to such an extent
that the Agency's knowledge about Iran's enrichment
activities continues to diminish. As a consequence, the
Agency cannot confirm that all nuclear material in Iran
is for peaceful uses.

We remain committed to engaging Iran to address
these concerns, but it is clear that Iran continues to
proliferate and to pursue a nuclear weapons
programme. If the dual-track strategy is to succeed,
rigorous implementation by States of the measures
contained in resolution 1929 (2010) and the Council's
previous resolutions is essential.

