Mr. Del Rosario Ceballos (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to
congratulate Mexico, a distinguished member of our
region, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April and for its
initiative to convene an open Security Council debate
on Haiti. Debates such as this keep the spotlight on the
principle of solidarity and the commitment of the
international community to Haiti.

Likewise, I wish to congratulate the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya for the transparency and good work they
carried out during the month of March at the head of
the Security Council. I also thank Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for his valuable briefing this
morning.

Recently, nature has had a harsh impact on what
were already difficult living conditions for the peoples
of our two countries, but we recognize that it has been
even more devastating for the neighbouring people of
Haiti. Recurring hurricanes have cast a shadow and
indeed affected Haiti's present and its future, at least
its immediate future. In this context, we note the
urgency of responding to the call for solidarity
expressed in many multilateral forums by prominent
leaders in our region. The time has come to actively
help Haiti, and as the Secretary-General has said, this
help should be aimed at reducing Haiti's dependence
on humanitarian assistance, as recent statistical studies
have observed that Haiti's economic fundamentals are
strong.

The Dominican Republic views in a very positive
light the work done by MINUSTAH, and believes that
this effort of solidarity, which involves the countries of
our region and other parts of the world, will contribute
to the development and institutional, economic and
social progress of the Haitian people.

The Dominican Republic is currently working
with Haiti, as noted by the Secretary-General in his
report on MINUSTAH (S/2009/129), on the
8
re-establishment of the Haitian-Dominican Joint
Commission, which is aimed at addressing priority
issues in our relations, including immigration issues,
the increasing trade, health, education, border security,
the fight against drug trafficking, the environment and
other questions of interest for both countries.

In this regard, I am pleased to announce that the
Joint Commission will be meeting starting in
mid-April 2009 to commence work on our important
common agenda. Without a doubt, the friendly and
special nature of the personal relations between
President Fernandez Reyna of the Dominican Republic
and President Preval of Haiti has contributed
significantly to the progress in strengthening the ties
between the Dominican Republic and Haiti and, above
all, to the readiness to facilitate communication and
better understanding, as befits two peoples destined to
share a geographical border.

With regard to border management, the
Dominican Republic has implemented a professionally
managed programme on its side of the border through
the creation of CESFRONT, or the Specialized Border
Security Force. It is charged with supervising the
border with a view to preventing the trafficking of
drugs, arms and persons and has the specific mandate
of ensuring strict respect for the physical integrity and
health of the persons that cross through it. The results
of that programme were highlighted in the report of the
Security Council mission that recently Visited Haiti,
which confirmed the climate of respect and
professionalism that prevails in the border area.

We support the upcoming donor conference that
will be held in Washington, and we trust that it will
stimulate the cooperation of the international
community with Haiti. Recent progress in Haiti has
been noted by the Security Council mission and by the
Secretary-General following his visit to Haiti with
former President Clinton.

We know that the international financial and
economic crisis affects us all, but in our opinion, the
principle of solidarity should be maintained,
particularly in the case of Haiti, since, as the Secretary-
General has said, the progress that has been made there
remains very fragile and is subject to reversal.

I conclude by reiterating the readiness of the
Government of the Dominican Republic to continue to
contribute to this effort in favour of Haiti. I trust that
the international community, and in particular donor
countries as a whole, will continue to adhere to the
sound principle of solidarity.

