The Secretary-General: I congratulate the
Security Council on unanimously adopting the
resolution and giving the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) the strong mandate it needs to fulfil its
difficult mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The political and military leaders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have taken
important steps in the past month to inaugurate the
Transitional Government. This is now in place. But the
road ahead over the next two to three years towards
free and fair elections will be difficult.

I am grateful to the Council for its strong support,
especially in relation to the situation in the north-
eastern part of the country. Through resolution 1484
(2003), in which it authorized the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force, the Council has shown that a
timely and effective response by the international
community can put an end to violence. That Interim
Force has also served as an effective stop-gap
mechanism, giving MONUC and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations sufficient time to deploy an
expanded military force in Bunia.

Through the resolution adopted today, the
Security Council has placed MONUC, in coordination
with United Nations agencies and donors, in a key role
to help the Congolese achieve a sustainable peace
leading up to a democratically elected Government. It
will be necessary for the international community to
provide the resources needed to implement this far-
reaching resolution.

In the final analysis, however, there will be no
substitute for the resolve of the Congolese leaders to

implement their commitment to peace. It is my sincere The Security Council has thus concluded the
hope that they will continue to do so and thereby bring present stage of its consideration of the item on its
an end to the terrible suffering that has been endured agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

by the Congolese people for too long. The meeting rose at 10.20 am.

