Mr. Diarra (Economic Community of West African States) (spoke in French): Madam President, it
is a great honour for me to represent the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) at this
Security Council workshop on lessons learned from
resolving the crisis in Sierra Leone, on questions
related to the transition from peacekeeping to peace-
building, and, finally, on the subregional dimension of
the resolution ofthis conflict.

On behalf of the Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS, Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas - who could
not be here today because of a previous engagement -
I should like to thank members of the Security Council
for having organized this workshop, and in particular
the current President, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, head of
the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom to the
United Nations, for having kindly invited ECOWAS to
participate in this workshop.

ECOWAS welcomes the convening of this
meeting, which is very timely because it seeks to
consolidate the hard-won peace in Sierra Leone from
the broader perspective ofthe Mano River Union. Here
let me recall the exemplary partnership developed by
ECOWAS, the United Nations, the United States, the
United Kingdom and the Organization of African Unity
that made possible the signing of the 1999 Lome Peace
Agreement between the Government of Sierra Leone
and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), thereby
putting an end to atrocities that will remain seared into
the memory of humanity for all time.

I should like also to recall and commend our firm
resolve and our unreserved determination in the face of
the events of May 2000, when the RUF attempted to
call the peace process into question. I wish in this
respect to commend in particular the contribution made
by the United Kingdom, which was a decisive factor at
the time in helping to stabilize the situation.

Finally, I wish to recall and welcome the very
close cooperation between the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the Government of Sierra
Leone and ECOWAS, which made possible the
relaunching of the peace process. It is therefore thanks
to the combined efforts of all concerned that we have
achieved the positive results that we can now welcome.

We wish to express gratitude on behalf of the
peoples of West Africa. ECOWAS welcomes this
workshop, which is consonant with the commendable
efforts made to bring about, though our shared will, a
lasting peace throughout the entire subregion, which is
a sine qua non for any development.

The States of the Mano River Union, particularly
Sierra Leone and Liberia, have always received special
attention from the political bodies of ECOWAS
responsible for matters of peace and security. Whether
it be through the Conference of Heads of State and
Government or through the Mediation and Security
Council, set up in the framework of the Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security, many decisions have been
taken to end the conflicts that have cast a pall over this
part of our subregion. Those various decisions and
recommendations form the basis of the policy on
subregional peace and security. The main elements of
that policy for the Mano River Union region are in turn
based on three pillars: internal peace in Sierra Leone,
peace in the Mano River region, and the subregional
context. I shall first take up the issue of domestic peace
in Sierra Leone.

Peace in Sierra Leone was sufficiently discussed
this morning. ECOWAS believes that the disarmament
and reintegration programme should be continued.
State institutions should be reformed and strengthened.
The programme aimed at reconstruction, rehabilitation
and national reconciliation should also be continued.
Finally, we need to carry out a policy of democracy and
justice, establish the rule of law and gain the support of
the international community. These various points have
already been adequately covered.

The second element of our policy is peace in the
Mano River Union region. That means peace in each
State of the region. We cannot talk about peace in the
Mano River Union region without talking about peace
in Liberia. It is for that reason that ECOWAS has a
very specific policy with regard to promoting peace in
Liberia. ECOWAS heads of State have given Presidents
Obasanjo and Wade a mandate to organize a discussion
so that the three heads of State can meet around the
table. ECOWAS also welcomed the Rabat initiative,
which has made it possible for these heads of State to
meet and to relaunch the Mano River Union
mechanism. The second axis of that strategy is non-
tolerance for the presence of armed gangs. We think
that the presence of such gangs was one of the causes
ofthe conflict.

There is the relaunching ofthe Mano River Union
mechanism, the issue of refugees, and internal peace in
Liberia. I would like to emphasize internal peace in
Liberia. We confronted a difficulty during the Sierra
Leone crisis, namely, that we thought that there could
not be peace in Sierra Leone unless there was peace in
Liberia. It is for that reason that we joined together to
act to end the linkage between Liberia and Sierra
Leone, that is to say, to end the linkage between
diamonds, arms trafficking and Sierra Leone. I think
that link is what should today lead us to take a step
forward to consider the question of peace in Liberia, so
that that peace can be a factor for stability and peace in
Sierra Leone.
ECOWAS has taken a number of steps towards
that end. I should like to refer to some initiatives whose
results should make it possible to restore peace in
Liberia. Those include Liberian civil society initiatives
as part of preparations for a national reconciliation
conference. There have also been initiatives among
Liberia's religious councils. Finally, a meeting has just
been held among representatives of political parties
and civil society organizations.

The last pillar of our strategy is the subregional
context. No peace policy that brings together one, two
or three of the countries of the Mano River Union can
be viable unless it is part of the ECOWAS framework
as such. That is why we say that the Security Council
should support the efforts of ECOWAS. We are sure
that with the support of the Security Council, peace
will be restored in Liberia. That peace will be a
stabilizing factor in Sierra Leone, the region and the
entire community of West African States.

