Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I assure you of our full cooperation. The Sudan has witnessed remarkable positive developments since December 2018 that have created a new political reality that will undoubtedly lead to the establishment of a system in which the values of freedom, justice and the rule of law prevail. It has been nearly 14 months since the Sudanese revolted against injustice, repression and dictatorship, longing for freedom, dignity and a decent life. That revolution's distinct slogan is "peace, freedom, and justice'. Justice was and still is a primary goal of our Sudanese people's revolution. The tenets of justice are to fight and prevent impunity, ensure accountability for perpetrators and secure reparations and redress for the victims. In that context, it is necessary to emphasize the professionalism, independence and competence of the Sudanese judiciary and its ability to achieve justice in accordance with national laws, international criminal law and international humanitarian law. On 8 April, the Supreme Court of Appeal upheld the decisions of the Special Lower Court against the deposed former President, Omer Al-Bashir, by imprisoning him for two years after his conviction for corruption. The files of Mr. Al-Bashir and others were again transferred to another court by the Sudanese Public Prosecution Office on charges of undermining the democratic regime in 1989. Al-Bashir and those implicated in crimes committed in Darfur will face justice and be tried accordingly. Since the realization of comprehensive peace in the country is one of the top priorities of the transitional Government, rounds of peace talks continued with the armed struggle factions in Juba, the capital of the Republic of South Sudan. Agreement on the majority of political and security arrangements has already been achieved. Hopefully, a lasting peace agreement will be signed on 20 June. On 10 March, an agreement was signed between the Government of the Sudan and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, as a framework of cooperation to address sexual violence, and now the remarkable decrease in the number of cases and victims has been widely recognized. We hope and are determined to close this file in the very near future, especially in view of the implementation of the national plan of the Sudan for protecting civilians, which has now been issued as a document of the Security Council (S/2020/429). In confirmation of the transitional Government's firm desire to implement its obligations in line with the exit of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the establishment of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), a robust national plan for the protection of civilians was deposited with the Security Council. The plan was crafted so as to be implemented with a view to meeting all international standards for the protection of civilians. It deals with addressing the roots of intercommunal conflicts, strengthening the rule of law and human rights, focusing on combating violence against women and children, ensuring access to justice and building sustainable peace on the premise that the priority in all of this lies with the Sudanese Government. The Sudan reiterates its welcome to UNITAMS, which the Government had voluntarily requested to be established as a follow-on mechanism to succeed UNAMID so as to help the Sudan achieve the goals of the transitional period in order to achieve the aspirations of the Sudanese people. In conclusion, I reiterate that my Government is opening a new chapter based on close cooperation and collaboration with the international community. We affirm that the issue of combating impunity represents the noble goal of achieving justice. That is not contested; it falls primarily in the realm of the responsibilities of the relevant national judicial organs. Against that backdrop, we reaffirm that the transitional Government of the Sudan has a firm conviction and a strong commitment to fight impunity and that it has already set out in earnest on the path to addressing the atrocities and crimes committed in Darfur, in a manner that satisfies the conscience of the nation and the Sudanese people. The promise of the December revolution that was codified in the ruling Constitutional Declaration is that there is no room for anyone to escape justice or accountability.
