Mr. Siv (United States): Let me first thank the
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Lubbers, for a
very informative briefing. We believe that it is
important for the Council to keep abreast of refugee
and humanitarian issues, which have a significant
bearing on international peace and security in many
parts of the world. We appreciate the fact that the High
Commissioner has shared his Views with us. Let me
assure him of my Government's support for refugee
assistance and for the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). As we
enter the second half-century of the existence of both
the UNHCR and the Refugee Convention, it is
important that we in the international community
reaffirm our commitment to the protection and care of
refugees and that we provide to UNHCR the support
that it needs.

For its part, the United States is a committed
partner. Regrettably, UNCHR remains constantly
underfunded and has been obliged to move to a
resource-based budget. It is not acceptable to us that
some refugees, particularly in Africa, are not receiving
acceptable standards of care. It is not only UNHCR
that is short-funded; the World Food Programme is
beset by problems stemming from inadequate donor
support and breaks in the food pipeline. Refugees in
some areas go for unacceptable periods of time without
food supplies. The United States will continue to
provide its fair share of funding.

We were interested to hear the High
Commissioner's views on the impact of 11 September
and counter-terrorism measures. While the United
States has undertaken new measures to protect our
national security, we cannot and will not permit the
tragic events of 11 September to compromise our long-
standing tradition of providing refuge to those in need.
We must make sure, however, that terrorists are not
allowed to take advantage of the refugee protection
system. In our View, this can be prevented through the
scrupulous application of the exceptions to refugee
protection available under current law. We stand ready
to work with UNHCR to ensure that refugee status,
determination procedures and registration methods take
into account the new security measures to combat
terrorism.

In this vein, we again highlight the fact that the
security of refugee camps remains a key issue. We need
to ensure that refugees are protected from attacks, from
hostage-taking, from recruitment and from sexual and
gender-based violence. We also remain concerned
about the security of humanitarian workers, but we
welcome the steps taken to enhance coordination
between United Nations agencies and the Office of the
United Nations Security Coordinator.

Today it is our hope that in Afghanistan, the
millions of refugees who fled so many years ago will
eventually be able to return voluntarily, in safety and
dignity, when security conditions permit. It is
important that, as part of the reconstruction effort, we
focus on preparing for return. We look forward to
learning more about UNHCR's assessments of return
areas and preparations to ensure that assistance will be
timely and adequate.

We are pleased that in Western Sahara, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has funded
two UNHCR international positions for the operation
there. We also strongly support UNHCR's plans to
build confidence between the two sides.

We are still keenly concerned about the range of
refugee situations in Africa. We welcome the prospects
for voluntary return in safety and dignity but caution
against premature and, therefore, destabilizing
repatriation. We are pleased with the progress towards
peace in Sierra Leone. We continue to support efforts
to facilitate the return of refugees, and we have
expressed a firm desire to see all of them repatriated.
We recognize that for many, the time is not yet right.
We are also concerned about the ongoing instability in
northern Liberia, where tens of thousands of Liberians
and several thousand Sierra Leonean refugees have
been uprooted.

We encourage the High Commissioner's interest
in looking at ways to address protracted refugee
situations, to make the most of refugees' resources and
contributions and to View them as assets rather than
liabilities. We urge refugee-hosting countries to include
refugees in their poverty reduction and development
plans.

As a former refugee, I would like to express my
particular appreciation to those countries that have
provided refuge to the millions forced to flee, not only
in South Asia but also in Africa, Asia and South-
Eastern Europe. Their generous hospitality and their
contribution to the international effort are not
adequately recognized.

