Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his report and is grateful for the briefing provided
by the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi.

There has been some gratifying progress recently
in East Timor's political life. After extensive
consultations, the National Council was established,
with the participation of the representatives of all the
political parties and other parties. The United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the East Timorese people have jointly formed a
Cabinet to jointly decide and discuss State affairs.
These measures have truly demonstrated the principle
of emphasizing the Timorese people themselves. This
can increase their self-confidence and their trust in the
United Nations.

We believe that the East Timorese people,
through greater participation in the work of the
transitional period, which could thus be speeded up,
and with the help of the international community, can
achieve self-government and self-reliance at an early
date.

In terms of economic rehabilitation, housing and
infrastructure reconstruction, preservation of the social
order and security, legislation, employment creation
and training of the local people, UNTAET has achieved
obvious progress. We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, and his
staff for the huge amount of work they have done to
achieve this progress. We support the efforts that
UNTAET has made to promote the achievement of
political democracy and reconciliation among the
various parties. I wish to emphasize that in this process
it is necessary always to respect local tradition and
culture and the will and choices of the local people.

We are concerned about the situation of the
refugees remaining in West Timor. We hope that
UNTAET can continue to consult with the Government
of Indonesia to settle this problem.

We welcome the maintenance of good,
cooperative relations in all aspects between East Timor
and the Government of Indonesia.

The general security situation in East Timor is
stable. However, there have been some recent incidents
of violence that are very disquieting. We condemn
violent attacks against the United Nations peacekeepers
and express our condolences to the family of the
peacekeeper from New Zealand who was killed. We
await the outcome of the investigation of this incident.
We trust that the Indonesian Government will
continue to fulfil its commitments and take measures to
ensure security in the East Timor border areas.

