Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to begin
by expressing our gratitude to Special Representative
Yamamoto for his comprehensive and informative
briefing. Poland highly values and welcomes the efforts
ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to support peace and development in
Afghanistan. We are also grateful to Ambassador Djani
and Mr. Fedotov, as well as Ambassador Raz, for their
insightful interventions.

Let me say that Poland aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union.

I would like to touch upon three issues in my
intervention that we find of great significance,
namely, the presidential elections, the importance
of international humanitarian law and safeguarding
social achievements.

The forthcoming days will be essential for
eliminating the shortcomings and addressing the
lessons learned from the 2018 electoral process. It
is crucial to ensure credibility and transparency
and preserve the inclusivity of the political process
during the preparations and conduct of the upcoming
presidential elections. Strong, effective measures to
safeguard the safety, transparency, accountability and
credibility of this ballot need to be taken. We urge
anti-Government elements to restrain from attacking
polling stations, in order to allow the brave men and
women of Afghanistan to participate in the democratic
process. Poland reiterates its support for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, which provide
security protection during the electoral process in close
cooperation with NATO Resolute Support Mission
personnel. As the previous election has already proven,
capacity-building efforts supported by international
forces produce very positive and encouraging results.

The presidential statement adopted by the
Council on 20 August (S/PRST/2019/8) reaffirmed the
Security Council's strong condemnation of violations
of international humanitarian law committed by all
parties to armed conflict, wherever conflict occurs.
The condemnation relates also to the situation we
see now in Afghanistan, especially with regard to
civilian casualties. Poland condemns in the strongest
terms the brutal attacks by the Taliban deliberately
aimed at civilians. We urge all sides involved in the
current conflict to comply with international law so
as to end violations, abuses and impunity. We also
strongly condemn the unlawful denial of access to
humanitarian assistance and humanitarian personnel
and the deliberate attacks on medical and humanitarian
personnel, hospitals and other medical facilities subject
to protection under international humanitarian law.

In the context of recent developments, Poland
strongly believes that any peace process should include
mechanisms to safeguard the interests of all Afghans,
in particular women, youth and minorities. We wish
to underline that peace should not come at the cost of
rolling back the progress made in recent years. The
full participation of all Afghans, especially women and
youth, in all aspects of social, political and economic
life has to be preserved. A peaceful resolution of the
conflict cannot be achieved at the cost of women's and
minority rights.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Poland's
appreciation for the crucial role played by UNAMA
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people. The current negotiation process on
UNAMA's mandate should lead us all to the adoption
of a consistent and meaningful resolution that provides
a strong foundation for the United Nations active role
in Afghanistan. We remain committed to supporting
UNAMA and international partners to achieve a
democratic and self-sustainable Afghanistan.

