Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak, former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their comprehensive briefings.

Lithuania highly values the contribution of the
PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Support Office in support of durable peace and
development in a number of countries emerging
from conflict. The advisory, advocacy and resource
mobilization capacities of the Commission need to be
better harnessed. Complex peacebuilding processes
are receiving more attention, as evidenced by the
increasing number of United Nations, African Union
and European Union political missions. The integration
and coherence of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities remain crucial.

Over the past year, the PBC has achieved
encouraging results. In Burundi, the Commission
has engaged in high-level advocacy initiatives and
supported the political dialogue and preparatory process
for the 2015 elections. In Liberia, PBC support to the
implementation of the National Palava Hut Programme
has been crucial for the coherent national reconciliation
process to take place. Impressive progress has been
registered in Sierra Leone as the drawdown ofthe United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone calls for the refocusing of the Commission's
activities. In light of the upcoming 2015 elections in
many countries on the PBC's agenda, the PBC should
remain actively engaged in support of political dialogue
and other preparatory processes.

We would like to highlight three key elements
for sustainable peacebuilding. First, national
institution-building remains key to preventing relapse
into conflict. In the process of building, the focus
on how those institutions are put to use is of no less
importance.

Secondly, another crucial aspect is national
ownership. Peacebuilding cannot be outsourced. It
must be locally owned. It is important to include
local communities in the process and to prevent
peacebuilding from remaining a purely foreign
intervention. Strengthening societies and increasing
their resilience and capacity to withstand crises are key
factors in assessing peacebuilding success.
Thirdly, women can and should play a very
active role, not only in conflict resolution but also in
peacebuilding activities. Women, with rare exceptions,
are still marginalized as players in efforts to rebuild
war-torn communities and States. They are the ones
who take the brunt of the conflict. Women should be
in a position to envisage the path to empowerment
with their full-scale participation in post-war social,
economic, political and security structures.

We support the advisory role of the PBC and
further encourage strengthening the links between the
Commission and the Security Council. The interaction
between the two organs should remain mutually
proactive. We see the periodic and situation-specific
stocktaking briefings as a useful and informative tool
for the work of both bodies. The PBC should draw the
Council's attention to emerging crises in the countries
on its agenda. What is more, we agree that the PBC can
and should play a role when the Council is considering
mandate renewals and the transitions of United Nations
missions.

We would welcome a more proactive dialogue
between the PBC and regional and subregional
organizations. Partnerships between the PBC and the
international financial institutions, the private sector
and philanthropic organizations are also important.
We believe that work in that direction should be
further pursued in order to mobilize resources, identify
financing gaps and avoid any possible duplication.

We also support and encourage South-South
exchanges in the peacebuilding efforts. There have been
a number of examples of such successful cooperation.
In Cote d'Ivoire, expertise from Burundi, Liberia and
Senegal supported the reform of security sector. In
Liberia, Rwanda provided specialized capacities in
the areas of police management and administration.
In South Sudan, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan benefited from expertise from Sierra Leone in
legislative work.

To conclude, peacebuilding is a long and delicate
process, involving many actors and stakeholders with
different interests and visions. We value this discussion
and look forward to the interactive dialogue this
afternoon. We have much to learn and draw lessons
from in preparation for the comprehensive review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in 2015.

