Mr. Catarino (Portugal): Madam President, allow
me to congratulate you, on behalf of my delegation, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

I would also like to commend your predecessor,
Ambassador Sir John Weston, on the manner in which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

I wish to begin by expressing my delegation's
appreciation for the convening of this orientation debate.
By showing its readiness to listen to the points of view of
all Member States interested in this matter, the Security
Council is demonstrating the importance it attaches to the
Angolan peace process.

The representative of Italy has already spoken on
behalf of the European Union, and Portugal fully
associates itself with that statement. However, I would
like to add some further comments because, as members
are well aware, Portugal has been deeply committed to
this process, first as a mediator in the negotiations which
led to the "Acordos de Paz" and now as a member of the
troika of observer countries. Like previous speakers, we
share the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General
over the delays in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

I would like to focus my statement on three main
areas, the first of which is military issues. Portugal is
particularly concerned with the slow pace at which
UNITA troops are being quartered. We welcome the
positive steps that have been taken recently by the

 

Government of Angola, and we are now looking forward to
the fulfilment of the public commitment by the leader of
UNITA, Mr. Savimbi, to quarter 16,500 men by
8 February 1996, as restated with some modifications to
you, Madam President, in your telephone conversation with
him today.

We are, however, worried by certain reports according
to which the combatants moving towards the quarterng
areas are either the very young or the very old. Another
reason for concern is the fact that a high percentage of
those fighters have been presenting themselves at the
quartering areas without any equipment or armaments.

In this context, we would like to underline the fact
that UNAVEM. III is not a buffer force between the parties
in conflict: its aim is to monitor compliance with the
"Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol. It is essential,
therefore, that it should impose strict controls on UNITA's
armaments, including its heavy weapons.

Portugal fully agrees with the report of the Secretary-
General in urging UNITA to proceed with a large-scale and
fully verifiable movement of its troops to quartering areas.
No attempt to shift responsibility for delays or non-
compliance to UNAVEM. III will be admissible.

We are looking forward to the implementation of the
new timetable recently agreed to by both parties, under
which there will be a proper integration of UNITA troops
into the Angolan Armed Forces and a gradual
demobilization of its other forces.

Full and unconditional cooperation with UNAVEM. III
and the Joint Commission is required in order to achieve
the peace and stability the Angolan people desire and
deserve.

Portugal agrees with the report of the Secretary-
General that there is no excuse for delays in the release of
all prisoners or in the provision to the United Nations of the
information required by the Lusaka Protocol.
It is crucial to speed up the demining process.
Angolan roads free of mines will allow a better and
effective flow of humanitarian assistance to the needy
Angolan population. This will make possible a return to
normal life and allow the free circulation of people and
goods throughout the country, which, in our opinion, will
improve the atmosphere of trust, one of the obstacles still
to be overcome.

Secondly, let me turn to the political level. Portugal
considers the pursuit of a political dialogue between the
parties at all levels extremely important. We also
encourage a meeting, as soon as possible, between
President Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, as
another sign of political will and a further step towards
promoting mutual confidence and the full implementation
of the provisions on national reconciliation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

In this regard, we look forward to the return of
UNITA Members of Parliament to the National Assembly
in Luanda, the assumption of the vice-presidency by
UNITA and the participation of UNITA at all levels of
the administration, in the central, provincial and local
governments, all this according to the provisions of the
"Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol.

In the same vein, Portugal encourages all efforts
towards the complete transformation of UNITA from an
armed movement into a political party. We also
encourage the Government of Angola to pursue and
conclude the repatriation process of expatriate personnel,
the quartering of the rapid reaction police and the
disengagement of the Angolan armed forces.

Thirdly, let me speak about the mandate of
UNAVEM. III. Portugal considers that the use of the
duration of the mandate of UNAVEM. III as a form of
pressure towards the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol is probably not the best solution for the Security
Council to act upon at this stage.

In our view, in order to apply pressure effectively,
the Security Council resolution on Angola should be
tailored to include an operative paragraph establishing
clearly a review of the implementation of the provisions
of the Lusaka Protocol, which could take place on a
monthly basis. In this way, the Security Council would
send a strong signal that it would be closely monitoring
developments in Angola, and that at any moment it could
consider any new action required in the light of any
developments, such as imposing restrictive measures
against any offending party.

I should like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of the Secretary-General; his Special
Representative, Maitre Beye; and all personnel of
UNAVEM. III. I should also like to commend the positive
role that has been played by the neighbouring countries of
Angola. It is important that we all act in a concerted way
with one another and with the Security Council, using as

 

much weight as we can, in order to make possible a durable
peace.

UNAVEM. has been playing a vital role, fulfilling in
an exemplary manner its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. Now, more than ever, the Angolan parties must
live up to their share of the deal. The Angolans themselves
hold the key to the solution. They are primarily responsible
for the success, or the failure, of the process. The
international community has responded at various levels to
the appeals of the Angolans. They now must show that they
are worthy of such support. They must live together in
peace, and together they must reconstruct Angola.

