Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): By convening this meeting,
the United States presidency has provided the Security
Council with an opportunity to reinvigorate the process
for peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and, by extension, in the Great Lakes region of
Africa.

Last week, the Council heard from former President
Nelson Mandela, who apprised us of the developments in
the Arusha peace process for Burundi. We recognize only
too well the interconnection between the Lusaka and the
Arusha processes and commend you, Sir, for your
foresight in making the linkage between two crisis
situations as the Council focuses on Africa this month.

It is against this background that we join previous
speakers in welcoming the participation in this meeting of
so many African leaders and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). Their presence
here underscores the important role which the United
Nations can play in bringing peace to the Great Lakes
region.

My delegation further wishes to thank the United
Nations Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
detailed report on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for his valuable introductory
statement. In particular, we welcome his analysis and
recommendations, which should form the basis for action
by the Council. My delegation also wishes to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his special
representatives for their efforts to move the peace process
forward.

My delegation recognizes only too well the
difficulties and complexities that must be overcome in
order to achieve a durable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are aware of how seemingly
intractable the problems are, but no matter how difficult
it might seem to find solutions, the suffering of the
people involved impels us to use our best efforts to put an
end to their misery. We believe that, even where there

 
appears to be doubt and pessimism, the strength and
determination of a few can become a catalyst for the
movement towards peace.

My delegation has therefore been heartened by the
expressions of hope and the pledges of political will and
commitment made by all the African leaders in their
statements before the Council. We agree that it is vital to
create the conditions for lasting peace based on the full
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. The elements of
such a peace must include the security of borders of the
States concerned, their sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and their full enjoyment of their national resources.

In this connection, we support the call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and reaffirm support for
the unity, stability and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
charter of Organization of African Unity. To this end, the
withdrawal of foreign troops from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must take place in accordance with the
Lusaka Agreement.

Jamaica supports the pursuit of a national
inter-Congolese dialogue. This dialogue, we believe, is an
indispensable step towards national reconciliation and
lasting peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are pleased that the former President of
Botswana, Sir Ketumile Masire, has accepted the
appointment as facilitator of that dialogue, and we wish him
success in his efforts - which deserve the material and
moral support of the international community.

The precarious security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to be a cause for concern.
The heightened military activity of armed groups and the
danger of large-scale violence among ethnic groups
seriously diminish the achievement of the goals of the
Lusaka Agreement. We urge those who believe that they
have a legitimate right to petition for justice and full
participation in the political governance of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to do so through the processes
provided at the bargaining table and not at the end of the
barrel of a gun, recognizing that there can be no military
solution to the conflict.

My delegation is deeply disturbed by the worsening
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially by the fact that increased insecurity in
the war zones is making it difficult for humanitarian aid
workers to have access to vulnerable populations. We have

-V "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv
 

noted from the Secretary-General's report that more than
960,000 persons are now mostly inaccessible. The
increasing number of internally displaced persons and
refugees has serious ramifications not only for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also for the
neighbouring countries - with some 280,000 citizens of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo now being
refugees in the Republic of the Congo, Zambia and
Tanzania. We call on all the parties to the conflict to
respect the civilian and humanitarian nature of the refugee
camps and to act in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

We also wish to pay tribute to and encourage the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme and the non-
governmental humanitarian organizations involved in
caring for and facilitating the repatriation of refugees to
continue their work despite the difficulties encountered.

The Secretary-General's report also highlighted the
critical food insecurity facing some 10 million persons in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the high levels
of chronic and acute malnutrition in children under five.
We urge the international community to respond
favourably to the United Nations Consolidated Appeal for
2000, and we note with deep regret that the low response
to the 1999 Appeal made it impossible for the United
Nations to provide life-saving intervention.

The Secretary-General's report also draws attention
to reports of the victimization of children and their
recruitment as child soldiers. We agree with the
Secretary-General that in order to ensure that the lives of
children are protected, it will be necessary to act before
the fragile Ceasefire Agreement further erodes. In this
regard, the Secretary-General has pointed to the valuable
assistance that the civilian protection personnel authorized
under resolution 1279 (1999) could give, once they are in
place in ensuring a comprehensive approach to child
protection throughout all the stages of the making and
consolidating of peace and in complementing the work of
the United Nations Children's Fund.

The Lusaka Agreement has allowed the
demobilization and rehabilitation of ex-combatants to
move forward, and we urge the parties to cooperate in
implementation of this, beginning with the vulnerable
groups: children, the handicapped and the chronically
disabled.

 

My delegation is concerned that inaction on the
part of the Security Council could result in continued loss
of life, further deterioration in the humanitarian situation,
and a reversal of the progress already achieved in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. We therefore
believe that the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report must be speedily acted upon.

We support the View that the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) has a key role to play and that it should
be established on a permanent basis in order to carry out its
functions. Efforts to coordinate its activities with those of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should be continued.
Given the crucial role assigned to the JMC, it must be
provided with resources to support its operations. We must
acknowledge with appreciation the support already pledged
by several countries. Jamaica supports the expansion of
MONUC, as proposed by the Secretary-General, and the
eventual deployment of a peacekeeping mission. In this
connection, we believe that the forces involved must
operate under robust rules of engagement.

We remain firmly committed to the belief that
collective action is the best approach to addressing the
complex situation which obtains, and we wish to place on
record our appreciation of the efforts of the OAU, the
Southern African Development Community and President
Chiluba, which have resulted in significant strides towards
brokering peace in the Great Lakes region. This
notwithstanding, the Security Council cannot abdicate its
role in the maintenance of peace and international security.
The United Nations must continue to work closely with the
OAU in a coordinated way to promote mediation and
negotiations among the parties concerned and to support the
African leaders, who have sought to provide an African
solution to the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
not be achievable without addressing the security situation
of the entire Great Lakes region. Jamaica therefore fully
supports the holding of an international conference on peace
and security and development in the Great Lakes region, in
due course, under the auspices of the United Nations and
the OAU. It is our belief that only a holistic and integrated
approach to the crisis will result in lasting peace.

We believe that we must go forward from here
determined to make a difference in promoting peace and
security for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the people of the Great Lakes region and the people

-V "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv

 

of Africa. We share in the hope of those who believe that
peace and security are not only possible and attainable,
but important for the international peace and security of
us all.

