Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): It
was only yesterday evening that we were able to acquaint
ourselves with the report of the Panel of Experts to
investigate violations of Security Council sanctions against
UNITA. My delegation regrets the fact that it was not
received early enough to allow us to study it in depth and
thus make a significant contribution to the debate. We shall
return to this aspect of the matter later. For the time being,
I wish to thank you, Sir, for having given us the floor to
express our view on the work of the Panel of Experts.

The report submitted today for the consideration of the
members of the Security Council - the broad coverage of
which by the media before its official publication has
already been the subject of a response by my
Government - calls for the following preliminary
comments from us.

First of all, it should be noted that the mission of the
Panel of Experts to my country, Burkina Faso, in pursuit of
its investigations was quite clearly botched. Indeed, when
the Chairman of that Panel, Ambassador Anders Mollander,
wrote to me on 11 November 1999 to propose the date of
13 December 1999, my Government suggested instead the
month of January for the simple reason that the appropriate
political authorities capable of responding usefully to the
Panel's expectations would be unavailable on the
aforementioned date, as they would be in Lome for the
summit of the Economic Community of West African
States. This arrangement seemed to have been set, in
particular following exchanges with the Chairman of the
Sanctions Committee, when, on Friday, 3 December 1999,
to our great astonishment, the Panel of Experts called from
Abidjan to tell us that they were compelled to move on to
Ouagadougou. Thus, as one might expect, the experts were
received only by administrative officials who, quite
naturally, were in no position to respond to their questions.
Nevertheless, in Lome, where they subsequently travelled,
the experts were received at great length by our Minister
for Foreign Affairs. Clearly, however, from Togo he was
in no position to accede to their request to visit certain
supposedly suspicious locations that they wished to
investigate. Thus, we are baffled by the report's assertion
in paragraph 21 that the Burkinabe authorities turned
down on the spot the request of the Panel to investigate
the airport at Bobo-Dioulasso. These details, which are
not unimportant, appear nowhere in the report, thus giving
the impression of a deliberate desire on the part of the
Burkinabe authorities not to cooperate. Is it possible that
all this was done to embarrass and put them in a helpless
position, so that they might be accused later of refusing
to cooperate?

Moreover, Ambassador Fowler will remember that,
out of concern for the transparency of my country's
position, I proposed in an interview with him that the
Panel of Experts should return to Burkina Faso. He saw
no objection to this and even suggested to me that, should
such a fresh visit prove impossible, Burkina Faso could
provide by writing any information that the experts might
request.

I needed to recall all this to demonstrate the extent
to which it is difficult to consider the work done by the
Panel of Experts in Burkina Faso as particularly
meticulous. And yet, for one thing, the accusations
levelled at my country are founded on the results of that
mission. For another, we note that the thrust of the report
of the Panel of Experts is based on allegations made by
UNITA defectors - in other words, by people who had
become the enemies of their former leader, Jonas
Savimbi, and whose judgment, necessarily coloured by
rancour and perhaps by the spirit of vengeance, cannot
help but be biased and partial.

On the basis of this consideration alone, how can we
put stock in such allegations? For the sake of our
Organization's credibility, an inquiry report of this
importance - and, one might say, gravity, since it
implicates countries and heads of State - must be based
strictly on precise, tangible, verified and verifiable facts
secured in an impartial and transparent process. However,
with all due respect to the members of the Panel of
Experts, this report seems to be built on allusions rather
than on certainties. It will be noted, for example, that
most facts lack dates and are often flawed by a lack of
concordance and consistency. For instance, with respect
to paragraph 10 of the report, General Bandua, the chief
witness against Burkina Faso, was fully aware that the
Angolan Government had been informed that he was to

 

be questioned by the experts. What credence can we give
to such testimony?
Our reading of the report leaves us with the sense of
a certain degree of partiality based on a presumption of the
guilt of some countries and leaders and of the innocence of
others. Otherwise, how can we explain this ill-considered
focus primarily on three African countries thousands of
kilometres from the theatre of operations? By apparent
coincidence, these three incriminated countries are in the
same geographical area and are, moreover, French-speaking.
Let us call things by their proper names.

We could expatiate at length on the partiality of the
report, but we do not wish to tax the Council's patience,
especially since it appears that we will have the opportunity
to return to this matter.

Nevertheless, we wish to raise three points. The
members of the Committee carried out their enquiries in
Europe, the United States, Israel and elsewhere. Why does
the report remain silent in this regard? It seems strange that
it is mainly African countries that are mentioned, given that
the report refers to them only as relay points or
intermediaries. What about those at the top? What about the
main sources? What about the final destinations? What
about those who benefit at the end of the chain of
command?

The Panel of Experts considered the question of
mercenaries with UNITA as being very important. Despite
that, and although the Panel constantly received relevant
information in this respect, the experts on the Panel say that
they were not able to verify such information. Did they
even bother to interview the representatives of the
Executive Outcomes company, or even to question certain
countries about this important issue?

There seems to be a clear desire to obscure facts and
to exculpate certain important actors. The report itself
states, in paragraph 12, "Inevitably, a number of actors,
including important ones, will have escaped direct
mention." If they are important actors, why have they
escaped mention? And why is that "inevitable"?

Let us now consider what the report calls UNITA's
use of diamonds to buy friends and supporters, as set out in
paragraphs 99 to 104. The experts attest to having received
first-hand testimony which makes it possible for them to
name several heads of State. According to paragraph 12 of
the report, one of the principles adopted by the Panel is that
a fact can be validated only if it is corroborated by at least
two sources of information. The accusation levelled at the
President of Burkina Faso is based on the testimony of
one individual alone, Mr. Bandua. Why, in that specific
case, did the Panel not follow its own rationale, its own
principle? Here it is practising double standards.
Once again, we would like to welcome the initiative
of the Security Council in setting up the Panel of Experts,
because, ultimately, it is concerned with bringing out the
truth. But in our opinion, any investigation must be based
on a rigorous, fair and reliable foundation.

Burkina Faso believes that the report of the Panel of
Experts does not comply with the rigorous scientific
requirements of that approach. Furthermore, given the
sensitive nature and the gravity of the accusations made,
we believe that the States concerned should have had the
opportunity, even before the report was issued, to
respond, and that such responses should have been
included in the final report. That would at least have had
the merit of transparency and, in particular, of fairness.

We object to the conclusions of the report of the
Panel of Experts, and especially to those which accuse
our head of State by name. Before this Council, we
reaffirm the denial issued by our Government on
12 March.

Perhaps my country's only fault - which has
caused so much acrimony on the part of certain States -
is that it is one of the few countries as yet to dare to
think that any solution to bring peace to Angola cannot
exclude negotiation.

Nowhere in the report is there any mention of the
Angolan people. However, in the end, it is their destiny
that matters. On the other hand, there are numerous
references to diamonds.

We would therefore like to ask several questions.
Who is benefiting from the embargo? Who is buying
UNITA's diamonds? Who is manufacturing weapons and
selling them to UNITA, which is buying them with
diamond money? Such questions - and many more -
should have been elucidated in the report. Many small
countries, including mine, would like to have answers.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm my country's
commitment to the relevant decisions of our shared
Organization, the United Nations, and to state once again
that Burkina Faso will join in any initiative aimed at
achieving peace and that it will do its utmost to help to

 

achieve that objective in Angola, in Africa and throughout
the world.

