Mr. De Aguiar Patriota: At the outset of this
briefing, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to address the Security Council today in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

I am grateful for, and welcome the comprehensive
briefing delivered by, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Modibo Toure, as it is most timely under the
current circumstances. In addition to the information
presented by Mr. Toure in his briefing, I wish to add a
few elements on the basis of the discussions held in the
PBC on 22 August, which we hope will be helpful for
the Council's deliberations.

Guinea-Bissau has come a long ways since the coup
d'etat in 2012. The country has made important strides
in regaining its footing towards democratization,
and the progress achieved is now acknowledged by
many, even amidst the situation in which the country
remains trapped in a political impasse. Despite an
undeniably fragile stability, national actors seem to
understand that they must position themselves within
the context of respect for the rule of law, the country's
international legal obligations and the Constitution.
We were reminded last week by Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman, when he
briefed the Guinea-Bissau configuration on his recent
trip to Bissau, that the authorities in that country
today no longer faced the dilemma they confronted
in the wake of the 2012 coup d'etat, when there was
disagreement on who would legitimately represent the
country's Government during that year's session of the
General Assembly.

In equal measure, regional and international
observers who were then divided on matters related to
Guinea-Bissau are now aligned in supporting a strong
development and stability agenda for the country.
The consensus that today characterizes the oversight
of the ongoing challenges in Guinea-Bissau, both in
the PBC and in the Security Council, is something
worth highlighting.

At the same time, the precarious political situation
in Guinea-Bissau remains a source of concern to many
in West Africa and beyond. In a region that has seen
great progress in consolidating peace and stability
through democratic means, Guinea-Bissau remains
a weak link. I wish to use this opportunity to make a
strong plea for collective efforts to help the national
authorities of Guinea-Bissau find solutions to their
governance problems. Options must be discussed as
a matter of urgency. The longer the crisis is allowed
to last, the more the progress achieved thus far risks
being undermined, and perhaps even erased. We have
well-founded worries that it would become harder to
steer the country back on track if viable solutions are
not found in the short term to render the governance of
the country truly effective.

The PBC supports an inclusive and fruitful political
dialogue, as stated in the press statement issued on
26 August by the PBC Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration. That would be a positive step in paving
the way for longer-term policies that the country
requires, including a possible constitutional review.
The PBC could assist those and other efforts - for
example, by mobilizing constitutional experts who
may be able to provide adequate advice, as required
and in full respect for national sovereignty. In order to
tackle longer-term issues, it would be up to the Bissau-
Guineans to show wisdom and creativity to make their
political constitutional model workable and adapted to
their own specificities.

The PBC believes that every effort must be made
by international partners to support the continuation
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB). We
cannot afford to send the wrong signals regarding the
importance of maintaining a safe and stable environment
as remaining challenges are tackled. In that connection,
I wish to acknowledge the role of the European Union's
financial support to ensure the renewal of the mandate
of ECOMIB in June of this year.

In conclusion, the PBC believes that the lack of
genuine political will to overcome current impasses
is preventing the enactment of Government measures
that would lead to concrete peace dividends. The
PBC urges the political parties and, through them, all
legislative actors to work together and urgently resume
a constructive and cooperative dialogue in order to
approve the Government's programme and the State
budget. Without a national road map for policy and a
budget to sustain a functional State, the country will be
ill-positioned to receive support from the international
community, despite the professed intentions to provide
support. The PBC believes that the international
community, including the Council, must strongly
encourage regional diplomatic efforts, such as those
agreed to at the forty-nineth ordinary meeting of the
ECOWAS Heads of State gathering in Dakar in June. I
look forward to an early dispatch of a high-level mission
composed of the Presidents of Senegal, Sierra Leone
and Guinea. President Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia, as
acting Chair of ECOWAS, has a leadership role to play
in that regard. The PBC also encourages consultations
aimed at organizing a meeting of the International
Contact Group for Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, the PBC will continue impressing upon all
actors the importance of upholding their commitments
made at the Brussels donor round table in March
2015. That applies equally to the respective pledges
from national and international stakeholders. A clear
commitment to place the national interests above other
agendas will be conducive to stronger partnerships
between the Government and its international
supporters. We therefore urge the national authorities
to seek a path towards sustainable, constructive
governance where dissent is channelled without holding
hostage the country's institutional, social and economic
development perspectives.

