Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Rwanda for organizing this open
debate and for the concept note (S/2014/478, annex) it
has prepared on this important topic. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his observations.

As a troop-contributing country, we deem it
indispensable to hold a debate on all issues related to
the maintenance of peace under the United Nations
flag, especially given the rapidly changing conditions
facing such operations.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and would like to make some observations from our
national perspective.

First, peacekeeping operations must have clear,
achievable and verifiable mandates, tailored to each
particular situation and taking into account the
requirements and circumstances of each case. In order
to successfully implement the mandates of the Security
Council, it is necessary to address the issue ofthe major
gaps in the areas of skills, resources and training through
greater coordination between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries. In that
regard, we believe that regional organizations can play
a key role, especially given their strategic position and
proximity to the field.

Secondly, the growth and expansion of
United Nations peacekeeping operations has led
to increasingly complex mandates. This makes it
necessary to strengthen the capacity to assess conflict
situations; carry out effective planning based on
accurate information; strengthen measures aimed
at the protection and safety of forces; and devise a
rapid-response strategy for emergency situations. The
participation of and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations from the planning
stage of peacekeeping operations can help to ensure the
provision of more complete and detailed information,
thus leading to the establishment of better mandates,
concepts of operations and rules of engagement. This
will require the promotion and development of clear
policies for better cooperation in all areas with such
regional entities.

Thirdly, the Charter gives the United the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that context, we must recognize
the contribution that regional arrangements and
agencies can make to peacekeeping, in keeping with
the provisions of Chapter VIII. Regional arrangements
and agencies have supported and contributed to the
activities of United Nations peacekeeping; these efforts
must continue. It is therefore necessary to support
regional peacekeeping operations, ensuring predictable
and sustainable mechanisms for their funding.

Fourthly, the relationship between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding must improve. Efforts made towards
the maintenance of peace must be accompanied by
equal efforts towards economic recovery and capacity-
building. In this regard, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund play a critical role in
enhancing States' potential and preventing a return
to conflict. We must promote the involvement and
cooperation ofregional organizations in such processes.

Finally, I should like to touch on a specific issue
that concerns the credibility of the United Nations
and peacekeeping operations. I refer here to a point
made in the nineteenth report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to
the Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We are
deeply concerned about this observation. We call on the
Secretary-General to address, as a matter of priority,
the Prosecutor's request that a full, independent
and transparent investigation be conducted into
allegations that serious crimes against civilians and
troop contributors are being covered up in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We also call on the Council to support the
call made by the Prosecutor in the interests of effective
accountability.

I shall conclude by reiterating Guatemala's
commitment to provide troops with the highest
standards of efficiency, competence, discipline and
integrity to United Nations peacekeeping operations. I
also wish to pay tribute to all those working in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, especially those who
have made the supreme sacrifice for this noble cause.

