Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its sincere appreciation to the Portuguese
presidency for having organized this high-level
briefing. We welcome His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Portugal and thank him for presiding
over this debate. My delegation also welcomes the
participation in this meeting of the Secretary-General,
and we thank him for his statement. We also thank the
various briefers who have briefed this meeting. We also
acknowledge the presence of the high-level
representatives present at this meeting.

In five days, South Africa will welcome
thousands of delegates to the shores of Durban as the
incoming President of the seventeenth Conference of

the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the
seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol.

The global awareness of the threat caused by
human-induced climate change on our planet and
civilization began in the late 19705, culminating in the
adoption of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, which entered into force in 1994.

While there continues to be debate on the
suitability of the Security Council as a platform to
address new and emerging issues, such as climate
change, South Africa believes that the Framework
Convention and its Kyoto Protocol remain the best
instruments to deal with the broader challenges of
climate change. My delegation therefore reiterates its
principled View that climate change threatens not only
development prospects and the achievement of
sustainable development, but also the very existence
and survival of societies.

Of critical importance, therefore, is the need for
all countries to honour the obligations under the
UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol if we are to
effectively deal with the challenges precipitated by
climate change, in accordance with the fundamental
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
The contribution that individual members of the
Security Council can make to the UNFCCC processes
is to ensure that the architecture of the climate change
regime is strengthened, not fragmented.

The Durban conference, with its theme "Working
Together: Saving Tomorrow Today", provides the
international community an opportunity to demonstrate
real leadership in finding effective solutions to the
threat that climate change presents to the livelihood,
quality of life, dignity and, in many cases, the very
survival of millions across the globe. South Africa is of
the strong view that the Durban conference will
provide a platform from which the strengthening of the
full, effective and sustained implementation of the
Convention beyond 2010, through a comprehensive,
multilateral and rules-based system on climate change,
enforceable and equally binding on all, can be
achieved.

A second commitment period to the Kyoto
Protocol for developed countries is essential. No gap
between the first and the second commitment periods
must occur. For those developed countries that are not
party to the Kyoto Protocol and for those that reject a
second commitment period, comparable and
measurable mitigation commitments must be
implemented and must be equally enforceable. On the
other hand, developing countries must implement their
declared mitigation actions, assisted through the
necessary support in a measurable and transparent
manner. Making the Cancun mechanism and
institutions fully operational and honouring the
financial undertakings already made are again part of
that delicate balance.

Turning to drugs and crime, we are of the View
that drugs and crime threaten development, create
instability and jeopardize the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. In acknowledging the
challenge of drugs and crime, the international
community adopted the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime. We call upon
Member States to implement that Convention and other
relevant international conventions. International
cooperation, including bilateral and regional treaties on
extradition and mutual assistance in criminal matters,
are key tools in fighting organized crime.

In that regard, we need a comprehensive and
integrated approach that strengthens coordination
among the countries of origin, transit and destination.
South Africa welcomes the role played by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in the
creation of the regional programmes. Those
programmes are important, as they assist countries
with technical support in their fight against the world
drug problem and strengthen the partnership between
the UNODC, regional bodies and Member States. In
this regard, we welcome the conclusion of a
memorandum of understanding between the UNODC
and the Commission of the African Union under which
the two organizations work towards complementarity
of their activities.

The international community has made great
strides in dealing with the issue of HIV/AIDS, but
much remains to be done. That was clearly articulated
in the Political Declaration (General Assembly resolution 65/277) adopted by the High-level Meeting
on HIV/AIDS, held from 8 to 10 June 2011. The
Meeting confirmed and adopted meaningful and
forward-looking commitments aimed at guiding and
intensifying the global response to HIV/AIDS. That
will include, among other things, resource mobilization

for the AIDS response, strengthening health-care
systems and integrating HIV/AIDS into broader health
and development. This comprehensive recommitment
to the fight against HIV/AIDS addresses the epidemic
from all possible perspectives, which requires the
involvement and participation of the widest possible
range of stakeholders and Member States.

It is the view of South Africa that the response to
HIV/AIDS can best be dealt with by the United
Nations system and structures that allow for
unrestricted participation by all Member States. South
Africa is of the view that HIV/AIDS per se does not
constitute and has not been proved in the past eight
years to be a threat or a new challenge to international
peace and security.

Turning to the issue of refugees, we call on the
international community once again to address the root
causes of people fleeing their countries. We must
therefore find comprehensive approaches to resolving
their plight and realize durable solutions for them.
South Africa has an unwavering and steadfast
commitment to the protection of refugees as described
in international conventions and protocols.

In conclusion, my delegation firmly believes that
no amount of debate or statements and declarations by
the Council will address what we call today emerging
threats. What is needed is to deliver on the
commitments agreed upon in the various organs and
platforms of the United Nations. International
cooperation, financial resource mobilization and
technological investment is what is required to address
the global challenges facing our common humanity that
we seek to address today.

