Let me congratulate you, Madam President, and your friendly country, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, on presiding over the work of the Security Council for the current month. We have full confidence in your successful stewardship of its work, and I thank you for holding this open meeting on the so-called chemical file. First, I would like to express our categorical rejection of what Mrs. Nakamitsu said about not receiving any response or new information from the Syrian Government prior to today's briefing. That is completely false, as yesterday we sent her two emails that included the most important information and updates with regard to Syrian cooperation. That is in addition to the information contained in an official letter, dated 4 November 2020, sent by Syria's Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates to the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in response to his inquiries. Furthermore, Syria is currently hosting a delegation of experts and inspectors, who arrived on 3 November and will remain until 24 November. Syria cooperates fully with the OPCW and provides its experts with protection, security, safety and unrestricted access to all the places they wish to inspect. This is the seventh round of inspection. The reports of the sixth round confirmed that there are no chemicals or any activities at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre that are prohibited under the Chemical Weapons Convention. Ihave attentively listened to the statements delivered by my colleagues during this meeting. While we express our deep appreciation for the positions of members that adhere to the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and that share our condemnation of the use of chemical weapons and other weapons of mass destruction at any time, place and under any circumstances, our position - along with those members - simply focuses on the need to move away from politicizing these important issues and to preserve the technical nature, credibility and professionalism of the OPCW's work. However, I am surprised by the surreal and absurd scene that the representatives of Western countries tirelessly repeat in their insistence on adhering to Goebbels principles of propaganda that they know well and persistently deny all facts, evidence and proof that confirm the erroneousness of their claims. The manner in which some Western Governments deal with matters related to the situation in my country, whether related to political, humanitarian or chemical issues, reminds me of the novel penned by the famous Scottish writer Robert Louis Stevenson entitled The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Those Governments are trying hard to assume the role of Dr. Jekyll, the good character, when they preach about noble values and principles and voice out resonant slogans. In reality, however, and in their dealings with other countries, they behave like Mr. Hyde, the evil character who does not hesitate to commit various crimes while relishing in the suffering of his victims. As a result of their direct involvement in the terrorist, political, economic and financial war on my country, the Governments of these countries are directly and undeniably responsible for the suffering of the Syrian people over the past nine years. Even when it comes to our discussion on arms control and the prevention of the spread of weapons of mass destruction, there is a deep gap and rupture in the positions of the Western countries that destroyed Iraq under the guise of pretexts that have been proven to be fallacies. Those same Governments have been waging a campaign of misinformation and fabricating accusations against my country for years now, even as they provide the Israeli occupation military and technical support to strengthen its arsenal of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and defend Israel in international forums in order to perpetuate Israel's violations of the relevant international agreements and instruments. Is the task of maintaining international peace and security as permanent and non-permanent members of the Council consistent with that schizophrenia, selectivity and double standards? What of the lessons of history, the testimonies and reports of Hans Blix, Scott Ritter, David Kelly and Jose Bustani, and other documents that expose the manipulation of certain Governments in that regard to serve their agendas at the expense of international peace and security and the lives and well-being of the Syrian people? What about the facts and proof provided by former OPCW inspector Ian Henderson, Professor Theodore Postol and Mr. Aaron Mate during the Arria Formula meeting held on 27 September, thanks to a much- appreciated Russian initiative? I also remind the Council of the scandal when Western countries prevented Mr. Jose Bustani from speaking (see S/PV.8764). The Syrian Arab Republic once again reaffirms that it did not use chemical weapons. Syria no longer has chemical weapons. Furthermore, Syria continues to be committed to cooperating with the OPCW, its Technical Secretariat and its Declaration Assessment Team in order to settle all outstanding issues, permanently close this file as soon as possible and remove it from the circle of games and media misinformation. In that context, we kindly remind the Council that, despite the difficult security conditions that we went through years ago and the grave challenges posed by terrorist organizations and transnational terrorists and their operators, Syria was able to cooperate with the United Nations in New York and at the OPCW in The Hague in order to fulfil its commitments arising from its accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention in 2013. That cooperation resulted in the disposal of the entire Syrian chemical stockpile and the destruction of the related production facilities. Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Special Coordinator of the joint mission of the OPCW in charge of eliminating chemical weapons in Syria, delivered that news to the Council in her briefing five years ago in June 2014, and it was confirmed by the documents issued by the OPCW Technical Secretariat, the latest of which is the eighty-fifth monthly report of the Director General (see S/2020/1056, annex), issued on 10 October. Despite those assurances and the fact that representatives of the Western countries witnessed with their own eyes the destruction of the Syrian chemical- weapon stockpiles from the American ship M/V Cape Ray and several European ships, some Member States have maintained their hostile stance towards my country. Those Member States sought to escalate political pressure and, without any verification, launched unilateral and tripartite acts of aggression that, inter alia, completely destroyed civilian facilities such as the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre, although the OPCW and its teams have repeatedly searched the Centre and confirmed that it was not used to carry out any illegal activities. Moreover, the same Member States established illegal mechanisms, approved in violation of the law and the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention, such as the so-called Investigation and Identification Team, and relied on the Team's reports, which lacked all credibility and professionalism. One example is the fabricated report about Ltamenah incidents. In addition, these States ignored the information provided by both the Syrian Arab Republic and the Russian Federation in support of the decision issued by the OPCW Executive Council at its ninety- fourth session, and imposed artificial dates and deadlines that do not match the challenges posed by the coronavirus pandemic, leading up to the current United States Administration submitting an escalatory draft resolution in the Council aimed at promoting its agendas and imposing them by pressure and threat. That brings us back to Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. The United States of America, which claims to be keen on arms control and non-proliferation and has submitted to the Council a draft resolution against my country, is itself the only State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention that still possesses huge stockpiles of such weapons - ever since the Second World War - and refuses to destroy them. Furthermore, the United States, along with its allies, has sought to cover up the crimes of terrorist organizations and their use of chemical weapons and toxic gases against Syrian civilians and Syrian Arab Army forces. That was again fully evident in the report of the Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic with regard to the Aleppo incident that took place on 28 November 2018, in which terrorist organizations used chemical weapons that resulted in the injury of 125 civilians and military personnel. The Mission concluded that those facts were in question and advanced the bewildering claim that it was unable to determine whether chemicals were used in that attack, despite evidence to the contrary provided by the Syrian and Russian Governments. Would the Fact-Finding Mission have adopted the same position if it could have attributed responsibility to the Syrian Government instead? My country is committed to continuing to cooperate with the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Declaration Assessment Team to resolve all outstanding issues. To that end, on 4 October, my Government sent an official letter to the Director General of the organization, which included responses to his inquiries regarding the implementation of the decision of the ninety-fourth session of the Executive Council, as concerns the incidents in Ltamenah. On 15 October, my country submitted its eighty-third monthly report to the Technical Secretariat on activities related to the destruction of chemical weapons and their production facilities. Last September, the tripartite cooperation agreement between the Syrian Government, the United Nations and the OPCW was extended for a period of six months, starting 30 September. From 28 September to 1 October, the twenty-third round of consultations was held between the Syrian Government and the Declaration Assessment Team, which visited Damascus, and the Syrian Government provided it full access to all facilities to ensure the success of its mission. Despite all that information, some colleagues in the Council and Mrs. Nakamitsu are claiming that the Syrian Government is not cooperating with the OPCW or with the Declaration Assessment Team. Considering the positive action taken by my country, we call on all Member States of the OPCW to reject the politicization of the technical character of the organization and to address all serious defects in its work that could undermine its status and credibility. In the interest of preserving the mandate and credibility of the United Nations, we also call on the High Representative for Disarmament, Izumi Nakamitsu, to act with professionalism, impartiality and objectivity and not to ignore the information we submit to her. My Government renews its support for the Russian Federation with regard to allegations made by Western countries on the Navalny case, and the Skripal case before that. In conclusion, it is unfortunate that the minimal rules of etiquette in diplomatic discourse are absent, especially in the approach of my colleague the Permanent Representative of Germany. We assumed that, after almost two years of serving as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, his performance would improve and his language would become more polished and refined. Fortunately, history indicates that Germany was in a state of war with my country at the beginning of the Second World War, when it invaded my country alongside the French proxy Vichy regime forces. Syria declared war on Nazi Germany and participated with the allies in establishing the United Nations in 1945. History teaches us also that our two countries maintained good relations since Nazism was eliminated. However, in his statements, the German Permanent Representative persists in using overly hostile language towards my country, as if we were in a state of war. Contrary to the convictions and delusions of the Permanent Representative of Germany, we do not believe we are in a state of war against Germany.
