Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation would like to
thank Senegal for organizing today's open debate.

The current peacekeeping environment has become
increasingly complex and challenging. United Nations
peacekeepers are now deployed in areas where there is
no peace to keep. Targeted and asymmetrical hostile
acts against United Nations personnel are among the
most imposing threats faced by several peacekeeping
missions. United Nations peacekeepers are expected
to play a role for which they are traditionally not
mandated, much less equipped. It is then unfair to
blame them when they fall short of these expectations.

When we speak about dealing with asymmetrical
threats to peacekeeping operations, we must be clear
that we cannot erode the basic character of United
Nations peacekeeping by undertaking counter-
terrorism or counter-insurgency activities. We must be
guided by the wise recommendations of the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations that United Nations missions should
not be mandated to conduct military counter-terrorism
operations, as they are not suited to do so. On the other
hand, the United Nations cannot turn away from conflict
areas where peace is so gravely threatened, indeed
undermined, by actors that recognize no restraints on
their brutal tactics against civilians and peacekeepers.
Nevertheless, mandates need to clearly distinguish
between peace enforcement and peacekeeping.

The evolving nature of conflicts has led to the
redesigning of United Nations peackeeping mandates
beyond the traditional role of truce supervision. As
the bulk of peacekeeping missions are now dealing
with complex internal or intra-State crises, modern
peacekeeping missions are being designed to address
the political, security, humanitarian and development
dimensions of complex crises, and often to ensure the
implementation of comprehensive peace agreements.

The changing nature of threats is challenging the
traditional role of peacekeeping. The presence of rebel
groups, the flow of illicit weapons, planned, deliberate
attacks against peacekeepers, suicide bombings and
improvised explosive devices are some of the present-
day threats faced by peacekeepers. This has also served
to expose gaps in technology and capabilities that
need to be filled to maintain the level of excellence
and confidence that United Nations peacekeepers have
enjoyed for so long. In View of that, we would like to
stress the following points.

First, greater clarity is required on how United
Nations peacekeeping operations should function in
asymmetrical threat environments.

Second, asymmetrical threats put peacekeepers in
harm's way, as they are faced with situations beyond
their capabilities and resources. Therefore, the effective
implementation of their mandate needs adequate and
matching resources.

Third, our deployment decisions have to be based
on consultation, preparation and knowledge of the
situation on the ground. Triangular cooperation is
critical for all three. As principal stakeholders, troop-
contributing countries must be fully consulted in a
timely manner and have their suggestions taken on
board.

Fourth, the Security Council needs to be more
circumspect when mandating enforcement tasks.
Peacekeepers should neither become a party to the
conflict nor be perceived by the local population
and authorities to be a tool of external intervention.
Increased militarization of some United Nations
stabilization missions could make them riskier - more
dangerous, instead of safer.

Fifth, the use of modern technology consistent
with the principles of peacekeeping should enhance
situational awareness and help ensure the protection of
civilians and the safety of peacekeepers.

Sixth, where mandated, our peacekeepers have
fulfilled, andwill continue to fulfil, their responsibilities
to protect civilians. Clearly defined mandates would
make this task much easier.

Seventh, peacekeeping works best when there
is peace to keep and a political process to sustain
it - hence the need for political processes to always
accompany peacekeeping missions.

Last but not least, the basic principles of
peacekeeping remain essential for the success ofUntied
Nations peacekeeping. These principles are vital and
indispensable for retaining the broad support, legitimacy
and credibility that United Nations peacekeeping has
come to enjoy over the years.

Finally, let me say that, as a leading troop- and
police-contributing country, Pakistan has contributed
over 150,000 personnel and served in 41 mission in 23
countries since 1960. Our peacekeepers have worked
in diverse and difficult conflict and post-conflict
situations and have served with professionalism and
distinction. One hundred and forty-four Pakistani
peacekeepers have made the ultimate sacrifice.

Blue Helmets are a source of pride, not just for
us and for the United Nations but for other troop-
contributing countries as well. Those caught in the
throes of conflict see themselves as guarantors ofpeace
and the harbingers of stability. Their hands must be
strengthened and their successors appreciated.

