Mrs. Ogata: Thank you very much for the
questions, some of which are very concrete. I think the
repatriation of Sierra Leone refugees from the
neighbouring countries, particularly Guinea, will depend

 

very much on the early deployment of peacekeepers and the
peacekeepers being able to manage peace in Sierra Leone.
I think the northern part is still very fragile. Our own plan
for over 170,000 refugees is to start in April. This is being
planned and it is foreseen, but it will depend a great deal
on how, and whether, the refugees themselves perceive the
prospect for security. So, I cannot promise; but this is what
we are thinking.

As to the situation between Ethiopia and Eritrea, it is
really a localized war, with very limited impact on the
countries themselves. But at the same time, it does spread
insecurity to other countries - for example, to Somalia -
and in that sense we are very much worried about the
possibility of spillover effects.

As far as Eritrea is concerned, we have completed a
technical discussion with the Government. They seem to be
willing to take back their refugees, which is a good sign.
However, as to whether this war will be completed, it is a
very disappointing kind of war that I think we have all
deplored. I hope the efforts for peace will come very soon.

The issue of regroupment is a very touchy issue and
one that we dealt with in 1997. I think that what the
Government should be doing is providing security
throughout the country, rather than regrouping some people
in order to be able to take other actions in other parts of the
country. We therefore have enormous reservations.
Regrouping people and asking the international community
to provide humanitarian assistance means having a kind of
forced arrangement of internally displaced persons, and
directing assistance from the international community will
not solve the problem at all. So we do have enormous
reservations. However, if the people are in dire need, then
we have a dilemma. We do have to provide some minimal
assistance.

I am very pleased to note that Ambassador Dejammet
has considered the idea of stability. All the refugee
problems have to be solved regionally. Refugees cross
borders and place enormous burdens on neighbouring
countries. So neighbouring countries, together with the
countries of origin, can only sit down together to solve the
problem. I hope you will be able to examine these
prospects further.

