Mr. Elisaia (Samoa): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum member States with Permanent Missions
in New York - namely, Australia, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Fiji, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Palau, New
Zealand, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and
my own country, Samoa.

I would like, at the outset, to express our
unequivocal condemnation of the recent terrorist
bombings in Bali and convey our condolences and
sincere sympathy to the Government of Indonesia and
the families and friends of all those killed or injured in
the attacks.

The Bali bombings present a further stark
reminder that international terrorism remains a
fundamental threat to the safety and stability of the
international community, a threat that must be
overcome by a collective international response.

I would like to take the opportunity to thank the
Ambassadors of Argentina, Denmark and you, Mr.
President, for the briefings today. We welcome the fact
that the Committees have chosen to coordinate their
briefings and hope this trend will continue.

Pacific leaders made a commitment to meet
international counter-terrorism obligations in their
Nasonini Declaration of 2002, and our region remains
fully committed to the international campaign against
terrorism.

Our members are working together with regional
organizations and donors on a range of initiatives to
enhance our individual and joint counter-terrorism
capabilities and to strengthen our trade, transport and
border security infrastructures against possible attack
or exploitation by terrorist groups. We have made some
encouraging progress.

That said, it is important that we remind Council
members of some of the challenges the Pacific region
faces in complying with the multitude of new
requirements that have been introduced by the Security
Council, particularly since 11 September 2001.

First, I would like to emphasize that the majority
of Pacific Islands Forum group members are small
island developing States with limited resources and
many pressing priorities. Fulfilling counter-terrorism
commitments results in the diversion of scarce
financial and other resources that would otherwise be
used for development and challenges, such as poverty
eradication efforts and the fight against HIV/AIDS,
among other things.

A further challenge has been the sheer volume of
new international counter-terrorism and non-
proliferation standards introduced since 9/11. Keeping
informed of new standards is difficult enough. It is
even more difficult for many of us to meet often
onerous reporting requirements. More often than not,
new standards are introduced with very little
consultation or opportunities for us to provide input.
As a result, they seldom reflect, or make allowances
for, the challenges many of us face in implementing
them. To be frank, this is a source of frustration for
many Pacific Island Forum countries.

Our Governments are strongly of the View that it
is important that Pacific Island Forum member
countries should be able to engage at the senior level
on international counter-terrorism standards and the
standard-setting process with the bodies that set and
administer those standards. This message was clearly
conveyed once again at a Pacific Forum-wide Working
Group on Counter-Terrorism held this past June. In
particular, the obligations established by Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) are proving to be a
considerable challenge to our region.

To this end, the Pacific Islands Forum member
countries have extended an invitation to the Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) to attend next
year's meeting of our Working Group on Counter-
Terrorism. This Working Group represents the one
occasion annually that senior officials from all Pacific
Islands Forum member and observer countries, as well
as the relevant regional organizations, come together
specifically to discuss international counter-terrorism
issues. As such, acceptance of the invitation to next
year's Working Group Meeting would provide an
excellent and timely opportunity for Pacific Island
officials to engage directly with the CTC Chair to
discuss the region's security challenges and its role in
international counter-terrorism efforts, including
meeting the obligations of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). We also hope that experts from the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the 1267 and 1540 Committee expert groups could
attend. We strongly encourage the CTC Chair to give
positive consideration to this invitation.

On the specific challenge of reporting obligations
under the three resolutions, I would like to note that, in
the past, we have suggested that a collective Pacific
regional report to each Committee, submitted by the
Pacific Islands Forum secretariat, would alleviate some
of the pressures faced by member countries in meeting
the reporting requirements. While we understand the
importance of dialogue between the Security Council
and individual Member States, we would urge the
Council to be constructive in its approach and to
establish a two-way dialogue with us to work out a
practical and sustainable solution to this challenge.
Countries of our region are doing what we can to meet
reporting requirements. For example, a number of
Forum member countries have accepted New Zealand's
offer to work with individual Pacific island
Governments to assist them in preparing outstanding
Security Council reports.

In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to
underscore once again that the Pacific Islands Forum
group remains fully committed to the collective fight
against international terrorism. In that regard, the work
of all three Committees is critically important, and we
look forward to deepening our relationship with the
Security Council on these issues over the coming
months.

