Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to say how pleased my
delegation is at your assumption of the presidency of
the Council, and I would like to reiterate to you our
readiness to contribute to the successful fulfilment of
your functions.
On this solemn occasion, I also wish to extend a
cordial welcome to the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We regret the painful fact of
the death of his father, former President Laurent
Kabila, and we wish to convey words of comfort to his
family and to the Congolese people as a whole.

The presence of President Joseph Kabila in the
Security Council, and his statement at this meeting, are
of great significance to peace in the world and give us
grounds for hope. They reflect a clear commitment to
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - a
peace that we recognize to be the profound aspiration
of 52 million Congolese, with whom we identify as
members of the international community.

When we joined this Council, we promised the
Members of the United Nations to work for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and it
is our intention to fulfil that promise. Therefore, we
wish today to express a threefold purpose.

First we must work to ensure respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as of all the neighbouring States in
central Africa, as has been expressed by this Council
on many occasions.

Secondly we must demand, as is our duty, of all
the signatory parties of the Lusaka Peace Agreement
that they fulfil their obligations. This means the
demobilization of irregular forces, political dialogue
leading to free elections, the withdrawal of foreign
troops from Congolese territory and respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law, among many
other aspects.

The third component is to contribute to the
prompt deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
under guarantees of security for its personnel, freedom
of movement and logistical support, which are
indispensable for the conduct of its operations.

We hope that the expectations of the moment will
generate an atmosphere of confidence that will make it
possible for us successfully to hold the meeting
scheduled for 21 February between the Security
Council and the Political Committee composed of the
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement.

Peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
a commitment that this Council has to humankind. It is
a commitment that we have assumed towards the
Congolese people, the peoples of Africa and those of
the entire world. We call for the reconciliation of the
Congolese people with itself and with its neighbours,
and we are prepared to contribute from this office to
that goal.

