Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, my
delegation welcomes the presence of the Secretary-
General at this open meeting, which facilitates an
exchange of views on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We look forward to further discussions next
month between the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Agreement and the Security Council to explore further
ways in which the Security Council and the countries
in the region can sustain momentum for the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In this context, I wish to welcome the presence
here today of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to thank him for his
important contribution to our debate.

The timing of today's meeting is also opportune,
as it follows closely on the joint private meetings of the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries
which took place on 18 and 22 October. At those
meetings, we benefited from the substantive
discussions on the main issues raised by the troop-
contributing countries. This practice must be
encouraged, as it can lead to more active consultations
between the troop-contributing countries and the
Security Council on the formulation, renewal and
changes in mandate of peacekeeping missions.

I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ngogi, for his briefing and for
his introduction of the ninth report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). We
wish him every success in his mission and take this
opportunity to express to him and to the men and
women of MONUC our appreciation for their
exemplary service in the cause of peace.

The Secretary-General's report notes that, despite
difficulties, the overall situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to be favourable. The
report notes that the ceasefire along the confrontation
line has held since January, the disengagement of
forces and their redeployment to new defensive
positions is almost complete, and some foreign forces
have been withdrawn.

Nevertheless, the report also points to the
disturbing, dangerous and persistent outbreaks of
fighting in the east of the country. It is in this context
that, while my delegation welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the next
phases of deployment of MONUC and supports the
intention to move towards phase III, we are mindful of
the challenges which lie ahead in terms of
implementation and therefore call upon all parties to
cooperate fully with MONUC.

In particular, we call on all parties to cease
support for armed groups operating in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
for hostilities to cease in other parts of the country. As
MONUC deploys further eastwards, it is critical that
the armed groups comply with, and fully implement,
the relevant Security Council resolutions as well as the
Lusaka Agreement.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is now at a crossroads, and we must ensure
that the gains achieved so far are not eroded. It is in
this context that my delegation wishes to highlight
some concerns which persist.

First of all, we wish to commend the facilitator,
Sir Ketumile Masire, for organizing the successful
preparatory meeting in Gaborone. As my delegation
has insisted time and again, the inter-Congolese
dialogue remains the most credible and viable means
through which peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be attained.

The reports on the suspension of the dialogue in
Addis Ababa are therefore disturbing. We wish to
encourage all delegations to resume the dialogue and to
remain focused on our ultimate goal: the determination
of the future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have taken note of, and commend, the Government
of South Africa's willingness to host the dialogue
within one month by assuming the major share of the
expenses involved.

Secondly, the ability to effectively carry out the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is one of the main challenges that must be
overcome if the quest for peace is to be successful. As
was clearly highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report, it is critical to find durable solutions to the
problem of armed groups, including the repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration of ex-combatants into
the society. We emphasize that it is up to the parties to
the conflict to ensure that a conducive environment
obtains for the successful implementation of phase III
of MONUC.

As far as the regional context is concerned, we
have taken note of the intention of the Secretary-
General to strengthen existing cooperation between
United Nations organizations and programmes, as well
as the Bretton Woods institutions, with a view to
achieving a precise division of labour in the Great
Lakes region.

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
suggestion that the time has come for the parties to
explore means of associating Burundi more closely
with the peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and we look forward to receiving further
reports on this.

Next, my delegation wishes to agree with the
Secretary-General that the need to advance the peace
process and to end the fighting is all the more pressing
as serious human rights violations continue to occur
and humanitarian conditions for millions of Congolese
remain extremely poor. The continuing incidents of
torture and detention, the massacre of some 750
civilians, and the harassment and sexual abuse of
women must be addressed immediately and the
perpetrators brought to justice.

The lack of access to health care and the critical
food needs of some 70 per cent of the population are
particularly worrying, as the situation has the potential
of being a trigger for further conflict. We appeal to the
international community to continue to address these
concerns in tangible ways, and we wish to commend
the efforts of the humanitarian agencies, which, despite
tremendous odds, have endeavoured to provide
assistance to the populations in need.

Another issue of concern to my delegation is
the demilitarization of Kisangani. We see the
demilitarization and the restoration of civil authority as
pivotal to the success of the peace process. As aptly
stated by the Secretary-General, the demilitarization of
Kisangani will greatly contribute to the revitalization
of Congolese society and of the economy. We therefore
call on the RCD-Goma to act in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and for the
States in the region to use their influence to bring about
demilitarization and full cooperation with MONUC and
the peace process.

One other issue is the focus on information. We
are pleased to note the emphasis in the report on
developing United Nations radio into a source of
accurate, credible and impartial information about all
aspects of the peace process.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to emphasize
our commitment to achieving sustainable peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The positive
momentum which has begun must not be allowed to
dissipate, and we encourage all parties to seize the
moment and continue on the path to peace.

