Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me take this
opportunity to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting on the situation in Angola. I
would also like to recognize the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Malungo, Minister for Social
Assistance of the Republic of Angola, and thank him
for a very important and informative statement. His
presence at our meeting today is clear testimony to the
commitment of the Government of Angola to peace for
the people of Angola and the region.

We thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for his comprehensive report, which is before us today,
and we commend him for his commitment to the cause
of peace in Africa and in particular to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Angola. In the same vein,
let me also thank the Secretary-General's Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, Under-Secretary-
General Ibrahim Gambari, for introducing the report
and for updating the Council on the latest
developments regarding the situation in that country.

The report of the Secretary-General states that the
absence of dialogue has continued to create an unstable
political and military situation in the country, despite
the efforts of the Government to consolidate its
authority throughout the country. Therefore, the
Angolan people, the Government, the churches and the
civil society are engaged in debating this issue, with a
view to bringing durable and lasting peace to Angola.

The report also draws our attention to the real
problem that impedes the peaceful resolution of the
conflict in Angola. This problem is UNITA and
Mr. Savimbi, who bears the primary responsibility for
the return to war in that country. UNITA has refused to
comply with the basic provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol, which demanded that it demilitarize its forces
and allow the extension of State administration
throughout the territory. My delegation welcomes the
Government's reaffirmation of the validity of the
Lusaka Protocol and supports the Government's
position that it will negotiate with all political forces
that are ready to abandon violence as a way of gaining
power. In this regard, the international community, and
in particular the Security Council, must send a clear
and unambiguous message to UNITA and to
Mr. Savimbi to stop the carnage and carry out its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. We all are very
aware of UNITA's intransigence, and we should
therefore ensure that UNITA complies with the
demands of the Security Council and of the rest of the
international community.

The question of the violations of Security Council
sanctions against UNITA, which has perpetuated the
agony and suffering of the people of Angola, is of great
concern to my delegation and, I believe, to all
delegations in this Chamber. The report of the Panel of
Experts on the violations of Security Council sanctions
against UNITA is an unprecedented development in the
history of the United Nations. It is the first of its kind
to inform the Council and the international community
as a whole about the magnitude of the violations of
sanctions against UNITA and what could be done to
make them effective.

However, the Panel could not complete its
investigations due to the limited time it had at its
disposal. It is against this background that the Council
requested the Secretary-General to establish a follow-
up mechanism to carry out further investigations into
the allegations of violations of sanctions by UNITA.
We thank the Secretary-General for appointing a five-
member team to serve on this mechanism, and it is our
hope that the long-awaited team will begin its work as
soon as possible, to enable the Council to take
appropriate decisions.

In this respect, we welcome the bold measures
that, at their meeting held this month in Antwerp, the
World Federation of Diamond Bourses and the
International Diamond Manufactures Association
adopted with regard to illegally acquired diamonds
from conflict zones - in particular from Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone.
These measures, if implemented fully, will indeed be a
big step in the right direction- that is, towards
limiting or significantly reducing the capacity of rebel
movements in Africa to wage wars against legitimate
Governments. I cannot conclude this point without
once again paying special tribute to the Chairman of
the sanctions Committee, Ambassador Robert Fowler
of Canada, for his courage, determination and
commitment to help bring peace to Angola and Africa.
I endorse fully what you, Madam President, said about
Ambassador Fowler on behalf of the Security Council.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation is encouraged by the efforts of the
Government of Angola to put in place national
structures, logistics and funds with a view to
addressing the plight of the war-affected populations
and internally displaced persons. Of great concern to
my delegation is the large number of landmines and
unexploded ordnance. Estimates of the quantity range
between 6 million and 7 million, and 79 different types
of devices have been found in the country. We
commend the work of the humanitarian agencies in
assisting the people of Angola to cope with these
calamities and urge the international community to
provide funds bilaterally, or through the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Angola, to assist
the Government and the people of Angola - a people
who since independence has not enjoyed peace.

The effect of the war on the economy of Angola
is enormous. The international community should
support the efforts of the Government to achieve
economic recovery, so as to meet the needs of all its
people. We welcome the agreement reached between
the Government and the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, and it is our hope that the
programmes that are to be worked out will assist in the
national economic and social development of the
country. Similarly, we welcome the activities of the
United Nations Development Programme in the area of
poverty eradication and in dealing with the impact of
HIV/AIDS.

Allow me to welcome the long-awaited
appointment of the head of the United Nations Office
in Angola. It is our hope that this appointment will help
the Angolan people in their efforts to achieve peace,
development and prosperity. We would also like to take
this opportunity to commend the cooperation between
the United Nations and the Government of Angola in
their efforts to investigate the downing of the two
United Nations aircraft in Angola on 26 December
1998 and 2 January 1999 in areas then controlled by
UNITA. We would also appreciate from time to time
being updated on the ongoing investigations into the
airplane crash that killed the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye.

