Mr. Acufia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
the holding of this public debate organized as a
workshop, a format that is used to deal with topics that
are the subject of paramount concern in the Council
and the international community because of their
relevance in humanitarian, peace and security fields
and in the development of peoples.

Chile cannot but share the deep concern about the
impact of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in conflicts besetting West Africa and of the
increasing illicit intervention of mercenary forces in
such conflicts. Those practices contribute considerably
to the violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law, both among the combatants and the
affected civilian populations.

In this connection, as was clearly stated this
morning by the Secretary-General, the question of the
involvement of children in armed conflict acquires a
particularly serious prominence. We associate
ourselves with his appeal that States of the subregion
implement the international instruments prohibiting
such practices and develop the necessary machinery to
deal with the problem.

As we said in the high-level debate at the United
Nations Conference in 2001 on the illicit trafficking in
such weapons, we believe it indispensable not only for
regions such as West Africa but also for the entire
international community to lay down norms to restrict
severely the manufacture and trade of small arms and
light weapons, to duly registered manufacturers and
duly authorized trading agents. In this connection, we
are convinced that we must give pride of place to
restrictions over freedom of commerce.

With regard to the question of supplying small
arms to West Africa, Chile supports the initiative of
shoring up cooperation and the exchange of
information among States of the region to identify and
monitor individuals and entities that are involved in the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and
those who are supporting mercenary activities in West
Africa.

Similarly, my country recognizes that States of
the region must commit themselves more profoundly to
the practical implementation of the Moratorium on
small arms and light weapons declared in 1998 by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). To that end, particular account must be
taken of the recommendations of the recent African
conference on the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action on small arms and light
weapons of 2001.

From the global standpoint, the Security Council,
with the assistance of the Secretariat, over years has
developed a set of measures to avoid at least in part the
devastating consequences of the excessive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons and
their illicit trade by means of measures entailing
embargoes on territories where there is conflict and in
cases of conflict prevention, peacekeeping operations
or peace-building activities.
My delegation would like to thank the President
for organizing this seminar, which has enabled us to
exchange views in our search for effective solutions to
tackle this scourge that is so seriously affecting the
region of West Africa. The workshop format used on
this occasion, as well as the quality and suitability of
the Ministers for Foreign Relations and the other
speakers invited to participate have given us a very
comprehensive, first-hand picture of the situation and
the needs of West Africa. Those elements will enable
the Security Council and the Secretariat, as well as
Member States, to better prepare their work on those
sensitive issues.

