Allow me to start by thanking Mr. Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing, and Ms. Ibrahim for her interesting and key perspective presented to us this morning. The Dominican Republic welcomes the recent positive trends and relatively peaceful elections that took place in the subregion during this period. However, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been disruptive to certain vital efforts in the subregion. We hope that all the activities put on hold due to the health situation can be resumed as soon as possible, including the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission. Likewise, it is important that the various pre-election proceedings, such as voter registration processes and agreed constitutional referendums across the subregion, can be completed and that the upcoming presidential elections in Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and the Niger can take place in an inclusive, safe and peaceful political climate. The Dominican Republic is concerned with the impact of the pandemic in West Africa and the Sahel, given its implications on peace and security. We worry that the pandemic will very likely exacerbate the current human security crisis, especially in the Sahel region, due to the unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe and the combination of poverty, climate change, underdevelopment and conflict. In addition, according to estimates of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, the economic effects will even adversely impact the growth rate of Nigeria, the subregion's biggest economy, which could decline from an initial projection of 2.9 per cent to -3.4 per cent in 2020 - a worrisome trend for the whole region and directly linked to the effects of the pandemic. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the subregion is also facing an unprecedented humanitarian situation, with 24 million Sahelians in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. That situation, in turn, is worsening due to poor health-care systems, food insecurity, violations of human rights, a lack of development and the persistence of conflict and insecurity, all of which is leading to mass displacement. This precarious situation will likely be the trigger for confrontations to obtain scarce resources. The Dominican Republic supports calls for an urgent, coordinated and united global response to meet the global challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, and launches an appeal for international cooperation to help West Africa and the Sahel mitigate the effects of the pandemic and reactivate the economies of the countries of the region. With regard to the security situation, we condemn the attacks on civilians carried out by violent extremists and remain concerned about the increased intercommunal violence. Those developments create a vicious cycle that destroys the lives of innocent civilians, including women and children, and closes the doors of development for future generations who lack opportunities, including access to education. We support the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in its efforts to strengthen national security sector reform, and we applaud the revised tripartite agreement between the United Nations, the European Union and the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), signed in February at the Summit of the Heads of State of G-5 Sahel. The agreement reiterated the need for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to provide logistical support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, and took important steps to ensure a more coordinated approach in addressing threats to stability and security in West Africa. In addition to the current health challenges of COVID-19, we must continually analyse and address the emergence other factors of instability in order to identify their root causes and take action to counter them. That can be achieved - if there is political will among the leaders of the subregion - through strengthening and harmonizing the implementation of regional strategies to prevent and resolve such challenges in order to ensure a more promising future for the subregion and its people. In conclusion, we would like to commend Special Representative Chambas, his team and the respective regional organizations for all their efforts to sustain peace in West Africa and the Sahel under these unprecedented circumstances.
