Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing deepest condolences to the
delegation of Tunisia on the passing of former President
Bourguiba.

My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding
over the Security Council at this very important meeting.
We are aware of the important place that issues of human
security occupy in the foreign policy of your country. The
problems of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
humanitarian relief programmes for refugees and the
protection of women, children and the elderly, who suffer
most during conflict, have become an integral part of the
Council's agenda due, in part, to the efforts of Canadian
diplomacy and of your delegation here in New York. We
are convinced, Mr. Foreign Minister, that your personal
participation in the work of the Council during this month
will provide a fresh outlook to our deliberations on this
and other important issues.

During recent decades, the international community
has gained bitter experience and seen proof that the
primary harmful impact of any armed conflict is on the
most vulnerable parts of society. On the other hand,
ongoing human suffering is a contributing factor to
instability and further conflict. The current situation in
Afghanistan is yet further proof of this.

Last month, in informal consultations, the Council
thoroughly examined the situation in Afghanistan,
including mediation efforts and prospects for the peace
process, as well as drug-trafficking-related problems and
their impact on the whole region. Today's additional
emphasis on the humanitarian aspects of the ongoing
conflict in Afghanistan, together with the very informative
briefings by Ambassador Listre and by Mr. Renniger,
enable our deliberations to be comprehensive.

We note with great concern that the general situation
in Afghanistan and the humanitarian situation in particular
continue to deteriorate. The Secretary-Generals report
provides an alarming picture of the Taliban's continued
policy of flagrant violations of human rights,
maltreatment of the civilian population, forced
displacements, summary executions, deliberate abuses and
arbitrary detentions, violence and continuing
discrimination against girls and women, separation of men
from their families and the use of child soldiers. The
international community has several times expressed its

 

grave concern over such practices and has condemned
them.

Unfortunately, no signs of improvement in the current
situation can be seen, and the prospects are rather bleak,
considering reports that both parties are preparing to resume
fighting. The result of that could be easily foreseen: new
heavy losses of human life, increased suffering by the
civilian population, new flows of refugees and internally
displaced persons, destruction and a further decline in the
social sphere and in the economy of the country - which
is practically non-existent. Needless to say, the hostilities
create insuperable difficulties for the implementation of the
international community's humanitarian programmes in that
country and pose a threat to international humanitarian
personnel.

Here I would like to stress that we need to use all
possible means at our disposal to respond properly to the
test created by the conflict in Afghanistan in order to bring
the parties to peaceful reconciliation and to provide a safe
and secure environment for the civilian population.

We are thus convinced that it is very timely to
reiterate strongly the Council's position with regard to the
situation in Afghanistan. We welcome the draft presidential
statement, which conveys the Council's grave concern at the
current situation in various fields. It contains a clear and
resolute demand that the Taliban cease its abuses of human
rights, including the rights of women and girls; halt fighting
and hostilities; start negotiations with the aim of achieving
peaceful reconciliation; stop rendering support to
international terrorism; and comply without delay with
resolution 1267 (1999). It also carries the important
message that further non-compliance by the Taliban will
leave the Security Council with no choice other than to
consider the imposition of further targeted measures. We
thank the delegation of the Russian Federation for its
initiative and its efforts in the preparation of a
comprehensive document.

Finally, we once again urge the Afghan parties to
cease hostilities. We also urge the members of the "six plus
two" group and other mediators to resume their efforts to
find a way leading to a final solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan.

