Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate to
discuss the major issue of United Nations-African
Union cooperation. We commend your delegation,
Sir, for choosing to convene this meeting at this very
opportune time on the heels of yesterday's anniversary
of the tenth joint meeting between the Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.

This meeting also follows the most recent
Council mission to Africa, which was its third this
year. During its Somalia leg, Council members had
a valuable opportunity to see directly on the ground
and better appreciate a very decent pattern of African
Union-United Nations cooperation in the area of peace
and security, exemplified by the effective teamwork
of the African Union Military Observer Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia. It also allowed us to identify inevitable
shortcomings and discuss the ways to address them.

We thank the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations, which gave us a dynamic picture of
lively cooperation between the two organizations. We
also welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/8 at this meeting.

From the outset, I would like to note that Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

Over the past decade, the role of the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations in promoting peace
and sustainable development among African States
has increased exponentially. The African Union has
demonstrated its ability to take the lead in the effective

resolution of conflicts and its views and policies
on this matter are of particular value for the United
Nations. The launch of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and the establishment of its structures, as
well as the deployment of the African Union's peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council,
are a clear testimony to the growing importance of
enhancing United Nations-AU cooperation.

In recent years, the African Union has proved to
be a valuable partner of the United Nations. On many
occasions, the African Union and its member States
have been able to step in promptly to help maintain
peace and security or bring in a measure of stability
in crisis situations. The African Union's presence
also has the extra benefit of providing additional
political legitimacy and leverage to international peace
operations. We value very much the readiness of the
African Union to tackle problematic or sensitive issues
head on, especially when the United Nations is not able
to act expeditiously.

The African Union's response to the crisis in
Somalia and Mali come to mind in this respect. Another
case in point in our view is the situation in Burundi.
There, my delegation believes that the deployment of a
robust and meaningful United Nations police presence
would be very much in accordance with our shared
goal of preventing a further escalation of this crisis. In
this light, we call for increased consultations between
the two Councils and the broader use of preventive
diplomacy tools and mechanisms, as envisaged by
resolution 1625 (2005).

One of our common threats is terrorism, especially
as we see the rise of new types of terrorism-related
threats to international peace and security. We call for
greater unity and stronger international partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
in combating this dangerous phenomenon, including
in particular through effective implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It
is also important to enhance our cooperation to cut off
the sources of financing for terrorism and to prevent the
supply of arms to terrorists.

In recent years, we have seen progress in developing
the strategic relationships between the United Nations
and the African Union in the area of peace and security.
At the same time, we have to admit that challenges
remain and that more should be done to further
strengthen this relationship to effectively address
common collective security concerns in Africa.In this
context, Ukraine welcomes the new African Peace and

Security Architecture road map 2016-2020, aimed at
greater coordination and cohesion between the United
Nations and the AU in fulfilling their priority tasks.
The presidential statement that was just adopted also
serves this purpose well.

Last year, the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, in its report (S/2015/446), called for
the United Nations to deepen its strategic partnership
with the African Union through consultative
decision-making and common strategy. Therefore,
we look forward to the finalization in 2016 by the
Secretariat and the AU Commission of a joint United
Nations-AU framework for enhanced partnership in
peace and security. This instrument will provide a
blueprint for early and sustainable engagement between
our Organizations before, during and after conflict.
In the most recent United Nations-AU communique
(S/2015/212, annex), it was agreed to conduct a joint
field mission to a conflict situation or area in Africa,
to be identified through consultations during 2015.
However, such a mission did not take place and we look
forward to revisiting this effort in the course of 2016.

As we look at the African Union flag, we can see
the white colour representing Africa's desire to have
true friends around the world. Africa can continue to
fully count on Ukraine as its reliable friend and strong
advocate of peace, democracy and development on
the continent. As Ukraine has applied for observer
status in the AU, we intend to use this perspective
and enhanced relationship with the African Union to
advance cooperation and dialogue on a broad range of
issues, including security.

To conclude, I wish to use this opportunity to
convey my cordial greetings on the occasion of Africa
Day to be observed tomorrow.

