Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for today's
briefings and, as always, we shall begin by thanking
the humanitarian actors on the ground, in particular
the Syrian humanitarian organizations, for continuing
to provide assistance in an increasingly complex and
uncertain environment.

Today, as we consider the various and unthinkable
humanitarian challenges in the Syrian Arab Republic,
we are filled with a deep sense of concern. It has often
been stated here that the highest price of the conflict
has been paid by Syrian civilians. As other speakers
said earlier, it is the men, women, children and young
people whose protection is becoming increasingly
difficult; who carry the weight of a deeply despondent
country; and whose futures sometimes seem to slip
from their hands owing to the growing threats posed to
their well-being and development.

Throughout Syria, stories of human suffering and
adversity are piling up. In that regard, we ask ourselves
whether any kind of hope remains for the Syrian people,
so many of whom have been denied the possibility of
building their own future through education and the
enjoyment of a normal life. Our answer is "yes" and
that, despite their many trials, the people will persevere
in their resilience and that the country will be reborn.

As long as the uncertainty and insecurity that
unceasingly lead to massive internal displacement
continue, they will not be able to do so. They will not
be able to do so without the conditions necessary for
moving the political process forward. And they will
definitely not be able to do so under crossfire. The
resurgence of terrorism also poses an enormous threat
to the future not only of Syria, but that of the entire
region and beyond.

Military solutions leave only material destruction,
human displacement and physical and emotional
damage in their wake. Inclusive dialogue and broad
political agreement, therefore, are the only viable and
sustainable option. That is where Security Council
must focus its attention more than ever before. We
reiterate the need for a cessation of hostilities at the
national level that will bring respite to the population,
build confidence and energize a broad political process
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), while emphasizing
the work of the Constitutional Committee as a starting
point for other major transitions.

Secondly, we call for comprehensive and robust
humanitarian action contributing to the protection of
millions of vulnerable people, including internally
displaced persons and refugees. To that end, we call
for safe and unhindered access throughout Syria, the
protection of humanitarian actors and the respect of all
parties for the provisions of international law, including
international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I note the situation in the north-
eastern part of the Syrian Arab Republic and the plans
to create a so-called safe zone, entailing the subsequent
relocation ofrefugees. In that regard, we urge the parties
to safeguard, above all, the dignity and security of all
persons. If such an arrangement becomes a reality, it
must under no circumstances violate the rights and
freedoms of the civilian population or undermine the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

We are steadfastly determined to use all diplomatic
means possible to ensure that every return is voluntary,
safe and dignified. Non-compliance with those
internationally accepted principles would remain an
indelible stain on the history not only of all the parties
involved, but of the entire international community,
including all of us here today.

