Mr. Chkheidze (Georgia): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to congratulate you on assuming the functions of
President of the Security Council for this month. We
believe that under your skilful guidance, the Security
Council will successfully continue to fulfil its difficult
and responsible task.

Allow me also sincerely to congratulate the five new
members on their election to the Security Council. I wish
to express the hope that their efforts will add a new
impetus to the important work of this body.

On behalf of my Government and the people of
Georgia, I should like to extend warmest words of
appreciation to the United Nations, its Security Council
and, personally, to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, as well as to his Special
Envoy, Ambassador Brunner, and his Deputy, Mr. Beta,
for the attention and good will they have accorded the
dramatic processes in Georgia.

I should like to express my sincere gratitude to the
members of the group of countries known as Friends of
Georgia and to the Russian Federation as facilitator for
their tireless efforts to bring about a comprehensive
political settlement of the protracted conflict in my
country.

Allow me also to commend the joint activities being
carried out by the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) and the peace-keeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in monitoring
the cease-fire, as well as their efforts to facilitate the
repatriation of thousands of refugees.

Today the Security Council is once again in session
to deliberate on the situation in Georgia. Any decision
whatsoever adopted in this Chamber is of paramount
importance for the Government of my country. The
awareness of the constant care and attention accorded to
Georgia by the international community inspires hope for
the ultimate triumph of justice. The firm position of the
Security Council regarding the developments in the
troubled region of Georgia has repeatedly thwarted the
aspirations of the separatists to divide the country and to
put its sovereignty in question. The Georgian people are
gratified by the strong stand of the Council against any
manifestation of separatism and for political and material
support for Georgia's efforts to overcome this crisis.

Having experienced bitter lessons of history, the
Georgian Government has always ascribed special
importance to the meaning of peace and sought to bring
stability and balance to the Caucasus region.

 

It has become clear that the objective of establishing
market-oriented and democratic principles cannot be
attained solely by declarations of good will and the
dissemination of truthful information about the processes in
the region. Indisputably, the process of the world's political
change is not yet completed. It has just reached its most
painful phase.

The conflict in Abkhazia is only a part of the scheme
conceived by the henchmen of totalitarian revenge.
Unfortunately, due to economic, political and geographical
factors, the Caucasus has turned into the main theatre of
these dramatic developments.

Is it possible to forget that not so long ago the leaders
of the Abkhaz separatists joined those who attempted to
save the Soviet empire and were the most active members
of the notorious radical grouping known as Soyuz?
Equipped with communist slogans, separatists provoked the
confrontation and then turned it into a lasting ethnic
conflict.

Abkhaz separatists stubbornly continue to intimidate
the civilian population through kidnappings, tortures and
summary executions. People are deprived of minimal living
conditions and struggle to survive in abject poverty and
humiliation. Their victims are not only Georgians, but also
those Abkhazis who have realized the true motive of the
conflict and have condemned the adventurist policies of the
separatists.

Despite the resolutions of the Security Council calling
for the unconditional return of refugees to their homes to be
ensured, only a small group of displaced persons has
managed to return to the region of Gali. They live
particularly unprotected, under the constant threat of being
executed or of being evicted from their homes for ever.

On January 5, 1996 in the village of Sheshleti in the
Gali region, Abkhaz boeviks brutally tortured and killed
innocent civilians, Mr. Sanaia and six members of his
family, including his wife, children and grandchildren. Mr.
Sanaia's two neighbours, who had come to prevent the
massacre, were also executed on the spot. In carrying out
this barbaric act, the separatists once again overrode
numerous resolutions of the Security Council and ignored
the presence of the United Nations observers and
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping
forces in the region. It is clear that by being represented at
different international levels, leaders of the separatists
promote their names and drag out peace negotiations. They
are trying their best to transform the Abkhaz conflict into
a Balkan-like conflagration.

The Georgian Government has always been
committed to the peaceful resolution of the conflict, for
we realize that only a negotiated settlement of the dispute
can meet the interests of my people and those of the
international community. The adherence of the Georgian
population to this course was reflected in the presidential
and parliamentary elections held in Georgia on 5
November 1995. At the same time, numerous breaches of
agreements by the Abkhaz side, violations of the
provisions of Security Council resolutions and attempts to
ignore, evade and negotiate away their obligations have
brought us to the conclusion that peace has to be
enforced. The enforcement of peace was the only solution
for Bosnia and the same is likely to be true for the
Caucasus.

The recent massacre in the Gali region provokes
pain and resentment. The President of Georgia, Mr.
Eduard Shevardnadze, has expressed his deep concern
over this tragic incident and stressed that it was aimed at
hampering the peace process and at the institutionalization
of "ethnic cleansing" and genocide against Georgians in
the Abkhaz region.

On behalf of my President, today I appeal to the
Security Council to assist us by using its capacity to stop
further bloodshed and restore peace in Georgia. We
deeply hope that the members of the Security Council, all
interested parties, will once again seriously consider the
situation in my country and will take necessary measures
to prevent the imminent escalation of this dispute.

