Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your country, Jordan, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January.

I also wish to associate myself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and by the representative of Djibouti on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

We take this opportunity, in conjunction with the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, to reiterate our support for the State of Palestine.
The launch of the International Year of Solidarity, last
week, only strengthens the legitimacy of the Palestinian
people's struggle against the illegal occupation by
Israel. Yet the question of Palestine remains unresolved
on the agenda of the Council. What we have observed
so far only emphasizes that a just and lasting solution
is long overdue.

Malaysia reiterates its commitment to the
realization of a two-State solution based on the borders
of 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
We continue to call on all parties to live up to their
obligations under internationally recognized initiatives
such as the Arab Peace Initiative, the Oslo Accords, the
Quartet road map, the Madrid terms of reference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We further
recognize the tireless efforts of United States Secretary
of State John Kerry to facilitate the resumption of direct
negotiations between Palestine and Israel.

However, instead of adhering to the principles of
the initiatives I have just mentioned, Israel continues
its defiance against the wishes of the international
community. Secretary Kerry's efforts have been
met with ridicule by Israel, while European Union
Ambassadors to Israel have been summoned for rightly
speaking out against illegal settlements.

It is clear to us that this intransigence will lead to
the failure of the talks, which already appear to us to
be one-sided against Palestine. The discussions on core
issues must not be compromised or delayed. We fear
that the window of opportunity for a peaceful solution is
in danger of closing altogether, as the occupying Power
has proven it is unwilling to meet all its commitments.
In that regard, Malaysia strongly condemns the
announcement of new settlement activities by Israel,
and we demand a resolute end to that continued
illegal practice. Settler violence against Palestinians,
including destroying their agricultural land and places
of worship, continues unabated.

Malaysia also remains gravely concerned by the
situation in Gaza, where the illegal blockade continues
to suppress the lives of its citizens. The escalation
of Israel's military activities in recent days further
threatens to exacerbate the dire humanitarian situation.
The food and energy security needs of the people
remain at critical levels, while farmers and fishermen
in the security zone are denied their livelihoods by
the occupying Power. As Vice-Chair of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other
Arabs of the Occupied Territories, Malaysia has seen
and heard more than enough evidence of that oppression.
We call for an immediate end to the blockade, as well as
all other illegal Israeli practices in the Gaza Strip.

Let me now turn to the situation in Syria, where
the international community faces an ever-increasing
humanitarian crisis. As a demonstration of our concern,
Malaysia participated in the second International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria last week
in Kuwait, where we pledged $500,000. We continue to
urge all parties to end the violence and human rights
violations, including against innocent civilians. While
we welcome the recent delivery of aid to Palestinian
refugees in camps of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in Yarmouk, we remain particularly concerned that
they continue to face unbearable human suffering.
All responsible parties must allow for the appropriate
measures to be taken to ensure that humanitarian
assistance is provided to those desperately in need.

In two days, the long-awaited second Geneva
Conference on Syria will commence to follow up on
the 30 June 2012 communique (S/2012/522, annex).
Malaysia remains supportive of the efforts of the
Secretary-General and Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi, and calls on all parties to come
together to work towards a political solution that is
Syrian-led and inclusive. We hope that the parties
concerned will be able to put aside their differences in
order to ensure a viable and sustainable outcome that
will benefit the people of Syria.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, Malaysia
reiterates its objections to Israel's actions, including the
construction and expansion of illegal settlements in the
occupied Syrian Golan, which violate international law
and the United Nations Charter. In that regard, Malaysia
calls for the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
Syrian Golan, in line with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981).

The spillover effects of the Syrian conflict to
Lebanon continue to escalate. Malaysia urges the parties
involved in that conflict to cease cross-border fire
and other Violence. My delegation also reiterates that
Israel must cease its violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and other hostilities, and withdraw its troops from
Lebanon, with full respect for the Blue Line, in line
with resolution 1701 (2006).

In conclusion, Malaysia underlines its firm belief
in a moderate approach to the peaceful resolution
of conflicts, which can bridge differences and
restore stability to the Middle East. Whether in the
Palestine-Israeli negotiations or the streets of Beirut,
or even at the negotiating table at the second Geneva
Conference, the voices of moderation must prevail
over the voices of those who espouse hate, ignorance,
violence and extremism. We should summon the
collective political will to commit to a moderate course,
which will secure greater gains than if we were divided
by conflict.

