Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Security
Council is meeting to consider the quarterly report
covering October to December 2003, presented by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and to assess the 90 days work of the first quarter of
2004. I would like to take this opportunity to commend
in particular Ambassador Arias for his outstanding and
dedicated work. I also thank members of the Committee
and the independent experts for the work well done.

We have taken note of the Committee's work
regarding implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), in
the course of which it reviewed the reports submitted
by States, ensured the flow of information from States
in compliance with resolution 1373 (2001) in the field
of technical assistance, took a more proactive approach
to the provision of technical assistance to States facing
difficulties in complying with resolution 1373 (2001)
and strengthened cooperation with and among
international, regional and subregional organizations
with anti-terrorist programmes.

The period under review marks an important
turning point in the short but rich life of the
Committee. The report presented on 14 November
2003 (S/2003/1084) by the Chair of the CTC on the
problems encountered in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) identified a number of
important operational issues faced by the Committee.
The CTC took a more proactive role in the dialogue
with Member States, in evaluating implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), in facilitating technical
assistance to Member States and in promoting closer
cooperation and coordination with international,
regional and subregional organizations.

The report concluded that some problems are
being encountered in the implementation of the
resolution at both the State and CTC levels, and that
those problems should be tackled in a comprehensive
way due to the close interlinkage between them and the
urgency of the task.

Today we are seized of the report on the
revitalization of the CTC, endorsed by the Committee.
We take good note of the Chairman's strategic direction
for the proposed reforms and of the commitment of
Committee members to finding the best means of
forging ahead with the launching of the bases for the
revitalization of the Committee - a need felt by all
members of the Council.

The Chairman of the Committee has outlined the
main thrust of the reform that we are undertaking. Like
all reforms, it will take some time before its effects are
felt. As a precautionary measure, a wise decision was
taken: a trial period was provided for, set to end 31
December 2005, to review the effectiveness of the
reform, along with a sunset clause set for two years
later.

A large number of developing countries - the
most affected and the most vulnerable - have joined
with confidence the fight against terrorism. Many of
them have enacted anti-terrorist legislation, but the
scarcity of their resources - financial, technical and
human - impedes the implementation of such a
legislative framework. Moreover, such countries lack
the executive machinery and the capacity to deal
effectively with security, border controls, the
movement of criminals, the illegal circulation of
firearms, and terrorist networks.

It is not a lack of political will that is affecting
their action. Rather, it is a situation of a shortage of
resources, a gap which we have the means to close. I
hope that our Committee will continue to act in such a
way as to enable that gap to be effectively closed
through the provision of technical assistance.

We are pleased that the CTC, in its programme of
revitalization, has as one of its priorities the
strengthening and facilitation of technical assistance to
States. In fact, without long-term assistance that is
focused on national and regional capacity-building in
areas related to resolution 1373 (2001), the developing
countries will be unable to meet international standards
in order to face the grave challenges ahead. It is only
through a concerted effort and with international
assistance that they will be able to strengthen their
capacity to wage an effective combat against terrorism.
We welcome the Committee's commitment to
strengthen the provision of such assistance to countries
in need and its decision to adopt this more proactive
approach to its delivery.

The African Union has set a pioneering example
by adopting the Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism in Africa, generally known as
the Algiers Convention of 1999. Through that
Convention, the African countries are pursuing a
shared objective through common action at the
intergovernmental level involving the exchange of
information on the activities and movements of
terrorist groups in Africa and the undertaking of
actions designed to step up the fight against terrorism.
International cooperation is a vital prerequisite for
building capacity in the African countries, allowing
them to act more effectively at the national,
subregional and continental levels against the financing
of terrorism, in the tracking of terrorist networks, and
in apprehending and bringing terrorists to justice.

The international community at large should
reinforce its cooperation programmes with continental
and subregional organizations and with the African
countries in areas related to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), in order to strengthen their capacity to
fight terrorism. That will make it possible to deal with
one of the weakest links in the global fight against
terrorism.

We are pleased that the Committee will be able to
adopt the proposed reforms as presented by the
Chairman, Ambassador Arias, and we are convinced
that this is the way to forge ahead in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and to stay on course with our
actions against terrorism.

