Mr. Swe (Myanmar): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for this opportunity to speak before the
Security Council. I am particularly happy to see
Indonesia, a fellow member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), presiding over this
meeting. I understand that I will be followed by my
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Singapore,
who will speak in his national capacity. I also
understand that the Permanent Representative of Japan,
another country from our region, will be taking the
floor.

I wish to thank Special Envoy Gambari for his
briefing. His vast experience and consummate
diplomatic skills have stood him well in carrying out
the good offices role of the Secretary-General
mandated by the General Assembly. It is noteworthy
that, during his visit, he had the opportunity to meet
with the Prime Minister, General Thein Sein, and
several relevant Ministers. He also met with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and representatives of ethnic nationalities,
senior monks, political parties and civil society. I
congratulate him on the fruitful outcome of his
mission. His accomplishment is all the more
commendable in view of the unwarranted pressure on
the part of some quarters to unduly hasten his visit to
Myanmar. This created a less than favourable
environment for him to carry out his good offices
mandate. However, he managed to overcome the
challenge.
Allow me, Sir, to highlight the notable
developments in Myanmar since Ambassador
Gambari's recent visits, although he has touched on
most of them. Peace and stability have been restored in
Myanmar, and life has returned to normal all over the
country. The curfew has been lifted in toto, and there
are no further arrests in connection with the
demonstrations. Almost all those detained in
connection with the September unrest have been
released. As of 7 November, the number stood at 2,836.
Only 91 now remain in custody. They have been found
to have been involved in unlawful activities, including
conspiracy to commit acts of terrorism. Action is being
taken against them in accordance with the law.
Ambassador Gambari has also informed the Council of
this.

A 54-member committee has been constituted to
draft a new constitution. A Minister was appointed on
8 October to liaise with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. The
appointment was welcomed by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
in the statement issued by Ambassador Gambari on her
behalf on 8 November in Singapore. She also
confirmed that the first meeting between her and that
Minister on 25 October 2007 was constructive. She has
stated that, in the interest of the nation, she stands
ready to cooperate with the Government in order to
make the process of dialogue a success.

Daw Aung San Suu Kyi met with the senior
members of her party on 9 November 2007. Following
the meeting, the spokesman of the National League for
Democracy issued a statement saying that Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi believed that the Government "was
serious and really willing to work for national
reconciliation". A United Nations press release issued
on 7 November 2007 affirmed that

"the Prime Minister reiterated his Government's
full support for Mr. Gambari's efforts on behalf
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and invited
him to return to Myanmar in continuation of the
good offices process".

This is in line with Myanmar's longstanding position
of cooperation with the United Nations, a cornerstone
of Myanmar's foreign policy.

We are cooperating not only with the Secretary-
General and Ambassador Gambari in connection with
the good offices role mandated by the General
Assembly, but also with the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, Professor Paulo
Sergio Pinheiro, who is currently in my country. He is
receiving the full cooperation of my Government.

It is disappointing that, notwithstanding the
positive developments, some continue to express
scepticism with regard to the commitment of the
leadership and the pace of the ongoing process. It must
be noted that the challenges facing Myanmar are
complex and delicate. We are promoting national unity
and, at the same time, a national reconciliation process,
and we are also laying the firm foundation for an
enduring democracy.

Ambassador Gambari himself has mentioned,
time and again, that the good offices role of the
Secretary-General is a process and not an event. It
must also be acknowledged, as confirmed by
Ambassador Gambari in his statement this afternoon,
that there is significant progress in Myanmar. The
meetings between the Minister for Relations, U Aung
Kyi, and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi have got off to a
good start, and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi herself is
optimistic about the process. Today, the nation can look
forward with high expectations to the birth of a new
era. Both parties to the national reconciliation process
have expressed satisfaction with the ongoing dialogue.
This is a time for encouragement and not for undue
outside pressure. The good offices role mandated by
the General Assembly should be allowed to play its
catalytic role in facilitating the national reconciliation
process. The Council should provide encouragement
and refrain from taking any action at this critical
juncture.

We thank the members of the Council who see
things as they are and welcome the positive
developments. We appreciate that.

There are situations in the world that threaten
international peace and security and deserve the
undivided attention of the Council. The situation in
Myanmar is certainly not among them. Myanmar does
not pose any threat to regional or international peace
and security.

