Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Special Representative Jan Kubis for his informative
briefing. I appreciate the dedication he has shown in
implementing his mandate and commend the continued
resilience of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his remarks.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express our deep condolences for the loss of United
Nations and other international staff members in the
attack on a restaurant in Kabul in January.

Afghanistan has achieved considerable progress in
its political, security and economic transition over the
past decade. The final year of transition is critical in
making that progress sustainable and irreversible. In
that vein, I would like to touch upon three main areas
where more effort is required to facilitate a peaceful
transition and lasting development in Afghanistan.

First, the presidential and provincial council
elections scheduled for 5 April will be a significant
milestone in Afghanistan's political transition. We
welcome the electoral preparations made by the Afghan
Government, including the mobilization of observers for
the presidential elections and the security assessment
of polling centres. Given the growing attacks from a
number of groups, including the Taliban, security for
electoral personnel and voters must be ensured. It is
also important that any incitement to defamation and
violence not be tolerated, with a view to safeguarding
the integrity of the electoral process.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
while we welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen
the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces
and police, the growing number of security incidents
demonstrates that grave security challenges remain.
In particular, we strongly condemn indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and humanitarian personnel. We
reiterate that all parties must take every feasible step to
comply with their obligations under international law.
The ongoing support of the international community in
strengthening Afghan security capacity and enhancing
cross-border cooperation are crucial to the improvement
of the overall security situation.

Thirdly, as noted at the special meeting of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board in Kabul
in January, the Afghan Government should continue
to implement the key commitments of the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. In particular, the
Government needs to reinforce its efforts to tackle
corruption and the illicit economy.

We also urge the Afghan Government to make
additional efforts in partnership with the United Nations
for the protection of women and children. The law on
the elimination of violence against women should be
fully implemented to end impunity for violence against
women. It is also necessary to support the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission in assuming
its full functions.

In conclusion, in facing the final year of transition,
the sustained support of the international community
remains essential for the improvement of predictability
and confidence in Afghanistan. We appreciate
UNAMA's contribution to stability and development in
Afghanistan and fully support resolution 2145 (2014),
on the extension of its mandate.
