Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to join
others in thanking the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. John Holmes, for his briefing on his recent mission
to Ethiopia, the Sudan and Somalia.

The humanitarian situation in those regions today
requires our utmost attention and priority. Inhabitants
and refugee populations are forced to cope with
exceedingly difficult conditions in an inhospitable
environment, the legacy of conflict and environmental
degradation. The scale of humanitarian needs in these
regions is overwhelming, with varying degrees of
calamity and challenge. Mr. Holmes's briefing also
highlights the varying degrees of success in local,
national and international efforts in these regions.

The humanitarian situation in Ethiopia,
particularly in the Ogaden region, remains a source of
concern. Civilian casualties caused by the
counterinsurgency are deeply regrettable and must be
avoided. Indeed, avoiding civilian casualties in the
process of seeking to stabilize the region should be a
priority. We welcome continued discussions between
the Secretariat and the Government of Ethiopia on
ways in which the United Nations could support the
Government in its efforts to provide relief to affected
populations.

In the Darfur region of the Sudan, we remain
concerned with the violence and displacement that
continue unabated. It is troubling that in October alone
more than 30,000 civilians were displaced by clashes
between the parties in Darfur, including among Darfur
movements themselves, and that humanitarian workers
continue to be assaulted, harassed and even killed.

We find it unacceptable that vehicles belonging to
the humanitarian community continue to be carjacked -
128 this year and 13 in November alone - and used,
directly or indirectly, to prolong the conflict. These
carjackings and other kinds of banditry have further
hampered humanitarian efforts for the people of
Darfur.

We urge all sides to cooperate with the United
Nations and other actors engaged in humanitarian
efforts in order to contribute to stability on the ground
at this perilous time. We note that the Joint
Communique between the Government of the Sudan
and the Secretariat has proved to be a good mechanism
for addressing humanitarian concerns, particularly
those which relate to bureaucratic issues. We support
continued constructive dialogue with the Sudanese
Government in order to ensure that the people of
Darfur receive the assistance they need.

We are also of the View that internally displaced
persons in Darfur should only return to their homes
voluntarily and under safe conditions. It is indeed
desirable that people be able to return to their places of
origin and resume their normal lives as soon as
possible.

With regard to Somalia, we deeply regret that that
country is facing one of its worst humanitarian crises
in years. The humanitarian situation is, in many ways,
worse than that in Darfur, due to the inability to reach
those in need with humanitarian supplies and aid. We
should strive to improve the situation through our aid
efforts to the extent possible. I echo appeals to all those
with guns, whether they be Government, insurgent or
Ethiopian troops, to cease indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks affecting civilians.

As we move forward with our humanitarian
efforts, we are all reminded that these conflicts are the
result of the inability to resolve political problems
without the use of force. As has been said before,
humanitarian assistance is like a Band-Aid over an
open wound. We need to heal the wound, and a Band-
Aid alone is insufficient to do so.

Finally, I should underline the importance of
observing the international principles of humanitarian
assistance, which include humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, as well as full respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity of States.

