Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report

(S/2011/360) and the Legal Counsel for her
presentation.

The report, in its analytical approach, reflects the
difficulty of the subject that we are addressing today.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia is indeed a complex
issue, as the Council has acknowledged, in particular in
its resolution 1976 (2011), adopted in April. A solution
to this problem requires responding to a variety of
social, economic and security challenges. The report of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
Mr. Jack Lang (S/2011/30, annex), was particularly
eloquent in that regard.

One of the most important proposals to fight the
piracy threat in the region was the establishment of an
extraterritorial Somali court functioning in Arusha. The
solution, long defended by my country, represents the
most practical way of swiftly addressing the situation
of impunity for piracy in the region through a Somali
solution - a solution that is flexible enough to help
attract international capacity support, capable of
responding to needs on the ground as they evolve, and
also able to be rapidly set up, since it could rely on
existing facilities.

It was with this in mind that the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General, in its resolution 1976
(2011), to report on the modalities for the
establishment of specialized Somali courts to try
suspected pirates, both in Somalia and in the region,
including an extraterritorial Somali specialized
anti-piracy court consistent with applicable human
rights law and with the participation of international
personnel and other international support.

The thorough report presented by the Office of
Legal Affairs deals with the many components of the
solution and identifies exhaustively the difficulties and
challenges ahead. We note in particular the complex
political context, the security situation in Somalia and
the need for stabilization in the country and, in
particular, for political will for such a solution to be
viable.

We encourage the Office of Legal Affairs to
pursue its efforts in that regard, in particular in its
contacts with the Transitional Federal Government in
the months to come so as to determine, in cooperation
with the Somali authorities, a feasible road map of
activities conducive to the establishment of a Somali
judicial solution to piracy, including through the
definition of the necessary legal framework.

We welcome also the positive response by the
Government of Tanzania to the proposal to establish an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court in
Arusha. Such a solution, which builds on existing
premises and capacity in the existing International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) premises, seems
to be a practical way forward. We note also the
convergence of this aim with the downsizing and
completion strategy of the ICTR, and the possibility of
using available space in courtrooms and facilities in the
near future, not losing sight, naturally, of the security
needs to be safeguarded.

We thank the ICTR for its cooperation and
positive approach and welcome further efforts in
evaluating concrete needs to accommodate this
solution. We commend also the active support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in training
in the area of judiciary activities and in prompting the
necessary debate over the future needs for such a
solution.

To fight the scourge of piracy, we should
concentrate our efforts on targeting those suspected of
financing and planning acts of piracy. They are the
most responsible for and the real masterminds of the
majority of piracy incidents off the coast of Somalia
and should therefore be the principal aim of our action.

As the report underlines, consultations with a
number of Member States, INTERPOL, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of
Political Affairs and the Monitoring Group of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) suggest that the identities of key
leaders of pirate networks and their location and
political connections are widely known. Many of them
are reportedly within Somalia. Therefore, any solution
that is aimed at prosecuting such persons cannot be
detached from the legal environment of where they
actually live.

That is why a solution must be based on Somali
law, even if initially through an extraterritorial court
justified by the current security situation in Somalia
and the need to ensure safe and swift investigation and
prosecution. Such a solution would, indeed, allow for
investigations to be conducted securely from the
outside but under a legal framework that would
facilitate the execution of the necessary procedural acts
in Somalia, including arrest warrants.

Finding a solution to counter impunity for piracy
has never been easy. Moreover, in the particular
situation of the Somali conflict and the security
environment in the country, the challenge is even more
complex. But we remain convinced that any solution to
piracy off the coast of Somalia can be found only
inland. The capacities to be established now are to
benefit this country, because only by supporting
Somalia to overcome this challenge can the
international community put an end to the scourge of
piracy in the region.

We strongly support the Office of Legal Affairs
and encourage it to pursue all necessary efforts with
that goal in mind.

