The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Indonesia, Japan, Lebanon,
Morocco, Nepal, Oman, the Sudan, the United Arab
Emirates and Viet Nam in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Thayeb
(Indonesia), Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Mr. Tadmoury
(Lebanon), Mr. Zahid (Morocco), Mr. Sharma
(Nepal), Mr. Al-Hassan (Oman), Mr. Erwa
(Sudan), Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) and
Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam), took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 2 October
2000 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 3 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation, under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
Hussein Hassouna, Ambassador, Permanent
Observer for the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to participate in the Council's
forthcoming discussions on the situation in the
Palestinian occupied territories."

That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2000/939.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Hussein Hassouna,

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 3 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour in my capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group of the United
Nations to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation to participate in the
discussion under rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council's discussion
on the item entitled 'The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question',
scheduled for Wednesday, 4 October 2000."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2000/951.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.


