I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the three African members of the Council, namely, South Africa, Tunisia and the Niger, and of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Allow me first of all to thank Mr. Josep Borrell, High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for his comprehensive and informative briefing. Cooperation between the United Nations and the European Union in the area of the maintenance of international peace and security, as envisaged in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, has for several years now been of great relevance. Many modern threats to international peace and security, such as terrorism, mass population displacement, climate change and health crises, such as the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, cannot be solved by individual States but require collective action by the international community. In response to those challenges, regional and subregional organizations play a crucial role in United Nations efforts to ensure the collective security and development of Member States by promoting better intergovernmental coordination. Indeed, the COVID-19 pandemic the world is experiencing, which is undermining the global health system and our common efforts to maintain international peace and security, is proof of the relevance and necessity of multilateralism and cooperation, not only among international organizations but also between them and their member States. The value of collective action and solidarity have emerged as the only way to deal with the pandemic and its irreversible impact on socioeconomic sectors. In Africa, that partnership manifests itself in the field of conflict resolution, in political, technical and financial support and in European Union field missions wherever a peace process or a peace and security operation is under way. Thus, in Mali and the Sahel region, it supports the objectives and missions of the United Nations, as defined in the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, through the action carried out by its training mission in Mali, in coordination with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. In Libya, the European Union is working closely with the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the African Union to help Libyan actors make real progress towards reconciliation through national dialogue and elections. We hope to see the new European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI contribute to the fight against violations of the arms embargo on Libya and against the smuggling of migrants in the Mediterranean Sea. We also see the operational advantages for the African Union to play a more active role in peace operations in a number of contexts, such as the African Union Military Observer Mission and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. To that end, the three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines fully support the use of United Nations assessed contributions for African Union peace support operations authorized by the Security Council. In the Middle East, the European Union is firmly committed to comprehensive peace and sustainable justice. Its essential contribution to the struggle and defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Iraq and Syria and to the Israeli- Palestinian peace process are worth mentioning. Cooperation between the United Nations and the European Union also covers other areas of mutual interest. South Africa, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the Niger recognize and support the role of both organizations in strengthening the work of the United Nations in support of development cooperation and the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. We also reaffirm our support for the European Union's actions to protect civilians in armed conflict, including its initiatives to protect women and children affected by armed conflict, its commitment to the prevention and protection of victims of sexual violence and its support for the crucial role played by women in all peace and security initiatives, in particular those aimed at preventing, resolving and mitigating the impact of conflict. The same applies to the partnership in the areas of justice, the rule of law and respect for international law, which are essential to promote the maintenance of peace, stability and development. Since the European Union-African Union summit in Abidjan, a new approach has been adopted that allows the two organizations to jointly define their priorities. It is from that innovative approach that the United Nations-African-Union-European Union trilateral group has emerged to address the dramatic situation of African migrants in detention centres in Libya. Regional organizations, such as the European Union, as well as the African Union, the Arab League, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to name but a few, serve as bridges linking global responses to the local contextual realities facing our regions. Regional and subregional organizations are also the surest avenues for building national capacities within States that meet international standards and obligations while respecting cultures and realities on the ground. We are all witnessing the benefits of the African Union's operational guidance and policy frameworks in areas such as security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and transitional justice programmes, which are essential to building and maintaining peace. The three African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commend the United Nations and the European Union for their continued support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action at a time when the integrity of the agreement is under threat. The European Union's role in the Iranian nuclear issue is a clear demonstration of strong commitment to collective security based on a solid multilateral architecture for non-proliferation and disarmament. In conclusion, the three African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly believe that, if we are to achieve a more peaceful and prosperous world for all countries and peoples, the United Nations must explore new partnerships with regional bodies, such as the Eurasian Economic Union, the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and deepen existing partnerships with the European Union, the African Union, CARICOM and ASEAN.
