Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to join other speakers in
expressing my gratitude to Mr. Daudi Mwakawago,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sierra Leone, for the comprehensive briefing he has
just given us on the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and on the preparations to
establish the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIOSIL). As that was his last briefing on
UNAMSIL, allow me to also commend the work of the
members of the Mission. In many respects - including
with regard to cooperation between United Nations
missions in the subregion - this has been a very
innovative peacekeeping mission.

The report, which we have had an opportunity to
review, and the briefing given to the Council are
sources of encouragement, and they make us optimistic
about the future of Sierra Leone. UNAMSIL's effective
completion of its peacekeeping mission means that,
after six years of operations and following the
Mission's withdrawal at the end of this month, Sierra
Leone is now on the path to post-conflict recovery.
Stable security conditions were established; progress
was made in rebuilding the security sector; State
authority was restored; and progress was made in
reasserting State control over the diamond industry.
There were also improvements in the area of human
rights. There was sustained economic recovery, and the
country established peaceful relations with its
neighbours.

The Mission's progressive and calibrated exit
strategy, which was guided by specific benchmarks,
has proved to be effective and successful. A phase in
the United Nations effort has thus come to a close,
namely, that of peacekeeping and emergency
assistance. The peacebuilding chapter has now begun.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
will have a prominent role in supporting the
Government, especially in areas such as economic
governance and building up sustainable national
capacity to resolve conflicts.

In that context, Argentina believes that a
coordinated, uniform and integrated approach to
peacebuilding and reconciliation is required in order to
address the specific needs of countries emerging from
conflict situations. The goal should be to achieve
recovery, reintegration and reconstruction on the way
to laying the foundations for sustainable development.
The new body that we have decided to set up - the
Peacebuilding Commission - will have a key role to
play in that regard. We hope that it will assist
UNIOSIL in its tasks.

Sierra Leone is at a crossroads. The tasks that the
country will have to accomplish in order to carry out
its programme of post-conflict peacebuilding will be as
difficult as the ones it had to complete during the
previous peacekeeping phase. It will be necessary to
address serious socio-economic problems - especially
facing up to the problem of widespread corruption,
providing education and health services to the
population and putting in place policies that ensure
sustained economic growth. It will also be necessary to
carefully follow up the preparations for the elections to
be held in 2007. We urge the international community
to renew its commitment to building on the
achievements made since UNAMSIL'S deployment, in
order that, together with the Government of Sierra
Leone, those achievements can be translated into
concrete benefits for the people of Sierra Leone.

