Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We commend the Italian
delegation for convening this debate and keeping the
issue of trafficking in persons in conflict situations
on the Council's agenda. The briefers have set the
right tone for the debate. Trafficking in persons is a
curse and disgrace of our times. It is a gross violation
of human rights and an extremely complex form of
organized crime.

In recent years, we have observed a significant
evolution of its forms, especially in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Numerous ongoing conflicts have
led to a rise in exploitation of civilians. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab,
the Lord's Resistance Army and other terrorist and
armed groups engage in human trafficking, forcing
victims into sexual slavery, sexual exploitation
and compulsory labour. Trafficking is therefore a
transnational threat that requires a transnational
response, including from the Security Council. In that
regard, it is encouraging that the Council has addressed
the issue in two recent resolutions, 2331 (2016),
adopted last year, and 2388 (2017), which we have just
adopted today. Ukraine also fully supports the political
declaration on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
adopted by the General Assembly in September as
resolution 72/1. We must build on that momentum.

People who have been trafficked should be treated
as victims of a crime and not penalized for their
forced involvement in the unlawful activities of the
perpetrators. Along with the provision of psychological,
social and medical support to victims, we see the
fight against impunity as one of the key priorities in
this area. For traffickers, human beings are merely a
commodity to be sold for profit. The channels they use
for trafficking humans can also be used for smuggling
arms or transporting terrorists, if there is a greater
profit to be made. Terrorist organizations often engage
in such activities in order to finance themselves, and the
international community should therefore consolidate
its efforts to block those channels, treating them as a
major threat to international security.

Ukraine is not immune to the problem of trafficking
in persons, but our Government is taking firm steps
to address the issue and has put the fight against this
horrendous problem at the top of its agenda. In the past
decade, Ukraine has made significant progress towards
establishing a viable nationwide counter-trafficking
response framework, and has set up a national referral
mechanism for identifying, assisting and protecting
victims oftrafficking. We have enacted a law combating
trafficking in human beings in Ukraine.

Our approach therefore places victims and their
human rights at the centre of our actions. We are
working to eradicate trafficking in human beings,
taking into account the gender aspects of the issue
and the best interests of children. In that regard, our
priorities are, first, identifying, protecting and assisting
Victims oftrafficking; stepping up our efforts to prevent
trafficking in human beings; increasing the prosecution
of traffickers; enhancing coodination and cooperation
among key actors and institutions; and increasing our
knowledge of emerging concerns related to all forms
of trafficking in human beings and improving the
effectiveness of our response to them.

Ukraine has acceded to the main international
legal instruments related to the fight against human
trafficking and, as I have already mentioned, has a
solid national legal framework for dealing with this
shocking phenomenon. I should note, however, that at
the moment not all ofthose instruments can be properly
implemented in the areas of my country that are not
under the Government's control. According to current
international data, the Russian aggression in Ukraine
has displaced 2 million people, who constitute a
population that is especially vulnerable to exploitation.
In the areas controlled by Russia and its proxies in the
Donbas region, the situation has become particularly
challenging. Displaced persons are often victims of
trafficking, and some Ukrainians have been subjected
to forced labor in the occupied territory, often under
torture. Their cases remain largely unaddressed,
however, owing to a lack both of safe access for and
proper attention from monitoring missions, especially
the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine, as well as UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. In that regard, I should
single out another issue of great importance for
Ukraine, which is ensuring that the perpetrators of
trafficking in persons are rendered accountable and
that they are prosecuted. The high level of impunity for
such crimes in the areas that the Government does not
control is unacceptable.

Trafficking in persons is a blatant violation of
human rights and an offence against human beings'
dignity and integrity. For our common fight against
this scourge to succeed, it requires the efforts of all
concerned. A long-term solution will come about only
through the international community's consistent
political commitment and joint action in eradicating
this evil, promoting justice and accountability and
protecting the victims.
I would like to thank the President once again for
convening today's important meeting.

