Mr. Al-Murad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my profound gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for responding to the request by the
States of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Islamic
and Arab Groups to hold this important meeting to
discuss the deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories that has resulted from Israel's acts of
aggression against the Gaza Strip.

We believe that the speedy response by the
Security Council in discussing these developments
represents a recognition of the seriousness of the
situation in the occupied territories and of its negative
impact on peace and security in the Middle East region
and in the world as a whole. We hope that the Council
will shoulder its responsibilities and take urgent
measures to put an end to Israeli acts of aggression
such as those that occurred recently, which killed
dozens of people and injured many more.

Israeli practices in the occupied territories have
reached a level of intensity that cannot be ignored.
Military incursions into the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip have become routine, and the death of civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, hardly
attracts the attention of the international community,
which should call on it to halt or prevent such
practices, which violate the norms of international law.
Israeli forces have in the past few days carried out
massacres in Beit Hanoun and in other parts of the
occupied territories, the most recent of which occurred
yesterday and in which nearly 20 martyrs were killed,
most of them women and children.

Even more surprising are the statements made by
Israeli officials to the effect that the recent massacre
was due to a technical failure. These acts of aggression
are perpetrated under the pretext of self-defence. That
is a flimsy justification, and the fact that some accept it
raises questions as to their credibility and neutrality. It
is unreasonable to attempt to justify Israeli practices in
the occupied territories - practices that violate Israel's
obligations under international humanitarian law - by
saying that they constitute acts of self-defence, because
those who are really defending themselves are the
Palestinian people, who are resisting the occupation.

Can civilized countries that champion and defend
human rights and are bound by the provisions of
relevant international agreements and conventions
accept such acts? The list includes extrajudicial
killings; the disproportionate and excessive use of
force; the demolition of homes; the destruction of
Palestinian institutions; and the continued construction
of the separation wall, despite the emphasis by the
International Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion
dated 9 July 2004, of the illegality of the wall given
that it contravenes internationally binding resolutions
by imposing restrictions on the mobility of Palestinians
in the occupied territories and in continuing the policy
of siege and collective punishment.

All those practices represent a flagrant and
explicit violation of the provisions of the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilians in Time of War. We believe that the
Contracting Parties and those who adhere to that
Convention are obligated to implement its provisions
and condemn those practices rather than ignore them.

Kuwait strongly condemns the military
aggression that is being carried out by the occupying
Israeli forces in the Gaza Strip, which has led to
massive destruction and heavy loss of life. We call for
an immediate end to this aggression against civilians
and for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Palestinian territory. We call also for the establishment
of an international mechanism to monitor the ceasefire
and urge the international community, as represented in
the Security Council, to shoulder its responsibility to
rein in the Israeli Government by taking immediate
measures to protect the civilian population. It must also
ensure that such practices do not recur, as that would
lead to further deterioration in the living conditions of
the Palestinian people and reduce the opportunities for
resuming the peace process, which is at a stalemate
because of Israel's intransigence, as it continues to
reject all initiatives to move the process forward and
persists in taking unilateral action.

The State of Kuwait emphasizes its firm and
principled stance in support of the struggle of the
Palestinian people to realize all of their legitimate
political rights and to establish an independent State on
their territory, with Al-Quds as its capital. I would like
to emphasize that as long as the Palestinian people
cannot enjoy their legitimate rights, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle
of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, there
can be no just, lasting and comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, which lies at the heart of the
Arab-Israeli struggle.

On that basis, we call on the international
community, including the Quartet, to pressure the
Israeli Government to persuade it that there can be no
military solution to this question and that the solution
lies in the resumption of negotiations and of the peace
process, leading to Israel's full withdrawal from the
occupied territories and the implementation of
internationally binding resolutions and of the
requirements set out in the road map.

The State of Kuwait has great hopes that the
Security Council will shoulder its responsibilities in
the maintenance of international peace and security and
adopt the draft resolution before it, because the
Council's continued failure to take measures against
Israel will undoubtedly give rise to the feeling that that
country has special immunity from international
condemnation of its crimes and that it is exempted or
excepted from compliance with international
conventions and agreements and international law. That
would encourage Israel to continue its aggression and
its inhuman practices, and thus the vicious circle of
violence and instability in the region would continue.

