Mr. Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, first, allow me to thank you and the
members of the Council for allowing us to make a
second statement. We felt duty-bound to do so, given
the comments by the representative of the United
States delegation. We believe that this is a typical
response from someone who makes unfounded
statements.

In this regard, my delegation calls upon the
representative of the United States to demonstrate the
supposed commitment of her country to anti-terrorism
and to respond unambiguously to the following
questions. One, is it true or not that the Government of
President George Bush protects in his country the well-
known international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
without complying with his obligation to try or to
extradite him? Secondly, is it true or not that for more
than 40 years, the Government of the United States has
provided active support to terrorist and mafia
organizations in Florida, which have planned,
organized and carried out countless terrorist acts
resulting in the deaths of thousands of Cubans?
Thirdly, can the American representative deny that, in
an odious, vengeful act, Washington has kept five
Cuban anti-terrorist fighters imprisoned without any
sentencing - anti-terrorist fighters who remain in
United States prisons?

As we have said, it is impossible to eliminate
international terrorism if, on the one hand, some
terrorist acts are condemned, while others are passed
over in silence or are tolerated, justified, or even
encouraged. We have said more than once in this
chamber that in Miami, funds are collected, with
complete impunity and with the complicity of the
United States authorities in order to carry out terrorist
acts against Cuba. The bank accounts financing that
terrorism operate openly in the United States.
Terrorists are recruited, stocks of weapons are gathered
and a safe haven is provided in this country to people
who finance, plan and carry out acts of terrorism
against the people of Cuba.

In the case of the terrorist Posada Carriles it is
clear that Washington is defending one of its pawns in
the criminal war against our people, in supporting
Latin American dictatorships in recent decades; in the
sinister operations of their dirty war in Central
America and in assassination attempts against political
leaders and heads of State whose views run counter to
the hegemonic interests of imperialism.

My country has struggled in an exemplary way
and has adopted effective measures against
international terrorism. Detailed information on these
efforts has been presented in our four extensive reports
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

The idea of destroying Cuba and its revolution is
an obsession that has lasted for more than 45 years. It
has guided and continues to guide United States policy
along a twisted path, full of lies, mistakes, failures and

bad choices. What the Government of the United States
proclaims to the world and what it does in relation to
Cuba is the most profound and most demoralizing
contradiction of its foreign policy.

I wish to add that neither terrorist acts, nor
genocidal blockades, nor military aggression could put
an end to the Cuban revolution, nor to our altruistic
efforts to attain social justice. We will not tire in our
struggle, and we will never give in. The cause of the
five Cuban individuals who are being unjustly held in
United States territory must be properly dealt with by
the United States authorities. We have offered
sufficient information in this regard as to the violations
that have been committed in this trial, in particular the
contradictions that we have found and denounced.

Therefore, we reiterate our rejection of the
explanations we have heard, and we maintain our
position of denouncing these inconsistencies in United
States policy.

