Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to congratulate the Colombian delegation
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish you every success in
your work, Sir. We would like also to thank the
friendly delegation of China for the outstanding
manner in which it presided over the Security Council
last month. We would also like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing this morning.

My delegation supports the statements made on
behalf of the Group of Arab States, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The negotiation process has now been at a
standstill for seven months, despite efforts by a great
number of parties to see them resumed. Many had
hoped to see the end of this long conflict within the
present year through the establishment of an
independent, sovereign Palestinian State, within the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.

Once again, the established goals have been
compromised by the situation on the ground, which is
characterized by the intransigence of Israeli policies
that flagrantly contravene international conventions
and go against the negotiating process. That process
must be based on trust, good faith and the will to
seriously address the issues that determine the fate of a
people that has been deprived of its most fundamental
rights and suffered the consequences of war and unrest
for many years.

The occupying Power, Israel, continues its acts of
colonization instead of promoting peace, despite the
international consensus as to the illegal nature of such
settlements. This complicates the situation and
jeopardizes the chances for achieving peace through
the two-State solution.

We are all aware of the fact that this colonization
reduces the size of the territory that has historically
been Palestinian and which is subject to negotiation,
thus affecting one of the most important elements of a
final settlement. Moreover, the expulsion of Palestinian
residents, the confiscation of their land and the
demolition of homes and eviction of their owners are
all in complete contravention of the relevant legal
norms, and the Fourth Geneva Convention in
particular, on which the Council has drawn in adopting
a great many resolutions that have been decisive with
regard to the settlements and the illegal acts
perpetrated by the occupying Power, Israel, against the
people of Palestine over many decades.

I would like to recall that more than 30 years ago,
in March 1980, when Tunisia was a non-permanent
member, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 465 (1980). In so doing, the Council adopted
a clear and sincere position on the colonization, and the
international community has to this day referred to that
resolution. However, there has been no real change on
the ground and no respect has been shown for
international law by this State Member of the United
Nations.

Tunisia views the Palestinian question as a matter
of national interest. We have always seen it as a
priority and consistently and robustly supported our
Palestinian brothers. Theirs is a just and legitimate
struggle for sovereignty, freedom and dignity.

Tunisia is proud of its glorious revolution of
14 January 2011, a revolution of dignity and freedom.
We reassert our commitment to international law and
our support for just causes throughout the world, first
and foremost the Palestinian question. We reaffirmed
our support to President Mahmoud Abbas when he
visited our country from 18 to 20 April during his
discussions with various leaders. This position was
reaffirmed by the people of Tunisia on many occasions
throughout and at the culmination of our revolution.

Tunisia calls for the occupying Power, Israel, to
bring an immediate end to its settlement activities and
to respect its commitments under international law,
international humanitarian law, the Road Map and the
peace process. Tunisia calls on all parties concerned,
and in particular the international Quartet, to assume
their responsibilities to respond to the intransigent
Israeli position of refusing to respect international law
and do what is needed to achieve a just peace.

We reject all measures aimed at altering the
religious, demographic and social identity of
Jerusalem. We thoroughly reject attacks on the holy
sites, arbitrary expulsions and the separation of
families. We condemn Israel's continued perpetration
of such acts and call on the international community to
adopt a strong position in order to put an end to these
actions and to prevent the imposition of a status quo.

The situation in Gaza, as has been said by many
people on many occasions, will only lead to greater
unrest. The latest acts of aggression against Palestinian
civilians underscore the danger of a new cycle of
violence, which would further increase the suffering of
the Palestinian people, whose wounds have not yet
healed following the aggression against Gaza of
December 2008 and January 2009.

Tunisia reiterates its position in support of
international protection for the Palestinian people. We
affirm the need for the occupying Power to respect its
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention. We
caution against any acts of violence, which would only
detract from peace efforts and destroy any hope for a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.

With regard to the Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
Tunisia reaffirms that comprehensive and just peace
with Israel can be achieved only through Israel's
complete withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories
to the line of 4 June 1967, including East Jerusalem,
the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and the territory still
occupied in southern Lebanon.

The establishment of an independent Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital, in keeping with
the Arab Peace Initiative, is important for the
realization of a fair solution to this issue based on the
resolutions of the United Nations. The people of the
Middle East have suffered far too long. We must bring
the occupation of Arab lands to an end in order to
promote the security and stability of the region. The
security of the region is linked to the security and
stability of the whole world. Indeed, global security is
linked to security in the Middle East.

We must not allow a return to tension,
confrontation and attacks against civilians. To prevent
such a scenario, we must adopt urgent, decisive
measures to address the underlying causes of these
tensions.

Given the extremely sensitive circumstances at
present, there is greater need than ever for us to save
the peace process so as to meet the aspirations of the
peoples of the region and support the just cause of the
right of the Palestinian people to freedom, dignity and
an independent State, on the basis of international will.

We call on all parties to go beyond mere rhetoric
and to undertake courageous initiatives that show
sincere and robust will to jointly assume the historic
responsibility to bring an end to this long-standing and
bitter conflict, which has taken a heavy toll on the
region in terms of both property and human life. This
conflict has deprived the people of the region of
stability and development and forced them to live in
constant fear.

Despite this situation, those who are calling for
peace, dialogue, negotiations, a settlement of the
conflict, and security and lasting peace in the region
remain strong in their hope for a change on the ground
leading to the two-State solution and an end to the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian-Arab territory. We
must support their voices.

