Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First, I join other
delegations in thanking Special Representative Mr.
Holkeri for his very comprehensive briefing. I also
commend him for his work in his first few months of
duty, and assure him of our continued support for his
very difficult and important work.

Secondly, I would like to state that Germany fully
subscribes to the statement that Italy will make shortly
on behalf of the European Union.

The opening session of direct dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade in Vienna this month returned
Kosovo to the headlines. This is because direct
dialogue is rightly seen as pointing the way towards a
solution to many of Kosovo's problems. We share the
regret of Mr. Holkeri that the Kosovo Government was
not represented there. We hope that this will change,
because there is simply no alternative to direct dialogue
right now. That is why Germany attaches high priority
to getting effective working groups for direct dialogue
under way as soon as possible.

Allow me to highlight some of the developments
described in the Secretary-General's report, as also
mentioned by the Special Representative.

The security situation in Kosovo is still very
worrying. It has been reported that continuing violence
in Kosovo has, sadly, again led to the deaths of
innocent civilians and police. I repeat what has been
said in the Council on many previous occasions: this
violence is absolutely unacceptable. The horrible
experience of the Kosovars in the Kosovo crisis and the
atrocities committed against the Kosovo Albanian
majority population in the past cannot in any way
justify violence against the Kosovo minority
population today. Any form of violent revenge and
ethnic hatred is absolutely unacceptable.

This problem is directly linked to the benchmarks
and the question of the future of Kosovo. Unless this
violence ends and Kosovars of all ethnic communities
feel secure in Kosovo, it will not be possible for
displaced persons to return to their homes. The secure
return of displaced persons is one of the benchmarks
that must be met before progress can be made towards
solving the status issue.

We call upon politicians in Kosovo to actively
work against that climate of hatred, to condemn in
unmistakable terms violence when it occurs and also to
encourage the best possible cooperation of the various
ethnic communities with the police in solving violent
crimes. It is disturbing that, as pointed out in the report
and by Mr. Holkeri, none of the criminals responsible
for the murders recently committed have been
identified.

In addition to an end to the violence, a successful
returns policy will require an effective political
decentralization plan. The international community
must give high priority to elaborating such a plan in the
next several months, a plan that provides for the needs
of all communities. This will help build confidence and
ease the negotiations between the parties.

On the other hand, the illegal parallel
Government structures, which, as pointed out in the
Secretary-General's report and by Mr. Holkeri, are
supported by Belgrade, are still in place and are a
significant hindrance to progress. We fully share Mr.
Holkeri's remarks about parallel courts. These parallel
structures must be eliminated immediately.

On the topic of benchmarks, we feel that it will
be extremely helpful to have all benchmarks fully
operationalized into a more detailed work plan. This
will help focus work in Kosovo on what needs to be
achieved, and will give the international community a
clearer basis on which to judge progress. We hope that
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo institutions will be
able to finish work on the operationalized benchmarks
as swiftly as possible. These benchmarks should be
closely linked with the measures that need to be taken
by the parties in the region to advance their declared
ambitions to move forward in the European
stabilization and association process.

I would like to make some remarks on the legal
difficulties that have arisen in connection with
privatizing socially owned enterprises in Kosovo, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report. The board
of the privatization agency in Kosovo, the Kosovo
Trust Agency, concluded that legal uncertainties
prevented further progress on privatization of socially
owned firms in Kosovo. It seems that the staff of the
Agency - and, indeed, of all UNMIK Pillar IV - are
not presently covered by United Nations immunity.
Therefore, individual staff members may be exposing
themselves, as well as the agency, to unacceptable
liability. This problem needs to be resolved quickly. In
our understanding, UNMIK Pillar IV, including the
Kosovo Trust Agency, is an integral part of the United
Nations mission in Kosovo, just as the other Pillars are.
We hope that the United Nations and its legal
department will find a solution to this problem soon.

Rapid privatization is - and we agree with what
Mr. Holkeri said on this - essential for making the
best economic use of the assets that Kosovo possesses,
and economic progress is essential to creating social
and political stability. Therefore, it is necessary for
privatization not to lag behind, as it does now, but to
make rapid progress.

Let me close by returning to the topic of direct
dialogue. We hope to see the working group sessions in
all areas get under way next month. In addition to
being an essential benchmark, direct dialogue is the
single best way to build trust between the parties.

The groups of experts will address problems such
as shortages of electricity and difficulties in travelling
across borders that if eased will make a real difference
in the lives of ordinary people. I was glad to hear from
Mr. Holkeri that progress is being made in this regard.
However, we understand that there is still great
mistrust between the parties, which may make them
hesitate. We believe they must focus on the many
positive achievements they can make for their people
by now talking to each other.

In conclusion, Germany stands ready to help
facilitate this dialogue, but it is, of course, up to the
parties themselves to make it work.

