Mr. Simonovie: The ninth report of the United
Nations Human Rights Mission in Ukraine, whose
mandate has just been renewed for a further three
months, was released on 2 March. It covers the period
from 1 December 2014 to 15 February 2015. Today I
will highlight some of the report's key findings and
provide an update on developments since the cut-off
date.

Although since the 12 February Minsk agreement
the ceasefire in Ukraine has held up in general, with a
few isolated incidents of small arms and mortar shelling
reported, the human rights situation, especially in
eastern Ukraine, has remained alarming. Particularly
in January and the first half of February, the stark
escalation of hostilities led to increased violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, with a sharp spike in casualties and
devastating consequences for the local population.
From mid-April 2014 until 15 February 2015, at least
5,665 people were documented as killed; by 5 March,
the figure increased to at least 5,820. Given that
full reports on casualties, especially near Donetsk
airport and in the Debaltseve area, are still pending,
we estimate that the total number of people killed in
eastern Ukraine has now passed the 6,000 mark.

Allow me to highlight a number of disturbing
trends in the human rights situation in Ukraine.

First, during the reporting period there was an
increased use of sophisticated and heavy weaponry,
including multiple launch rocket systems. Those types
of weapons were used during the 24 January attack
on Mariupol, which killed 31 people, including two
children. In the east up until the ceasefire of 15 February,
and in the Debaltseve area beyond the ceasefire,
there was continued indiscriminate shelling of highly
populated civilian areas, both in areas controlled by the
Government and those controlled by the armed groups,
with an escalating toll on civilians. The deliberate
targeting of civilians may constitute a war crime and
could amount to a crime against humanity if widespread
or systematic. Attacks caused heavy damage to civilian
property and vital infrastructure. By 4 March, the
number of residential buildings destroyed during the
conflict period on the territory of the Donetsk region
exceeded 9,500. Approximately 150,000 local residents
of the Donetsk region alone still remain without water,
gas and electricity. Hospitals, schools and kindergartens
have been shelled in both Government-controlled and
armed-groups controlled areas, limiting access to
health care and education. The situation is aggravated
by the alleged continued inflow of heavy weaponry and
foreign fighters from the Russian Federation.

Secondly, many civilians have remained trapped
in the conflict zone, with ongoing and severe
restrictions on the freedom of movement. According
to the Government, the situation of approximately
4,000 people remaining in 21 facilities of institutional
care in the areas under the control of armed groups is
particularly precarious. The lack of vital medicines and
food is also of major concern. The armed groups have
on several occasions stated that they will not allow
the evacuation of people from social care institutions,
such as older persons or the bedridden. Nothing has
been done to evacuate prisoners either. It is essential
that these most vulnerable groups be evacuated as a
matter of priority, and as part of an obligation under
international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, there is a clear indication that the divide
in Ukrainian society continues to deepen. With every
new attack on the civilian population, with every new
case of arbitrary detention and torture, with every
new deprivation of basic services to those remaining
in the territory under the control of the armed groups,
with every new displacement, the divide deepens. A
terrorist attack in Kharkiv, which killed four people by
an explosive device on 22 February, and 14 attacks in
Odesa since December, targeting pro-Maidan offices
and supporters, are further contributing to the negative
trend. At the same time, there is growing dissatisfaction
among the Ukrainian population over the fighting in the
east, and there have been a series of anti-mobilization
protests around the country.

Fourthly, the humanitarian situation is increasingly
affecting the social and economic rights ofthe population
as a whole. The enormous influx ofregistered internally
displaced persons (IDPs), as already reported by Office
for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs, is placing
an ever-heavier burden on the Government and on the
Ukrainian people. Just this week, the Parliament passed
a bill reducing already low pensions in order to satisfy
conditions for the much-needed International Monetary
Fund loan and to allow social payments to IDPs. It
is clear that the price of the conflict rises for every
individual Ukrainian, as the cost of living continues to
soar, the threat of potential gas and heating shortages
becomes more likely and the value of the hryvnia
declines, along with the standard of living. Ultimately,
the much-needed and long-promised reforms are
severely jeopardized as they are moved further and
further down the Government's list of priorities.

Against that backdrop, it remains absolutely crucial
that the Government show resolve and commitment
to fight corruption and to render impartial justice
and accountability for all human rights violations,
regardless of the perpetrators or the victims. Impartial
accountability can help deter future human rights
violations, preserve the confidence of the people in
their Government and contribute to the healing of
psychological wounds. In that context, the judgement
rendered by the regional administrative court on
19 February, which found that the State emergency
service was responsible for inaction during 2 May
disorders in Odesa, is a welcome step in the right
direction. Nonetheless, progress in the investigations
into human rights violations related to the Maidan
events remains slow. After one year, only four persons
have been arrested, two of whom are being tried
currently. However, as yet no one has been convicted
for the violence that led to the deaths of 117 people.

Impartial justice and accountability must also apply
to those who have committed violations in the context of
the hostilities. While the initiation of some 49 criminal
proceedings against servicemen ofthe Ukrainian armed
forces and National Guard for human rights violations
was a welcome development, it appears that most cases
were not pursued due to disputes over the official status
of those presumably involved. In the same vein, it is
also very alarming that the key defence witness in the
case against former mayor of Slovyansk Nelya Shtepa
was abducted and found murdered on 30 January, which
effectively intimidates other witnesses from coming
forward.

At the same time, the armed groups continue to
violate the most basic human rights of the population
trapped in the areas under their control. The Human
Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine continues
to document cases of torture, ill-treatment and
disappearances. On 22 January, a dozen Ukrainian
servicemen captured at Donetsk airport were forced
to march through the streets of Donetsk. Several were
reportedly physically assaulted by members of the
armed groups and by onlookers. It is recalled that such
degrading and humiliating treatment of prisoners may
constitute a war crime.

The situation in the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea is also deteriorating, with systematic human
rights violations affecting mostly Crimean Tatars and
those who opposed the March referendum. The Deputy
Chairman of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, Mr. Ahtem
Ciygoz, was placed in pre-trial detention for his
participation in a pro-Ukrainian protest a year ago. That
is in addition to the continued ban against the historical
leaders of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, Mr. Mustafa
Jemilev and current Chair Refat Chubarov, to return to
Crimea. According to Mr. Chubarov, there are serious
allegations of attempts to break the autonomy of the
Crimean Tatar Mejlis and replace its leadership with
pro-Russian candidates. The pressure on Crimean Tatar
media also continues.

It is absolutely necessary that all sides fully respect
the 12 February Minsk agreement. It is the only way out
of a crisis, which is not only national but also regional
and, increasingly, global. I especially welcome the
all-for-all formula for the release of detainees. I have
advocated for the formula with representatives of the
armed groups, the Government and the facilitators.
However, so far it has not been properly applied.
Piecemeal prisoner exchanges, which have taken place
so far, stimulate arbitrary arrests in order to have more
prisoners to exchange. The full implementation of
an all-for-all release formula would be an important
confidence-building measure and a real test of the
commitment of parties to end the conflict. I therefore call
on both parties to implement it fully and immediately.

At the same time, the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko remains in solitary confinement in a
pre-trial detention centre in the Russian Federation.
It is highly important to ensure that Ms. Savchenko
is released from custody immediately. She should
either be released under the all-for-all formula or on
humanitarian grounds, because of her health conditions.

In conclusion, the human rights situation in
Ukraine remains grave. There are fears that hostilities
may resume, and concerns about a military campaign
on Mariupol, That could entail many more casualties,
significantly escalate the conflict and lead to its
further internationalization. After more than 6,000
killed, 1 million displaced, hundreds of thousands of
refugees, and continuing violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, the conflict has
still not reached the point of no return. However, the
window of opportunity seems to be rapidly closing. We
simply cannot afford to let that happen.

