Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for his briefing as well as the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo for their
statements.

As the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2012/8l8)
points out, and as Mr. Zarif has just noted, we can be
pleased with several developments that have taken
place since last we met. I will mention three of them.

First, the end of the supervised independence of
Kosovo on 10 September has opened a new chapter in
history. This represents an opportunity that should be
seized so as to consolidate the reality of a sovereign,
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo that is respectful
ofhuman rights and living in peace with its neighbours.
To that end, Pristina must convince the Kosovo Serbs
that Serbs and Albanians have a common future and
shared interests both in the north and in the south. They
must give concrete assurances with respect to security
and decentralization to Serbs in the north of Kosovo,
exploring all the possibilities offered by the Ahtisaari
plan.

We view the establishment by the Kosovar
authorities of the Mitrovica North administrative
office as a step in the right direction, but we have to
go even further in terms of political vision and public
investment. Belgrade, for its part, must also contribute
to the settlement of the issue, including by finding a
solution to the question of illegal parallel structures
in the north by eliminating security structures and
integrating socioeconomic ones into the legal Kosovar
framework.

We support the integration of Kosovo into the
international community and its recognition by a
growing number of States. The fact that the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development has decided
to welcome Kosovo as a member will promote its
economic and social development as well as regional
stability.

Secondly, the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo
held under the auspices of the European Union (EU) has
resumed at a political level, that ofheads ofGovernment.
That is an important gesture that confirms the will
of both sides to normalize their relations within the
framework of European rapprochement. We support,
of course, the efforts made by Mrs. Ashton towards a
comprehensive settlement of the issue that would allow
both countries to fully devote their energies and their
efforts to their European prospects.

We are encouraged by the progress made with
respect to integrated border management. We hope that
the agreements already reached will be implemented
in good faith and that this new dynamic will make it
possible to achieve progress in new areas for the greater
benefit of the citizens of both countries.

Thirdly, the security situation remains calm despite
a few incidents. We are closely following the situation
in the north of Mitrovica. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) office
must demonstrate the required neutrality.

As the report of the Secretary-General underlines,
it is crucial to strengthen the human rights of minorities
in Kosovo, protect its religious and cultural heritage,
and ensure the return of the 18,000 internally displaced
persons and refugees in conditions conducive to
security and reintegration. Respect for human rights is
crucial for the stability of Kosovo.

We would recall also that the personnel of the Kosovo
Force and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) are responsible for ensuring freedom
of movement in Kosovo, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). Any obstacle to their own freedom of
movement is unacceptable.

The prospect of European integration should make
it possible for Serbia and Kosovo to put conflict behind
them once and for all. The future of both countries is
the European Union.

We hope that when the time comes we can reach
the stage of membership negotiations with Serbia, once
the conditions set out by the European Union have
been fulfilled. France supports the negotiation of a
stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo
once the preconditions laid down by the European
Commission have been met. In that respect, we
encourage the Government of Kosovo to undertake the
necessary reforms in the areas of the rule of law, public
administration and the business environment.

We support the increased commitment of the
European Union to Kosovo. It is crucial that the
authorities of that country cooperate with the EULEX
mission, especially in investigating allegations of organ
trafficking. We are pleased that the EULEX report
annexed to that of the Secretary-General provides the
Security Council with information on the progress
achieved, and we welcome Mr. Williamson's interaction
with the highest authorities ofSerbia, It is also important
for the Government of Kosovo to work closely with the
European Union Special Representative and with the
head of the European Union Office.

I should like to conclude by thanking the Special
Representative and United Nations agencies in Kosovo
for their efforts. We invite UNMIK to continue to
cooperate with the other international organizations
that are present there and to adapt its efforts to the
evolving situation.

