Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): First of
all, I should like to stress that Luxembourg fully supports
the statement made this morning by the Presidency of the
European Union. Barely a week ago, we met here to hear
the Secretary-General announce the results of the popular
consultation held on 30 August under the auspices of the
United Nations in East Timor.

We were filled with hope that, after 20 years of
conflict, the people of East Timor would finally be able
to determine their own future. We were confident that, in
accordance with the Agreements signed, the Government
of Indonesia would assume its responsibilities, maintain
order and security in East Timor and thus allow the freely
expressed will of the East Timorese people to be
translated into reality.

Those hopes have been dashed in recent days. The
reports that have reached us describe an eruption of
violence, massacres of the civilian population and
uncontrolled militias sacking the Territory. The
Indonesian Government, which had accepted the
responsibility of guaranteeing the security of the
population and respect for law before and after the
popular consultation, has clearly failed to shoulder that
responsibility. The situation has spun out of its control
and the steps taken have been ineffective.

Like many other delegations that have spoken today
in this Chamber, we call on the Government of Indonesia
to accept without delay the offer that has been made to
help it to comply with the commitments it has undertaken
and to give its consent to the dispatch of an international
force under United Nations auspices. It is high time for
the Indonesian Government to agree to cooperate with the
international community to halt the violence in East

 

Timor, restore peace and security and allow displaced
persons to return in security to their homes.

The humanitarian situation on the ground is daily
deteriorating. If we wish to avoid a major catastrophe, it is
essential not only that the international humanitarian
organizations obtain access to refugees and displaced
persons in Eastern and Western Timor, but that they also
receive security guarantees. We call on the Indonesian
Government to do everything possible to that end.

Finally, I pay tribute to the courage and determination
of the personnel of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor. Luxembourg hopes that conditions conducive to the
complete fulfilment of its mandate will soon be restored.

