Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): As
outgoing Chair, I am pleased to brief the members of
the Council on the activities of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued the
efforts of previous Chairs to further promote the
transparency and efficiency of the Council's work,
including the implementation of presidential note
S/2006/507.

This year, the Informal Working Group held five
meetings in which the members considered issues such
as streamlining summary statements, redistributing
items on the Security Council's yearly programme, and
ways of enhancing interaction between the Informal
Working Group and the wider membership. At the
beginning and in the later part of the year, the Informal
Working Group considered the issue of streamlining
summary statements of matters of which the Council is
seized. In that context, we examined possible means
for reducing the items on the list under the Council's
active consideration. This is not an easy task, since it
has to be carried out with extreme care vis-a-vis the
countries concerned. This ongoing process will be
addressed in January 2012.

In addition, the Informal Working Group focused
on redistribution of reporting and mandate cycles in
order to create a more even distribution of the
Council's annual workload. It is clearly apparent, for
example, that June, July and December are more
densely scheduled than other months. We are of the
view that this exercise will be an important
contribution to improving the Council's working
methods. The Informal Working Group was briefed by
the Council's secretariat branch and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the administrative,
financial and political implications of redistributing the
mandate cycles of peacekeeping missions.

Taking note of the views expressed, we believe
that the exercise will take 18 months to implement,
with close coordination among Security Council
members, Member States and the Secretariat. As the
outgoing Chair, we warmly invite the incoming Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions to build upon the work
initiated in that regard.

With a View to improving and, in a way,
demystifying some practices of the Security Council,
we organized what we called a "special meeting" of the
Informal Working Group, at which the Security
Council Secretariat Branch briefed members on the
unknown or misunderstood working methods of the
Security Council. We also had a presentation by the
Security Council Practices and Charter Research
Branch on the Security Council repertoire website. The
repertoire is a record of the proceedings of the Security
Council that serves as an institutional memory of the
evolving practice of the Council on constitutional and
procedural matters.

As I mentioned previously, one of the principal
issues that the Informal Working Group has been
engaged in is the issue of further increasing the
transparency of the Council's work. Thus, together
with Japan, the preceding Informal Working Group
Chair, we organized a workshop on working methods
for the general United Nations membership, where we
introduced the new 507 President's note (S/2010/507),
comparing it to the old 507 note (S/2006/507). Also, as
Chair of the Informal Working Group, I participated in
the meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly, at which we
shared the Council's experience and good practices in
the domain of documentation, working methods and
organization of work, with a focus on summary
statement streamlining.

Based on the past year's experience, I would like
to conclude by highlighting two recommendations for
the future activities of the Working Group. Bosnia and
8
Herzegovina believes that, in the future, the primary
focus should be on the following areas.

First, taking note of the increased number of calls
for interaction between the Informal Working Group
and the wider membership, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has suggested that the Group hold regular briefings on
Security Council working methods for non-members of
the Council. With pleasure, I can confirm the members'
dedication to more transparent relations with the wider
membership. Therefore, we intend to organize the first
such briefing in a week's time. We are convinced that
such interaction is to the common benefit.

Secondly, it is of vital importance that the
redistribution of reporting and mandate cycles initiated
by Bosnia and Herzegovina remain a priority on the
agenda of the Working Group next year.

Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to all
members of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions for
their constructive approach and cooperative spirit.

