The President: At the outset, I should like to
explain how we shall conduct our consideration of the
Afghanistan issue today. First, we shall hold this
meeting, which will include a question-and-answer
session. Because our Japanese colleague has come
from Tokyo to provide us with information, I think the
Council should have an opportunity to engage in
dialogue with him and the other briefers after the
briefing. Following that, the Council will hold a private
meeting, because I understand that one of the briefers
has a confidential document, which will be distributed
and discussed then. If that is agreeable to the Council,
we shall so proceed.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 February 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of Japan to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I am writing in reference to the open
meeting of the Security Council on the item
entitled 'The situation in Afghanistan', which is
to take place on Monday, 24 February 2003. I
have the honour to request that, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council,
Mr. Mutsuyoshi Nishimura, Ambassador of Japan
in charge of Afghan Aid Coordination, be
permitted to participate in the above meeting and
supply the Security Council with relevant
information."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/209.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Nishimura.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Nishimura to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should also like to inform the Council that I
have received a letter dated 20 February 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that
Ambassador Harald Braun, Special
Representative of the German Government for the
training of the Afghan police force, be allowed to
participate in the meeting of the Security Council
on the situation in Afghanistan on Monday, 24
February 2003, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, and
that he be granted the right to brief the Council."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/200.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Braun.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Braun to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

The Security Council will hear three briefings:
first by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, followed by
Mr. Mutsuyoshi Nishimura and then by Mr. Harald
Braun. After the three briefings, I shall open the floor
to Council members who may wish to address
questions to Mr. Nishimura and to the other two
briefers, as Mr. Nishimura will not be joining us in the
private meeting of the Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Guehenno.


