Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to join other
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for the able
and fair manner in which you have presided over the
Security Council in the month of April. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his briefing today and for the work he and his team
have done towards bringing about an end to the crisis
in Syria and finding a long-term, sustainable political
solution in the country.

South Africa welcomes the continued engagement
between Special Envoy Pedersen and both the Syrian
Government and opposition groups in pursuing his
and the international community's objective towards
establishing credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governance, setting a process for drafting a new
constitution and the conduct of free and fair elections.

Such engagement is essential to ensuring that
any political agreement reached between the parties
benefits from the positions and views of all and reflects
the will of the Syrian people.

In that regard, my delegation would like to reiterate
that the only sustainable answer to the situation
remains the realization of a political solution through
an inclusive Syrian-owned and Syrian-led process.

In order to achieve this, the constitutional committee
must be established without delay. We welcome the
Special Envoy's efforts to finalize the composition
of a credible and balanced committee and its rules of
procedure. In that regard, South Africa also calls upon
all parties to maintain their commitment to ensuring a
30 per cent representation of women in the Committee,
as it is well established that women offer a unique
perspective in matters of peace and reconciliation that
cannot and should not be ignored.

My delegation has taken note of the recent meeting
of the Astana guarantors in Nur-Sultan and their
commitment to the United Nations-facilitated political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which
contains all the provisions necessary for ensuring a
viable political solution for Syria. We hope that these
discussions will aid in achieving the goals set by the
Special Envoy for achieving a political settlement
in Syria.

It should be noted that some parties have taken
advantage of the situation in Syria to advance their own
interests and lay claim to territory occupied illegally.
This cannot be allowed, and the United Nations, and
its Security Council in particular, must honour its
responsibilities and condemn such actions.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
international community must support a political
solution to the situation in Syria as a matter of urgency
as well as support the United Nations and Special
Envoy Pedersen as the main channel for negotiations
and mediation.

