The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.

I warmly welcome the President of the Swiss
Confederation in his capacity as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and thank him for his extensive briefing
earlier today.

The body that he is chairing is the largest
regional security organization partnering with the
United Nations. It is unique in its comprehensive
approach to security and has respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms at its core, in which
participating States engage in open debate on pressing
security challenges and constantly review the state of
implementation of their commitments.

Let me express Lithuania's appreciation for the
Swiss priorities of the OSCE chairmanship, which
focus on fostering security and stability, implementing
OSCE commitments and strengthening the OSCE's
capacity to act. The OSCE remains a strong United
Nations partner under Chapter VIII of the Charter.

We look forward to the Swiss OSCE chairmanship's
initiative to organize a conference devoted to
strengthening cooperation between the OSCE, the
United Nations and other international organizations,
with a particular focus on the human dimension.

Important cases of cooperation between the United
Nations, the OSCE, and the European Union include
their coordinated response and actions during the crisis
in Kyrgyzstan in 2010 and a contribution to security
and stability in Kosovo.

The international discussions in Geneva to address
the consequences of the 2008 war in Georgia offer a
good example of OSCE-United Nations cooperation
in the field of mediation. Those efforts could be
strengthened by the OSCE and the United Nations
presence on the ground throughout Georgia.

Dramatic events are evolving before our eyes in
Ukraine, and the most recent breathtaking democratic
changes are an impressive reminder that it is not
possible to ignore people's striving for freedom,
democracy, human dignity and justice. Political power
that disregards the will and expectations of the vast
majority of its citizens and is concerned only with its
own egoistic interests loses democratic legitimacy and
the trust of its people and is not sustainable.

Lithuania welcomes the ongoing democratic
change in Ukraine and the determined leadership of the
Supreme Rada in that historic process. We hope that it
will open the door to a quick and peaceful resolution
of the political crisis, which was created by the former
Government and President Yanukovych. We welcome
the adoption of new decrees and other decisions in Kyiv
in the past few days, which seek to introduce a new
constitutional framework, consolidate the foundations
for a comprehensive legal reform and resolve the
remaining issues of selective justice.

Lithuania remains firmly committed to supporting
Ukraine's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, as well as Ukraine's European integration.
We believe that the OSCE, and in particular the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, have an
important role to play in the process of preparing for
new elections in Ukraine.

The Vilnius OSCE Ministerial Council of 2011
took a decision on the conflict cycle, equipping the
OSCE with the necessary tools for the prevention of,
and response to, conflicts. That asset should not be
wasted. The political will to use those tools remains
essential.

We welcome the OSCE's focus on addressing
transnational threats. Cybersecurity threats have been
on the rise, and we welcome the pioneering work by the
OSCE on cybersecurity confidence-building measures
at the regional level and would support a discussion on
the possibility of applying that approach beyond the
OSCE.

The OSCE is also at the forefront ofimplementing the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, especially in assisting participating
States in the development of relevant legislation. The
OSCE should further facilitate cooperation between
Central Asian States and Afghanistan, especially in
the area of border management, including through the
OSCE Border Management Staff College in Dushanbe.

Energy security has direct linkages to the
independence of economic and political action in
international affairs and has a direct effect on national
security, development and prosperity. We note the
complementary role of the OSCE in promoting energy
security dialogue in line with closer cooperation with
the United Nations.

Emerging regional challenges related to the use
of natural resources, including water, also merit the
OSCE's attention. We would appreciate the views of
the Chairperson-in-Office on how the OSCE and the
United Nations could best address issues related to
inland water resources in Central Asia.

There cannot be lasting security and stability
without respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Lithuania consistently supports the work
of the independent OSCE institutions relating to the
implementation of OSCE human rights commitments.
One particular area where the OSCE needs to maintain
continuous engagement is freedom of expression and
media freedom. Also, the implementation of resolution
1738 (2006), on the protection of journalists, remains
essential.

Women's full and equal exercise of their human
rights is essential to achieving a more peaceful, secure
and democratic OSCE zone. The appointment of gender
focal points in field operations and departments of the
OSCE and the implementation of the OSCE Action Plan
for the Promotion of Gender Equality are essential. The
work of OSCE field presences in Central Asia across all
three dimensions deserves special attention, especially
in the area of democratic reforms and human rights.
Those activities are relevant and should be continued.

To conclude, let me assure the Swiss Chairperson-in-
Office of Lithuania's continued support for his work and
the priorities of his chairmanship. Lithuania will also
continue supporting the OSCE role in the realization
of a free, democratic, common and indivisible security
community, in line with the principles and commitments
enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Burkhalter to respond to the
comments and questions raised.

