The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire for the kind words he
addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea.

In the historic Declaration of the Millennium
Summit, the world's leaders, meeting here in New
York, affirmed their willingness to work to establish a
climate of peace and security, the fundamental basis for
a partnership for sustainable development. Today, we
must recognize that the international community seems
to demonstrate a certain impotence in the face of
numerous human tragedies and the destruction of
socio-economic infrastructures, the consequences of
the persistence of many flashpoints of tension in the
world.

For more than a decade, West Africa, the theatre
of several conflicts, has been a subject of great concern
because of its disturbing number of refugees and
displaced persons. The causes of this instability have
been diagnosed many times, but the remedies have not
always been applied to restore peace and calm for the
people of the subregion. Today, the constantly growing
number of unemployed youth and the consequences of
conflicts are fertile ground for the development of this
phenomenon. The use of child soldiers also results
from these deep-seated causes.

Faced with this new threat, what remedies should
be proposed to eradicate this scourge? Undoubtedly,
the domestic conflicts in Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and recently in cote d'Ivoire have had
deplorable consequences, both for those countries and
for neighbouring States, jeopardizing the subregional
balance.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and the increasingly frequent recourse to mercenarism
are unlikely to enhance the restoration of peace and
security in West Africa. The Ivorian crisis is an
unfortunate illustration. While it is recognized that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons is not in
itself the cause of these armed conflicts, it has
nonetheless been established that it helps to exacerbate
them. The joining of such proliferation with the use of
mercenaries today constitutes factors of destabilization
and insecurity in West Africa.

The holding of this interactive workshop has been
to the point, because it has undoubtedly enabled us to
measure the impact of these scourges and to provide
the necessary incentives to eradicate them. In other
words, we must proceed to an in-depth consideration of
the mechanisms that underlie these phenomena, and we
must adopt appropriate measures with a view to both
prevention and elimination.

The conclusions of previous studies and debates
on these issues confirm the gravity of the danger and
the scope of the damage caused in West Africa in
particular. It is, in fact, deplorable to note that 500
million light weapons are circulating freely in the
world - 30 million of them in Africa and 8 million in
West Africa. Even worse, 60 per cent of these weapons
are held by civilians, of whom approximately 500,000
die each year; 80 per cent of these victims are women
and children.

That somber tableau surely explains the feeling
that, in Africa, guns are not only weapons of choice,
but weapons with devastating effects. My delegation is
concerned by the uncontrolled and abusive use of small
arms and light weapons, which affect the public
resources of our States - already very limited - and
the implementation of development programmes. We
are of the view that this form of governance has as its
corollary the flight of foreign capital and
disinvestment.

Moreover, we must recognize that the moderate
cost of these weapons and the fact that they are easy to
use and to acquire explain their possession by
everyone, including children, who are often recruited
against their will for armed conflicts. Guinea
subscribes to the view that these conditions
dangerously compromise the implementation of peace
agreements in the subregion, whose failure is often
attributed solely to the absence of political will. How,
in fact, can those agreements be effectively
implemented when the subregion is more concerned
with its safety and stability? Taking that factor into
account is a matter of moral fairness.

We admit that, besides the weak capacity of
security forces, unemployment and poverty promote
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In
that regard, several initiatives have been undertaken, in
vain, to eradicate this scourge. In October 1998, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) adopted a Declaration of Moratorium on
the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Light
Weapons in West Africa for a renewable three-year
period. In order to accelerate implementation of the
Moratorium, an action plan for the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED) was adopted in March 1999,
thanks to the cooperation of the United Nations system.
Despite the slowness observed in the establishment of
national commissions, years after the adoption of the
Moratorium, some progress deserves to be emphasized:
to date, 13 national commissions have been created.
Nevertheless, increased assistance by the United
Nations system is required to make them more
operational.

We understand that the difficulties encountered in
the effective functioning of the ECOWAS Moratorium
are also attributable to the absence of effective and
efficient cooperation among States to harmonize their
policies; to insufficient personnel and equipment at the
ECOWAS secretariat level to oversee implementation
of the Moratorium; and to the absence of binding legal
provisions.

Therefore, my delegation remains convinced that
we need to strengthen the subregion's institutional
capacities, ensuring a long-term fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, by
taking the following elements into account: the
introduction of a standardized end-user certificate in
the subregion; the broadening of the Moratorium with
the goal of creating a mechanism for the exchange of
information on all types of weapons acquired by the
States of the subregion, as well as on deliveries made
by the countries exporting them; the computerization of
aircraft registration lists, in conformity with the
provisions of the International Civil Aviation
Organization Convention of 1944; the elaboration of
national action plans; the increased involvement of
national commissions and of local structures in the
implementation of measures taken at the subregional,
regional and international levels; and finally, the
strengthening of unity of action to break the mafia
mechanisms that feed weapons trafficking.

Guinea, for its part, has taken the following
measures: the creation of a national commission on
18 August 2000; the elaboration of an action plan
based on the nine priorities defined by PCASED; the
introduction of legislation and of administrative
procedures on arms possession, soon to be adopted; the
establishment of a training and awareness programme
for the Guinean army; and the holding of numerous
symposiums, seminars and workshops and participation
in those types of events with a view to gradually
establishing a true culture of peace. Regardless of such
efforts, the hoped-for success will essentially depend
on the considerations that we have just cited.

My delegation notes - and deplores - the fact
that people without faith or law, whose sole motivation
is enrichment, are selling their services today to parties
in the same conflict. Members will agree with me that
the degrading use of mercenaries has made the security
situation of our States - already so worrisome - even
more fragile. It has been proved that these mercenaries
are, more and more often, turning soullessly against
their own employers. That is to say, the common
enemy of the States of the subregion is now mercenary
activity. We must denounce those who order it or
permit it. We must not forget that these mercenaries
operate in motley groups of various nationalities,
sometimes nurtured by former combatants who have
never been taken in charge by disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

My country, the Republic of Guinea, has paid a
heavy price for the use of mercenaries. It was the
victim of aggressions in November 1970 and in
September 2000, which enabled us to measure the
danger of mercenary activity to a country's stability
and security.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to invite
the Security Council to ensure scrupulous compliance
by all States of the subregion with measures taken
against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and the use of mercenaries. Therefore, it is
essential that our States give due consideration to the
recommendations and observations that have resulted
from this workshop, with a view to combating these
scourges - an undeniable reality - and to ensuring a
better future for coming generations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Director of the
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), and I would ask
him to give us a very brief assessment of our
workshop.

