Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having convened this
debate and for being with us in person today. I want to
join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing, all of which I agree with, and for
his leadership of the Human Rights Up Front initiative.

The Security Council's primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security is enshrined
in the Charter. That puts us, as my New Zealand
colleague has just said, at the center of the rules-
based international system. We face new threats that
the founders of the United Nations did not foresee,
but the responsibility that the Council holds remains.
It is a responsibility that empowers us to take a range
of measures, including force, should the situation on
a particular issue or in a particular country threaten
international peace and security. The only question to
be debated today is how we do so.

The Article of the Charter that you, Madam
President, mentioned - paragraph 7, Article
2 - is explicit in not prejudicing "the application of
enforcement measures under Chapter VII".

Threats to international peace and security have
changed; they now come mainly from intra-State
instability that spreads far beyond national borders.
Weak or failing States and non-State actors now pose
our greatest challenge. As the situation in Syria shows,
if they are left unaddressed, these threats undermine
both the rights of States and the rights of people.

In response, we should not let outdated
interpretations ofthe Charter be used to excuse inaction,
still less to justify action that makes the situation worse.
Sadly, there are some in the Council that do precisely
that: members that claim the primacy of sovereignty
above all else, or that would rather abuse the power
of the veto and ignore the responsibility conferred on
the Council by the Charter, or that disregard efforts
to restrain the use of the veto, including through the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group's
code of conduct, which the Spanish Minister rightly
highlighted and which the United Kingdom is proud to
commit to.

Ironically, it is those members of the Council that
abuse sovereignty the most. Look at the invasion and
illegal annexation of Crimea two years ago. This was
the most egregious violation of sovereignty in recent
memory. That it was perpetrated by a permanent
member of the Council, a member that claims to uphold
the principles of the Charter, makes it even more
unacceptable still. I reaffirm in this Chamber the United
Kingdom's full support for Ukraine's independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and I reassert our
commitment to the return of Crimea to its rightful place
as part of Ukraine.

In the light of the new threats that we face, our
response needs to be commensurate with the purposes
and principles of the Charter. In doing so, the Council
can bolster sovereignty. As the Secretary-General
argued recently in Cambridge, England, we need to
recognize that you cannot have true sovereignty without
respecting the human rights of the people you govern,
or, as he said today, that it is violence and conflict, not
our attempts to help Member States prevent it, that
threaten States' sovereignty. It is violations of human
rights by the State that erode the legitimacy of the State.

The concept of sovereignty has not stood still; we
no longer accept the medieval view that the sovereign
owns everything and is the State. In the twenty-first
century, sovereignty has to amount to a contract
between governed and Government, and, crucially,
this contract depends in part on respect for human
rights. When human rights are violated and abused,
when basic freedoms are ignored, when a leader loses
legitimacy, peace and security can be threatened and
sovereignty is put at risk. We saw this for ourselves
when we visited Burundi last month; we heard stories of
summary executions, mass graves and sexual violence.
These warning signs should be all too familiar to the
Council. We must all know by now that if they are
left unchecked, the risk to sovereignty will not come
from too much action by the Council but from the
destabilizing consequences of too little.

If we are inactive, violence could spill across
borders, providing space for extremism to flourish,
undermining the rule of law and eroding respect for
human rights. That is exactly what has happened for
nearly six years in Syria. Has a heavier price ever been
paid for such a myopic interpretation of the Charter of the
United Nations? As a consequence, a quarter of million
people are dead, and millions upon millions have fled
their homes. Over 1 million people now live their lives
under siege, with many facing starvation. We should
all welcome the commitment made by the International
Syria Support Group in calling for a cessation of
hostilities last week. It is long overdue. However, it
will only succeed if the Syrian regime and its backers
change their behaviour, stop the bombing, observe the
ceasefire and allow humanitarian access - in short, if
they live up to their obligations.

Let me conclude with this final reflection: what
would our world look like if we really believed in an
outdated view of sovereignty - an extreme view in
which sovereignty trumped all principles in international
relations and international law? The Security Council
agenda would be thin. It would be a world where the
Council would not even attempt to prevent calamity in
Burundi; where peacekeeping operations would be far
fewer in number; where sanctions would never be used to
encourage regimes towards more acceptable behaviour;
where threats of proliferation went unchecked; where
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community went unpunished. There would be impunity
and no accountability. How could international justice
function at all?

It would be a world where we failed to uphold
even the first Article of the Charter, to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace. I am glad that we do not live in that
world. We live in a world - for all its imperfections
and challenges - where individuals can demand rights
and are entitled to hold their Governments to account.
We live in a world where old backward-looking
concepts of sovereignty no longer provide stability or
peace and security. We live in a world in which the
Charter, written 70 years ago, still applies exactly as
it was meant, respecting the rights of States and their
peoples and granting the Council the authority to take
enforcement action to maintain international peace and
security.

