The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

At the outset, my delegation would like to thank
the United Kingdom for having taken the initiative to
request this meeting. We are also grateful for not only
the briefing delivered by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, but also
the work carried out by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.

After having listened to Mr. Lowcock once again
in this Chamber, we can reaffirm that not only the
international community, but also the Council, has
been warned. We cannot plead ignorance for what
is happening in Yemen. I have listened carefully to
each and every speaker and several words have been
repeatedly used to describe the situation in Yemen:
horrendous, horrifying, catastrophic consequences,
imminent famine, cholera, war, extreme poverty,
vicious clashes and economic collapse, to name a few.

My delegation expresses its serious concern at
the delicate humanitarian situation caused by the
continuing escalation of violence in Yemen, especially
the intensification of bombings, air strikes and the
launching of missiles against civilian populations.
Unfortunately, those armed clashes, which have spread
beyond the airport, have affected the tenth and sixteenth
kilometres of the main road connecting the cities of
Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a, making it almost impossible
to use the road to transport goods and humanitarian
aid. The clashes have also disabled access to the Red
Sea Mills, one of the most important granaries in
Yemen, with the capacity to store enough grain to feed
3.5 million people per month.

Moreover, the cholera outbreak represents a major
concern, since it has infected more than 1.2 million
people in 22 of the 23 governorates of Yemen and
has caused more than 2,500 deaths since it started to
spread in April last year. Unfortunately, the damage
to water treatment facilities and plants, particularly in
Al-Hudaydah, has increased the risk of outbreaks of
cholera and other diseases. In September alone there
were 13 cases of diphtheria and two deaths due to
the disease.

Since the beginning of the conflict, the number of
civilian victims who have died or have been seriously
injured as a result of the clashes and attacks against
civilian spaces and infrastructure amounts to more than
16,000 people, of whom more than 2,400 are children.
Unfortunately, that chilling statistic is only increasing,
given that since June there have been more than 170
fatalities and at least 1,700 injuries in the governorate
of Al-Hudaydah alone.

Unfortunately, war, disease and hunger are not
the only challenges the Yemeni people must face, as,
over the past month, the governorate of Al-Mahrah,
in the south-east of the country, has been affected by
Cyclone Luban, as was mentioned by some Council
members, which caused floods affecting more than
3,000 families, claimed the lives of 11 people and left
124 people injured. That situation exacerbates the
urgent need for humanitarian assistance required by the
population to survive.

Given all that has been said, we recall that more than
70 per cent of the imports and humanitarian assistance
that enter Yemen do so by the port of Al-Hudaydah.
Therefore, any kind of attack or military campaign
against that city or port would not only seriously
affect the more than 22 million people who currently
require humanitarian assistance but, according to
the Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, Ms. Lise
Grande, it would raise that number to an untenable
level, dangerously increasing the number of people at
risk of famine from 8 million to 13 million.

The military actions in Yemen only serve to
undermine and weaken the efforts of our Organization
and those of the Special Envoy to establish a dialogue
that brings the parties closer to achieving a negotiated
solution to the conflict. For that reason, we call on
all the actors and parties involved to cease violence
immediately, guarantee the integrity of Al-Hudaydah
port and its access roads, abandon any preconditions
to establishing dialogue and implement resolution 2216
(2015), thereby laying the foundation for a political
solution that satisfies the demands and aspirations of
the Yemeni people within the framework of respect for
their sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

Finally, my delegation supports the process of
consultations and dialogue initiated by the Special
Envoy as an important initiative to guide the process
of political negotiation that allows for the peaceful
resolution of the situation in Yemen. We therefore
reiterate our call to the actors and parties involved to
join and contribute constructively to the process.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

