Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Sir, for scheduling this important debate
today. Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his comments and for his personal valuable
contribution to the protection of civilians agenda. I
would also like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay; the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Catherine Bragg; and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip
Spoerri, for their insights into subject matter of today's
debate.

As Mr. Spoerri has just reminded us, the primary
responsibility to protect civilians lies with States. The
concept of protection of civilians is firmly embedded
in modern military doctrine in many countries and in
the thoughts of policymakers around the world. It is
now central to most United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to military operations authorized by the
Security Council. But to ensure its practical
implementation in conflict situations, the principle
needs to be underpinned by enforcement mechanisms
at both the domestic and international levels, including,
ultimately, the possibility of individual criminal
liability.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) is
bringing to account those responsible for atrocities
against civilians. The ICC is a visible demonstration of
the international community's increasing intolerance
for impunity.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
cornerstone of international humanitarian law. The
United Kingdom therefore urges all States to ratify
outstanding international humanitarian law treaties and
to incorporate the relevant provisions of those treaties
into their domestic law. And we agree with the
Secretary-General that those Member States -
including some members of this Council - that have
not signed and ratified the Rome Statute of the ICC
should be encouraged to do so.

We believe that a link exists between
international and national efforts to enhance
accountability. It is the responsibility of States to
investigate and prosecute crimes. But it is important
that steps be taken at the international level when
national efforts fail.
The United Kingdom shares many of the
concerns raised during the course of today's briefings.
I would like briefly to mention just three situations.

In Syria, the United Kingdom condemns the
brutal repression of peaceful demonstrators and the
massive violations of human rights that President
Al-Assad and his authorities have been committing for
the last six months. As Ms. Pillay has just reminded us,
more than 3,500 people have now been killed. The
Syrian Government should immediately end the
violence, release all prisoners of conscience and allow
free, unhindered and immediate access to United
Nations monitors for an independent assessment of the
situation on the ground.

In Somalia, Al-Shabaab's terrorist campaign
continues to have terrible humanitarian consequences.
We congratulate the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) on their recent successes in Mogadishu.
Those military gains now need to be followed up by a
stabilization effort to enable the provision of basic
services, such as electricity, water, food, hospitals and
schools, to the civilian population in those areas. We
recognize that the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) has begun to address the protection of civilians,
and we encourage them to continue to do so. We
continue to explore ways in which we can support the
TFG and AMISOM. in order to minimize the risk of
civilians when they come under attack and to protect
the citizens of Mogadishu.

In Burma, we remain seriously concerned for the
well-being of the civilian population, especially in the
Shan, Kachin and Karen states. We call upon the
Burmese army and ethnic militia to make every effort
to protect civilians and bring to account those
responsible for human rights abuses against them.
Peace and stability can be achieved only through a
genuine process of national reconciliation, starting
with inclusive dialogue among all ethnic and political
opposition groups.

In conclusion, we welcome the mainstreaming of
protection of civilians activity with the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and with the working
group of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. The United
Kingdom continues to implement our national strategy
on protection of civilians, and to lead the informal
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians. That is an
important tool for the sharing of information from the
field, and we look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General on the subject in May 2012.

