Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank the Swedish
presidency of the Council for organizing this open
debate on the children and armed conflict agenda item,
which is an absolute priority for us. I also thank the
Swedish presidency for having steered the important
resolution that we have just adopted (resolution 2427 (2018)). It is a rare privilege to have the Prime
Minister of Sweden here with us to preside over this
essential debate.

Finally, I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba, Executive
Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore and Yenny
Londofio for their illuminating and inspiring briefings.
More broadly, I wish to thank all actors, particularly
from civil society, who work every day on the ground
to protect children. They deserve our admiration
and support.

I note the worrying increase in the number of
violations of children's rights, which must lead us to
remain more mobilized than ever and to make the best
use of the precious tools that the Council has adopted.
Within the framework of the method proposed by the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le
Drian, during the open debate on 31 October of last
year (see S/PV.8082), I will outline several new areas of
work for the coming months.

First of all, more than 20 years after the creation of
the agenda, the tools adopted by the Security Council
are more essential than ever given the increase in the
number of violations of children's rights. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/465) shows a marked increase
in the number ofviolations in 2017, with more than 21,000
verified cases and some areas, such as Afghanistan or
Somalia, that remain of serious concern.

However, certain developments are encouraging,
such as the extraction of children from armed groups in
Colombia, the signing of new action plans in Mali, the
Central African Republic and Nigeria, and the release,
in total, of more than 10,000 child soldiers. Those
successes call for the continuation of over 20 years of
efforts of the Council and the actors on the ground.

First of all, the mandate entrusted to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to engage
in dialogue with the parties and obtain concrete
commitments from them, in particular through the
action plans, is ofparamount importance in this context.
This field work, conducted in close coordination with
United Nations country teams, is certainly difficult,
but absolutely essential. Like the monitoring and alert
mechanism, it must remain at the heart of the agenda.

Secondly, as we all stressed at the Arria
Formula meeting last May, those action plans must
be comprehensive and seek to eliminate all serious
violations. Their implementation must also be assessed
in the light of all such violations.

Thirdly, it is essential for peacekeeping operations
to maintain adequate resources. Child protection
advisers play a crucial role, as demonstrated each year
by the release of children following the tireless efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and through
the central role of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in the recent signing of a new action plan in
the Central African Republic.

Fourthly, we would also like to commend Sweden's
work as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which plays an key role.

Finally, a normative framework - a constitutional
bloc to protect children - has been created and
continues to be developed. We therefore call on the
States that have not yet done so to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict; to
endorse the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces
or groups, the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
(Paris Principles), which are a reference for all actors,
especially in the field, the Safe Schools Declaration
and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, which complement the foundational Paris
Principles. This group of instruments is complete and
operational, and is destined to become universal.

In that connection, we must redouble our efforts
to better protect children through actions ranging from
prevention to reintegration. Conflicts evolve, as do the
methods employed by belligerent parties. Resolution
2427 (2018), adopted today by the Council, on which
France has worked very closely with Sweden and with
all members of the Council, provides several important
operational responses in that regard. I note the following
six areas of work.

First, we must respond to the cross-border nature of
violations committed against children. It will therefore
be essential to combat violations against children in
the context of trafficking and to strengthen the role of
regional and subregional organizations in that regard.

Secondly, we must ensure more effective
prevention, including by raising awareness and
guaranteeing access to education in schools protected
against attacks. The detailed analysis of recruitment
methods used by non-State armed groups and work on
early warning systems will also be very useful.

Thirdly, we all recognize that is key to sustainably
strengthen reintegration mechanisms when children
are released.

Fourthly, we must more carefully consider
the specific needs of girls in order to prevent their
stigmatization, and adopt a gender-specific approach to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

Fifthly, we must ensure full compliance with
children's rights and applicable international standards
in order to put an end to the illegal detention of children.

Sixthly and finally, strengthening the fight against
impunity is the best prevention method. The role of
international justice, including that of the International
Criminal Court, are very important in that regard.

We also have a duty to raise public awareness in the
Council. I propose that we regularly use the press and
press statements to do so.

The protection of children and their rights is not
only a universal moral obligation but also one of the
essential conditions for lasting peace. Children embody
hope for reconciliation and reconstruction, as has been
so rightly pointed out. The best interests of the child
must therefore prevail everywhere and children's
voices must be heard. Their rights must be respected.
The Council knows my country's constant and historic
commitment to the protection of children in armed
conflict. France is more determined than ever to act to
strengthen our collective action.

