Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Iwould like to thank
Mr. Zuev and Ms. Ochoa Nifio for their vivid briefings.
I want to thank you in particular, Mr. President, for
bringing this issue before the whole of the Security
Council. It is an issue that we seldom discuss, but one
that has an impact on conflict after conflict ever since
the United Nations came into existence. Sadly, that
impact is still being felt in too many places today.

To simply treat this issue as any other on our
agenda would be a mistake. Anti-personnel landmines
are nothing short of indiscriminate killers. They do
not recognize sides in conflict; they recognize no age
or affiliation.

I am proud to represent a country that wants to
see an anti-personnel-mine-free world. In 1995 our
predecessors sat around this table and unanimously
adopted resolution 1005 (1995), which recognized the
global threat posed by those devices. At the time we
focused on Rwanda and a select group of countries. Two
years later, Princess Diana walked the streets of Cuito,
Angola, greeting children affected by the scourge of
landmines. She spoke with the survivors and saw the
human face of an epidemic, a man-made epidemic,
that took the form of a 100 million mines scattered
throughout more than 70 countries. Twenty years ago,
landmines claimed a new victim every 20 minutes.

That was the state to play two decades ago. In the
face of what seemed to be insurmountable odds, we
collectively said then that this must end. Later that year,
we came together as Governments, civil society and
survivors from around the world to channel momentum
and agree to a treaty banning antipersonnel mines.

Twenty years later, we have undoubtedly come a
long way, but 2015 showed what is at stake if we take
our foot off the accelerator. That year saw a 75 per cent
increase in casualties compared to 2014, and it was the
most deadly year on record since 2006. That marked
increased was largely due to the increase in the use of
improvised anti-personnel mines by non-State armed
groups in the Middle East. What is worse is that of the
6,461 people killed or injured that year, more than one
in three was a child.

The thousands who lost life and limb do not tell the
full story. Millions more are forced to live alongside land
littered with anti-personnel mines, cluster munitions
and other explosive remnants of war. By virtue of
their very existence, livelihoods are put at risk. They
prevent children from attending school; they prevent
farmers from growing crops to feed their communities;
they prevent humanitarian aid from reaching those
in need; and they make the journey home impossible
for refugees.

It is for all those reasons that the United Kingdom
announced in April that we would be increasing our
support for anti-mine action. We announced more
than $125 million for the United Kingdom Global
Mine Action Programme over the next three years.
Those funds build on the existing $38 million that
our Department for International Development has
already pledged. They will be used to clear 150 square
kilometres of lands of mines, cluster munitions and
other explosive remnants of war

Because of those projects, 800,000 people will no
longer live under the threat of landmines, and 100,000
people will receive education on the dangers they
pose. The United Kingdom is also making significant
progress towards meeting its obligations under the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines
and on Their Destruction in order to demine the
Falkland Islands after we announced a new $25 million
programme phase in September last year, which we are
implementing now.

We are focusing our efforts on the countries where
we can make the biggest impact, where the greatest
number of people live in the shadow of explosive
remnants of war. By the end of the three years,
Afghanistan, Somalia and South Sudan, will be among
the countries that have benefited from this United
Kingdom-sponsored project.

Sadly, this will not be enough. Sixty countries and
four territories are still contaminated with landmines.
Nearly a dozen of those have more than 100 square
kilometres that have been forfeited to mines. Landmines
are still destroying opportunity and hope. If we are to
restore that hope, we must come together again as we
did 20 years ago. Ending mines will require money,
education and survivor assistance. We call on each
and every Government that will speak in the Chamber
today to play that part.

As conflicts subside today, the explosive remnants
of war do not. Landmines respect no ceasefire; they
respect no peace agreement. In any given week, the
Council discusses the need to end Violence, conflict
and war in some part of the world. If we do not tackle
the global scourge of landmines, we are putting those
who have emerge from conflicts even further behind.

Twenty years ago, we showed the collective action
was possible. Now it is time to finish the job.

