Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Meza-Cuadra for his briefing, as well as
his leadership as the Chair ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism. We very much appreciate his work.

Over the past year, deadly terrorist attacks have
killed hundreds of innocent civilians and injured
countless others throughout the world, in places like
the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul, Las Ramblas in
Barcelona, the Al-Rawda Mosque in the Sinai and the
Save the Children Office in Jalalabad, to name just
a few. Although we continue to destroy the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) on and off the battle
fields of Iraq and Syria and shut down Al-Qaida and
ISIS networks around the world, terrorists continue to
evolve and adapt.

The ability of the terrorist networks to exploit
weaknesses in our defences both at critical infrastructure
sites and soft targets all around the world make it clear
that much more must be done. That is why the United
States strongly supported the adoption of resolution
2341 (2017) a year ago and called upon all States to
make concerted and coordinated efforts, including
through international cooperation to raise awareness
and expand knowledge of the danger of terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure. It is clear that Al-Qaida
and ISIS operatives, including returning foreign
terrorist fighters and home-grown terrorists, continue
to plot against critical infrastructure, such as airports,
power plants and Government facilities, despite nearly
two decades of international efforts since 11 September
2001. We must better address those threats.

However, we must also not forget that such
operatives continue to attack soft targets, such as
sporting venues, theatres and hotels, because they
have historically received far less attention than
critical infrastructure, and we all have paid dearly for
it. That is why we must continue to do more to assess
and raise awareness of the actual risks, while taking
appropriate preparedness measures, promoting better
interoperability, not only within Governments and
between Governments but also with the public and
private sectors, and ensuring resilience to attacks. We
must continue to look to the United Nations, regional
and international organizations and Member States
to develop and share good practices, and take all
appropriate measures to manage the risk of terrorist
attacks on critical infrastructure and soft targets.

For instance, since the adoption of resolution
2341 (2017) a year ago, the Global Counterterrorism
Forum has published the Antalya Memorandum on
the Protection of Soft Targets in a Counter-terrorism
Context. The Antalya Memorandum contains good
practices for both Government and industry on how to
increase awareness and preparedness for attacks against
the public spaces where we gather to dine, shop, tour
and conduct business. Those good practices reflect the
collective expertise of more than 60 countries and 150
public and private practitioners from law enforcement
intelligence agencies, emergency management and the
private sector and are applicable globally to inform
and guide Government and industry in developing and
refining policies and practices for soft target protection.
In the United States we have incorporated the Antalya
good practices into our domestic soft target security
programmes. We encourage others to do the same and
continue to collaborate with international partners on
how to implement most effectively these good practices
as a means of promoting greater global preparedness
for those types of attacks.

We also pleased that both resolution 2395 (2017),
renewing the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), and
resolution 2396 (2017) on returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters reaffirm resolution 2341 (2017)
and the importance of addressing risks associated with
critical infrastructure and other particularly vulnerable
targets from terrorist attack. We will be looking to CTED
and other United Nations and international bodies such
as the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
INTERPOL and the International Organization for
Migration to assist Member States in improving their
efforts to implement those resolutions and facilitate
needed technical assistance.

In the United States and many other countries,
private companies own most of the critical
infrastructure. Protecting such infrastructure is
therefore a collaborative effort between the private
and public sectors. In April the United States will be
hosting in Japan under the auspices of the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum a workshop on protecting
soft targets from terrorist attack, which highlights the
importance of fostering public-private partnerships.

Resolution 2341 (2017) represented a significant
step forward in the global response to protecting critical
infrastructure from the threat of terrorist attack. Now
we must take concrete steps towards increasing our
vigilance and adaptability to the evolving threat to
better protect our citizens from future terrorist attacks.

