Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the very generous and kind
sentiments that you have just expressed towards me.

Today I conclude a long journey of 33 years in
the foreign service of Mauritius and in the wonderful
world of diplomacy. My foreign service career began
with the independence of our country in 1968 and ends
here, in the Security Council Chamber, where
Mauritius is serving its two-year term, having been
elected by the General Assembly last fall to a non-
permanent seat in the Council.

I take this opportunity to express my thanks and
gratitude to my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives for the confidence they placed in us in
voting us into the Security Council. I have tried my
best to live up to this confidence, which has been at the
centre of my preoccupations in our participation in the
work of the Security Council over the last six months,
since we assumed our term here.

I also take this opportunity to warmly thank the
close friends, including several members of the
Council, who encouraged us and actively assisted us in
our bid for a Security Council seat.

The Security Council is an entity that evokes all
kinds of imagings around the world - among nations,
among peoples, among academics and among students
alike. Beyond the known platitude that it is the
supreme instrument for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is regarded as the
embodiment of hope and justice, not only by nations
that feel aggrieved by the actions of other States or
face unmanageable internal strife, but by the ordinary
people - men, women and children - who are usually
the innocent victims and whose lives are shattered by
wars and conflicts.

Therefore, Security Council members -
permanent and non-permanent alike - bear an
awesome responsibility on behalf of all the people of
the world. That is why the Members of the United
Nations expect all Security Council decisions to be
even-handed, fair and just. Members need always to
bear in mind that the decisions they take in this
Chamber and in the consultation room are the object of
scrutiny by the international community as soon as
they become public, and that they will be the object of
critical study in the future as well, by students of
international relations.

We are fully conscious of the complexity of
national and international politics and of their
dynamics in the Security Council's decision-making
process. We believe that, in spite of the constraints, it
should be possible for members of the Security Council
to work on the basis of certain norms, on which we
should not compromise at any time. The basic norms in
that regard should be, as I have said, even-handedness,
fairness and justice. I have sometimes wished that there
was a meditation room somewhere in the corner near
the Security Council Chamber, where from time to
time, when in doubt, we could go and reflect,
individually or collectively, and then begin
deliberations in the consultation room.

Before I became a diplomat, I was a teacher, and I
may have pontificated a little bit in this, my final
statement in the Council. But I have, I hope, done that
with the President's indulgence. I hope that what I have
said contains a little bit of material to reflect on.

For me, it has been a wonderful experience to
work in the Security Council together with colleagues
who are the top diplomats of their respective countries.
In the Council, we have, during the past six months,
addressed every issue today affecting international
peace and security. We have done that in a wonderful
spirit of mutual respect and compromise, understanding
and camaraderie. I thank all delegations for the
courtesy they have extended to me. I also thank the
members of the Secretariat at all levels, who have been
just wonderful.

Your presidency, Sir, has been of a quality that we
all know very well and about which we have spoken
before in the consultation room; it has been of the
highest standard, and you have set extremely high
standards for us all - and have kept us all very busy as
well. But the highlight of your presidency was the
appointment of the Secretary-General. We are glad that
the Secretary-General is present at this wrap-up
meeting. I congratulate him very warmly.

I thank you, Mr. President, and I thank all my
other colleagues.

