The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of cote
d'Ivoire.

My delegation thanks Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto
for his briefing on developments in the situation in
Afghanistan. It also thanks Mr. Yury Fedotov and
Ms. Ghizaal Haress, member of the Independent
Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of
the Constitution, for their relevant briefings on drug
trafficking and on the strengthening of the rule of law
in Afghanistan. I also thank Mr. Mahmoud Saikal,
the representative of Afghanistan, for his extremely
instructive statement.

My delegation commends the tireless efforts of
the President Ghani and his Government to give the
brave Afghan people peace, stability and development,
which they have aspired to throughout so many years
of suffering.

My delegation also welcomes the parliamentary
elections held on 20 October, which mobilized many
Afghans. Unfortunately, the elections were marred by
deadly attacks carried out by the Taliban and the local
branch of the Islamic State. These incidents negatively
affected voter turnout. My country condemns this wave
of violence, which once again reminds the Council
of the need to pay sustained attention to the security
situation in Afghanistan. We must recall that, 17 years
after the fall of the Taliban regime, the protection of
civilians and the delivery of humanitarian aid remain
major challenges, especially in provinces under
Taliban control. My delegation therefore encourages
the forces in the country to further strengthen joint
operations with the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in the provinces most affected
by insecurity.

An election is scheduled for April that will be
decisive for the future of Afghanistan - the presidential
election. We hope that it will be transparent, credible and
totally inclusive. In this regard, we note with satisfaction
the commitment of the countries contributing to
the Resolute Support Mission to maintaining their
presence in Afghanistan and the pledges of funding
for the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
until 2024. Furthermore, my country calls for the
implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity, which could help to
resolve the security problem in the region.

Similarly, we welcomed the participation of
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran in the Triangular
Initiative meeting, which took place on 12 December
in Islamabad, under the auspices of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. The Initiative has yielded
tangible results in the fight against drug trafficking
through the sharing of information and simultaneous
operations at the borders of the three countries.
Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire has always favoured dialogue
as a means of resolving conflict and urges the Taliban
to firmly commit, within the framework of the Kabul
process, to direct peace talks without preconditions
with a view to achieving a political settlement of the
crisis and lasting peace in Afghanistan.

In the efforts to resolve the crisis, my country
endorses the conclusions of a national conference on
women's participation in the peace process, which
was held on 12 December in Kabul. We believe that
the greater involvement of women in the process would
ensure that it has every chance of success.

With regard to humanitarian issues, Cote d'Ivoire
remains concerned about the situation of internally
displaced persons and refugees, whose dignified and
safe return to their areas of origin is made difficult by
the lack of infrastructure, poor access to basic social
services, problems related to land management and
food insecurity risks. In this regard, my delegation
commends the outstanding work of the United Nations
and its partners in helping more than 3.5 million people
in need. We therefore urge the international community
to maintain its financial support for the humanitarian
plan for Afghanistan in order to provide the necessary
assistance to the population. C6te d'Ivoire laments
the restrictions on humanitarian agencies' access
to vulnerable populations, as well as the attacks
on humanitarian workers, which are a violation of
international humanitarian law.

Cote d'Ivoire congratulates the Afghan Government
on its commitment to the fight against corruption and
the measures it has taken to stabilize the economy
and improve business. My country also encourages
the Government to pursue its efforts to combat drug
trafficking, which is an important source of funding for
the Taliban.

cote d'Ivoire commends Ambassador Kairat
Umarov for his work as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and
reiterates its full support for him.

In conclusion, my delegation calls on the States
Members of the United Nations, and in particular the
countries of the region, to ensure strict respect for the
sanctions imposed on the Taliban. This would help
to bring peace and stability to this country, which is
devastated by a conflict that has lasted far too long.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

In line with note S/2017/507, I remind speakers that
they are kindly requested to limit their statements to
five minutes, so that the Council can carry out its work
in a timely manner. Delegations with long statements
are invited to distribute them in printed form and to
deliver an abridged statement in the Security Council,
because we have a long list of speakers in accordance
with rules 37 and 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

I now give the floor to the representative ofPakistan.

