Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned at reports that the use of chemical
weapons has caused civilian deaths and casualties in
Syria. We are firmly opposed to the use of chemical
weapons by any country, organization or individual,
under any circumstances. This has been China's clear
and consistent position.

China supports the carrying out of a comprehensive,
objective and impartial investigation into the use of
chemical weapons in Syria so as to achieve results that
are based on substantial evidence and can pass the litmus
test of history and truth, bringing the perpetrators and
the parties responsible for the use of chemical weapons
to justice. There should be no prejudgment of the
outcome or arbitrary conclusions.

The Security Council has a consensus on
condemning the chemical-weapons attacks in Syria,
establishing a new investigative mechanism and
identifying the perpetrators of the chemical-weapon
attack in Syria. All members of the Security Council
should remain united and insist that the Council and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons be the main channel for dealing with the
Syrian chemical-weapon issue, in an effort to seek an
appropriate solution through consultations.

The draft resolution that was just put to the
vote in the Security Council (S/2018/321) had
elements of consensus, including condemning the
chemical-weapons attacks in Syria, establishing a
new investigative mechanism and urging all parties
to cooperate with the investigation. However, on some
specific measures, it does not take full consideration of
some of the major concerns of certain Security Council
members on improving the mechanism's working
methods and ensuring an objective and impartial
investigation. Against that backdrop and in the light of
our long-standing position on the question of chemical
weapons in Syria, China abstained in the voting on the
draft resolution.

The issue of Syria is currently at a critical juncture.
China remains firmly seized of the situation and is
deeply concerned at the developments on the ground.
China has always called for respecting the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and insists on seeking a peaceful solution to the dispute.
We oppose the use or threat of force in international
relations and believe that any action taken should be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

The international community and all parties
concerned should stand firm on the imperative need to
seek a political solution to the question of Syria, step
up their support for the United Nations main channel
of mediation, and push for all Syrian parties to seek a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution to the
question of Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).

China is ready to work with all parties in an effort
to push for a political solution to the issue of Syria.

