Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to extend a
very warm welcome to Mr. William Hague and the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom for
convening today's high-level debate. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the Secretary-
General and the honourable Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the United States, France, Russia, Germany,
Guatemala and Portugal.

Sitting in this Chamber today, Sir, I shall start off
by referring to your distinguished compatriot in
Cambridge, Mr. Stephen Hawking, and his fraternity
who are with him in surveying the universe, and
specifically in demarcating dark space/spaces. Those
dark spaces constitute the vast majority of the universe
today, and in this Chamber today I have witnessed
those spaces in many long diatribes in which so much
has been said and yet not said. Hawking has cautioned
all of us that the dark spaces that constitute the vast
majority of the universe are not dormant spaces. The
majority of those vast spaces will one day unleash their
silent fury, and he cautions us to be prepared. I believe
that we should be so prepared with respect to so much
that we do not say, or dare to say, in this house today.

In North Africa and the Middle East, under
discussion today, we have witnessed important
developments. My country firmly believes in the
fulfilment of the aspirations of the people and their
rights to be masters of their own destiny, to speak and
to be heard, and to pursue their legitimate aspirations.
No effort should be spared in accommodating those
efforts. We therefore strongly condemn the use of force
against peaceful protestors, as well as violations of
human rights wherever they occur and irrespective of
who the perpetrators may be, as a matter of principle.

As one of the bigger democratic countries, we are
firmly committed to the ideals, values and principles of
the United Nations and believe that the legitimate
aspirations of people should be accommodated
peacefully, without external interference and in a
matter consistent with the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of States.

Today, in support of those embattled societies, I
again urge the Council to please remember that no
movement in the world, including the great
revolutions, has succeeded without external help. They
cannot be stroked out with a pen. Anyone who seeks to
rationalize a principled position by riding the high
horse of morality very truly needs to narrow the
distances by treading slowly on what might be referred
to as lowly grounds.

But the support that we extend to the legitimate
wishes of people has to be within the confines of
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. Interference in the internal affairs of
sovereign States and supporting such concepts as
regime change are alien to the ethos of international
good-neighbourliness.

The changes in the region under discussion today
have often been referred to as the Arab Spring. The
concept of spring evokes images of rebirth, change,
renewal, warmth and beauty. It should have an air of
tranquillity and harmony about it. More than anything
else, it is a natural process than can neither be forced
nor be abrupt. This has to be understood. Winter
evolves into spring and spring brings an end to winter's
hardness. That natural process of evolution must
therefore be allowed to take its course uninterrupted.
So we welcome change when it is locally led, peaceful
and an expression of the aspirations of the people.
Solutions to problems have to be found by the people
themselves and not, I repeat, not imposed from outside.

The Foreign Minister of Jordan, Mr. Nasser
Judeh, made a remarkable statement on 29 February to
the Foreign Affairs Committee of the European
Parliament that I keep going back to time and time
again. He told the Committee that there can be no
complete Arab Spring or Arab awakening without
peace in the Middle East. And there will never be
peace in the Middle East without a solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This, then, is the context of
my speech - the winter of Arab discontent. Can we
usher in a vast spring with that winter consistently
raising its head? I do not think so. The denial of the
Palestinian right to self-determination is at the heart of
unrest in the region. If peace in the Middle East is to be
lasting, progress on the Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel
conflicts is necessary as well. Israel must withdraw
completely from the occupied Lebanese lands and the
occupied Syrian Golan, in compliance with relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

With the continuation of Israeli settlement
activity, hope for the Palestinians to have a viable State
of their own is fading fast. We have had grim
reminders of that delivered to the Council in the recent
briefings by representatives of the Department of
Political Affairs and a number of Member States. There
is a general belief that the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is becoming increasingly volatile.
Given such factors as the ever-increasing settlement
activity and settler violence, the continued blockade of
the Gaza Strip, diminished economic prospects for the
population, vandalization of the holy sites, the plight of
Palestinian prisoners, and so on, it is understandable
that the people should be on tenterhooks. A small spark
could turn into a big fire.

We also condemn any pipe bombs being fired
from the Gaza Strip, but we believe that the biggest
threat to international peace and security arises from
one particular aspect. Yet the Council continues to do
nothing cogent for the Palestinians. Each time that
Council members meet, we are told that the Quartet is
now discussing the matter. I await the day that the
Quartet will produce a result that will substantially
change the plight of these people.

One of the best things to do, and we have so
moved, is that if it is agreed that Gaza should be given
provisions, we should take a flotilla, land on the
beaches and deliver to the inhabitants, through the
United Nations, the security and the food that they
require. We strongly feel that now is as appropriate a
time as any to send a strong, unified signal to the
occupying Power to stop its activities, specifically in
land-grabbing.

There continuously arises a matter here that I
would like to dispel once and for all. I may or may not
succeed. It is basically that, whenever anyone queries
whether Islam and democracy are incompatible, the
answer is that they are not incompatible. Only
Huntington really believes that they are incompatible. I
believe that it is a question of time even there. But I
would like to say very emphatically that our prophet
basically called all our brothers in Islam as brothers
and asked them to share their surpluses as well as their
shortcomings. In my opinion, there is no better
manifestation of democracy. Furthermore, he asked
Muslims to reach out to the world in peace. For reasons
of learning, he told them to go to China, which was not
a Muslim brother State. That does not matter. It shows
the vastness of the vision of the person of the prophet.
When he found that things were not good for Muslims
in Mecca, where he started out, he told them to go to
the brotherly king of Ethiopia, who happened to be a
Christian, and said that he would look after them. That
vast outreach shows the beauty of what is already
available. We need not confer too much distinction on
Huntington.

I will conclude this segment by reiterating our
support for the Palestinian people in their just struggle
for peace and the right to self-determination and their
membership, as was said by my Indian colleague, in
the United Nations at the earliest. We feel that
Palestine will remain the biggest challenge of the
Middle East. That opportunity is being afforded by this
wave of fulfilment of aspirations in the name of the
people of the Middle East through the Arab Spring. I
feel that the Palestinians should also benefit, and not
lose. I reiterate that without resolution of this core
issue, as was said by the Foreign Minister of Jordan,
we will not be able to see real peace in the region.

I would also like to address five crucial points
raised by the Secretary-General in his statement. I
believe that those are crucial points, as he himself says.

He first speaks of leaders choosing the path of
meaningful reform and says that people do not want
cosmetic changes that give only the merest taste of
democracy. I believe that a great American president,
many years ago, spoke of the four freedoms. I believe
that there must be a basic intent on the part of the
United Nations for fundamental legislative action by
the General Assembly and the Security Council with
respect to the basic democratic requirements of
statehood in which those freedoms should be
enshrined. Everyone who wishes to be a Member here
must at some stage be able to resolve and come to this
particular aspect. I believe that just naming them as a
pillar would not be enough; it would be important to
have a minimum legislated induction into all the
documents in the world where such elements such as
promoting pluralism and the rights of minorities would
be the minimum requirement.

We just celebrated International Women's Day.
Women get that once a year and they happen to be a
majority in the world. I feel that we have to rectify
those matters first. We have to understand that women
have a crucial role to play, without which we will never
get anywhere.

I also take very strongly his third aspect, that
women have stood in the squares and streets
demanding change and now have the right to sit at the
table with real influence in decision-making, and safe
from violence, intimidation and abuse. That is
happening even now in the Arab Spring. Last week,
eight members of the Council met with women from
Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen, and
we heard those women and were shocked. One of the
things they said, which I think we should support very
strongly here, is that 25 per cent of all financing
through the United Nations must be earmarked for
delivery into the hands of women. Do not forget, they
constitute 75 per cent of the world. Women end up
feeding, clothing and looking after children, not only
doing all the work but having to do it; yet they do not
get the benefit of their husbands' employment,
especially not in the Third World. In addition, 25 per
cent of all delegations visiting, calling on or meeting
with the United Nations should be made up of women.
We need to make it necessary that they be part. They
have made more sacrifices than anyone in this Spring,
as we call it, so then let them be able to be a part of
that complete change.

When we speak about the fourth pillar,
opportunities for young people, there are 200 million
more in Asia. I think that takes on an importance that
cannot be denied.

There must be regional peace for the Palestinians.
If there was a Balfour Declaration that brought the
State of Israel to where it is today, then let us have a
Balfour Declaration for the Palestinians as well.

In conclusion, in the context of world peace and
the Middle East, I would like to stress that while we
understand all sorts of needs arising on security, it
would be better for that region and the whole world if
28

the situation of Iran could be stopped from moving
towards conflict, because it will be the sort of conflict
that might have a very unfortunate impact on the world
and that might be the proverbial last straw that breaks
the camel's back on world peace. I hope not. We
understand the seriousness of it. We also hope that with
the accumulated diplomacy here we can do better.

