Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Ghassan Salame', the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Sma'il
Chergui, the African Union Commissioner for Peace
and Security, for their detailed briefings. We support
Mr. Salame's work and will continue to help him. We
want to affirm to Mr. Chergui that the Russian Federation
has always emphasized the crucial role of the African
Union in settling crises on the continent, including the
one in Libya. We thank the German delegation for its
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, which has
come at a difficult stage in the Libyan settlement.

We are sorry to have to conclude that the escalation
in greater Tripoli, and in Libya as a whole, is not
improving. Like other members of the international
community, Russia is deeply concerned. The bitter
truth is that this country, which was until quite recently
a stable and prosperous North African State, has
descended into chaos. It has no Government for all
practical purposes and has been fractured for a number
ofyears. It is being used as a transit and migration area. It
is a source of destabilizing influences on neighbouring
regions on both sides of the Mediterranean. Anyone
who believes that Libya's problems began only this
spring is deeply mistaken. Libya's situation today is
a result of geopolitical engineering and the policies
of regime change that various countries decided to
implement in 2011. We have only one purpose in
pointing this out. The situation that has arisen in Libya
should be a constant reminder of the bankruptcy of
the concept of outside armed incursions, which lead
to the dismantling of Government institutions and the
emergence of failed States.

We have to learn from mistakes, which means that
now, in the active phase of the conflict, we have to
work with all the parties involved without preferring
any one of them over the others. That is the only way to
end the military confrontation. Attempts to hold only
one of the players responsible will only deepen the
confrontation and worsen the prospects for resuming
the political process. We are confident that Mr. Salame
will be guided by that approach. We must continue
humanitarian assistance to all Libyans who need it and
ensure unimpeded and non-discriminatory access for
humanitarian personnel.

Russia will continue to appeal to all of Libya's
military and political forces and to its influential figures
to cease military actions, refrain from aggressive
statements and sit down at the negotiating table in order
to re-establish the trust that has been so undermined,
step by step. To do that, narrow interests must be set
aside and we must work based on the principle that
Libya and its people come first. For that, we must
refrain from plans that involve constant intervention
in internal affairs and remember that Libya's natural
wealth belongs exclusively to the Libyan people. In our
view, there is no alternative to a political settlement.
We must refrain from the use of force and work to
unite the efforts of all Libyan forces in the interests
of the rapid restoration of national institutions that
are capable of dealing effectively with the immediate
priorities, including the fight against terrorism.
Unfortunately, that threat is still a powerful one and
requires the unification of all political forces. One of
the most urgent tasks on the agenda is the establishment
of united, viable State institutions, including the army
and security forces. It is Libyans themselves who must
take those decisions. Succumbing to any temptations or
attempts to impose the parameters for that process from
the outside will inevitably be counterproductive, and
we will repudiate them.

We are coordinating our efforts with international
and regional partners on a bilateral and multilateral
basis. The situation in Libya was a subject of discussion
during the Russian-Arab Cooperation Forum in
Moscow. We are constantly analysing it in our daily
contacts with representatives of the African Union,
and we have reached an agreement on working together
on a Libyan settlement. Our shared goal is helping
Libyans to overcome their differences and emerge with
a sustainable agreement on the main issue, which is
national reconciliation. There have been previous steps
taken in that direction in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi,
but the commitments made then have unfortunately
remained on paper.

The regional actors have an important role to
play in encouraging Libyans to end the bloodshed and
resume negotiations. We note the leading role that the
African Union has taken in giving the Libyan settlement
new momentum, including through the conference in
Addis Ababa planned for July. We firmly believe that
all the international efforts to restore peace and unity
to Libya must ideally be harmonized, and we emphasize
once again that a political settlement should not be an
issue for competition.

Much has been said today about the role played
by Special Representative Salame' in arranging a
harmonized system for finding a long-term solution to
the Libyan conflict, as Ijust mentioned. But we should
all remember from our own experience that for the
task of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to
be feasible, it must be able to rely on the consolidated
support of international and regional players and all
of Libya's political actors. It requires a comprehensive
approach. Attempts to approach the situation selectively
will not work, and neither will attempts to act based
on the principle that what is permissible for some is
not permissible for others. All stakeholders, without
exception, must comply with the arms embargo.

Russia and Libya are linked by deep historic ties. The
relations between our States have always been defined
by mutual respect. That is why we have been able to
maintain contact with all political forces throughout the
crisis in Libya. Russia will continue to restore stability

in Libya, including by supporting Mr. Salame's efforts.
However, we will be strictly guided in that by the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, such as
the duty to ensure the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Libya. We encourage everyone
to work on that basis.

