Mr. Medan (Croatia): We thank the Venezuelan
presidency for holding today's timely debate on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.

Croatia welcomes the report (see S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts and fully supports its
conclusions that the United Nations must see sustaining
peace as the core task set by the Charter of the United
Nations. Peacebuilding should not be regarded as a
peripheral activity within the United Nations but as a
high priority.

The concept of peacebuilding has evolved since the
inception of the peacebuilding architecture, reflecting
the changing nature of international threats in an ever-
changing world. Originally conceived in the context of
post-conflict recovery efforts to promote reconciliation
and reconstruction, the term peacebuilding has more
recently taken on a much broader meaning. There is
recognition that the peacebuilding should not be limited
only to post-conflict engagement.

Many agree that the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) should adapt to a rapidly changing environment.
In that context, we share the view that we have to use
the review of the peacebuilding architecture in order to
make the Peacebuilding Commission more relevant and
efficient.
We welcome the considerable accomplishments
achieved by the PBC since its establishment, in 2005,
but we also recognize that it is facing with many
challenges. There is an impression that the expected
impact of the PBC is far from being fully achieved. In
that context, we believe that additional improvements
of the Commission's working methods, as well as their
rationalization, would be welcome. There is also a
need for improving and strengthening the relationship
between the PBC and the three principal United Nations
organs - namely, the General Assembly, Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council - as
well as other relevant actors.

Croatia advocates for a holistic, people-centred,
country-tailored approach to peacebuilding that
recognizes national specificities, respects regional
expertise and empowers local actors. At the same
time, international efforts should be more effectively
integrated into locally and regionally owned efforts
towards building peace. Croatia also advocates for the
need to facilitate and build broadly inclusive national
ownership. We believe that women's empowerment
greatly contributes to enhancing inclusivity and
cohesion, and therefore welcome the fact that the PBC
continues to attach importance to the role of women
in peacebuilding and their contribution to building
and sustaining peace. We also stress the importance
of the inclusion and empowerment of youth in national
peacebuilding priorities and actions. We welcome the
fact that the PBC recognizes the indispensable role
played by young people in any effort to sustain peace.
For peacebuilding efforts to be successful, long-term
political and financial support is needed, as well as
partnerships among local communities, Governments,
the private sector and regional and international
organizations, including international financial
institutions.

Peacebuilding requires the sustained and
coordinated commitment of national, regional and
international actors. Sustaining peace requires coherent
and coordinated action among the principal organs
of the United Nations, between Headquarters and the
field, and among different peacebuilding actors. There
is also the need for a parallel focus on political, security
and development issues. We therefore believe that the
review process of peacebuilding architecture should
be linked to other review processes - namely, the
review of peacekeeping operations and the review of
the progress in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) 4 as well as to a new sustainable development
agenda. All those processes should establish strong
linkages among peace, security, development and
human rights. True, comprehensive development cannot
be achieved and sustained without peace. Likewise,
peace cannot be achieved or sustained without justice,
and peace, development and justice are not possible
without respect for human rights.

The peacebuilding architecture review process gives
us a chance to improve our prospects for advancing the
course of peacebuilding, and that opportunity should
not be missed. Finally, let me reiterate Croatia's strong
support to such efforts.

