Mr. Pelsson (Iceland): The situation in the
Middle East remains of grave concern and continues to
threaten stability far beyond the region. My
Government attaches great value to the proximity talks
between Israelis and Palestinians and trusts that they
will pave the way for the resumption of bilateral
negotiations leading to the emergence of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State.
We also welcome the steps that are being taken in the
review of Israel's policy on Gaza and look forward to
the full implementation of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009), leading to the
unconditional opening of Gaza crossings for
humanitarian aid, commerce and people.

At the same time, Iceland remains deeply
concerned at the continued house demolitions,
evictions, settlement activities and the building of the
wall in the occupied Palestinian territories and fears
that this may lead to the erosion of the two-State
solution. Only last week, the Jerusalem municipality
approved the construction of 32 Israeli homes in a
settlement in East Jerusalem. This policy of continued
settlement activity is obviously not going to increase
confidence in the peace process and must be brought to
an end.

Also, the policy of house demolitions should be
ceased immediately. Last week, again, the Jerusalem
municipality demolished a number of Palestinian
structures throughout East Jerusalem, forcibly
displacing at least 25 people, including 12 children.
These and additional demolitions in the Jordan Valley
this week bring recorded demolitions in the occupied
Palestinian territories this year to a total of 198
structures, resulting in the forced displacement of
almost 300 Palestinians, half of them children, while
600 others have been otherwise affected.

While recognizing Israel's legitimate security
interests, Iceland strongly believes the blockade of
Gaza to be in violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The humanitarian situation
in Gaza remains deplorable as a result of the blockade.
We align ourselves with those who call upon the
Government of Israel to immediately and fully lift the
blockade so that the people in Gaza can regain their
dignity and revive their economy.

Iceland has strongly condemned the action
leading to the loss of lives on 31 May during the Israeli
raid on a flotilla sailing to Gaza and supports calls for
an immediate, full and impartial inquiry into the
incident, with international participation.

In conclusion, Iceland remains a firm supporter
of a peaceful resolution of the conflict and the two-
State solution. This requires genuine political
willingness by both parties to reach an agreement on
all final status issues, including borders, refugees and
Jerusalem. It has been said by some supporters of the
two-State solution that we are currently at one minute
to midnight. The urgency is clear, but what remains
unclear is whether the parties, in conjunction with the
international community, are ready to take the
measures that are necessary. Let us hope that we can
join forces and overcome the remaining hurdles before
the fateful hour strikes.

