Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein: May I
congratulate you, Madam, and the members of the
Security Council on preparing an excellent draft
presidential statement on the subject of sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I am most grateful to the Council for
having organized this briefing and for having invited
me to participate. This is the first time in its history
that the Council has ever had a public meeting of this
sort, devoted exclusively to sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations
generally.

Over the past several months, and in reaction to
first reports from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, some members of the Council were of the
opinion that an immediate and open discussion by the
Council on sexual exploitation and abuse was merited,
and the argument for it was indeed strong. After some
reflection, however, those members deferred to the
General Assembly, so that a broad strategy for dealing
with sexual exploitation and abuse could be put into
place - a strategy based on consultations between all
the major troop- and equipment-contributing countries,
the Secretary-General, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office of Legal Affairs. It is the
contributions of all those separate components,
together with the opinions offered by our United
Nations colleagues in the field, that enabled my team
and I to respond promptly to the Secretary-General's
request just over two months ago for a report, which
we entitled: "A comprehensive strategy to eliminate
future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations".

Before I turn briefly to the most recent
developments, where the work of the General
Assembly is concerned, and what lies ahead of us, I
would like, with your permission, Madam, to offer just
a few observations that I believe deserve specific
mention.

When we first began to take a close look at
sexual exploitation and abuse, what became obvious to
us was that sexual exploitation - predominantly
prostitution - in at least some United Nations
operations appeared to be widespread. The scale of
sexual abuse - that is, when the exploitation becomes
criminal - was somewhat more difficult to gauge. We
inferred, however, that given the apparent prevalent
nature of the exploitation, both by civilian as well as
by military personnel, the levels of abuse were
probably more serious than was previously thought.
Some of the possible reasons for why that has been so
are enumerated in detail in the report itself, and so I
will not repeat them here.

In reviewing all the information gathered for the
report, we also began to grasp the complexity of the
attendant legal questions - so much so that we were
concerned at how certain United Nations civilian
personnel could enjoy, by virtue of a specific set of
circumstances unforeseen at the time the United
Nations was created, complete impunity, even when
committing frightful offences, such as murder. We also
realized that, in the event that we could create the right
administrative and legal framework for addressing that
issue, we would solve many of the problems associated
not only with sexual exploitation and abuse
specifically, but also with other forms of misconduct.

Our growing understanding of sexual exploitation
and abuse led us also to ask the obvious question: Why
had we left this and other similar issues unresolved for
so long? It was well known to many in the Secretariat
in the early 1960s that the United Nations Operation in
the Congo faced difficulties relating to the ill-
discipline of some of its personnel; and ever since the
United Nations Transition Assistance Group was
mounted in 1989, a steady stream of similar reports
have surfaced in relation to practically every
subsequent mission and were brought to our notice by
the Secretariat, humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and the press.

What must be emphasized, and is emphasized in
the Council's draft presidential statement, is the
context into which we place all our words. United
Nations peacekeeping, in almost all theatres, is
dangerous, no matter how benign and peaceful
conditions may appear to be at certain times. It takes
courage for Member States to send their personnel to
participate in such an undertaking, and even greater
courage for the men and women nominated, military or
civilian, to actually go and serve. And we can rightly
be proud of what United Nations peacekeepers have
accomplished through the years. Moreover, in most
instances, whatever the abuses of United Nations
peacekeepers, they cannot compare to the viciousness
the parties to the conflict often invite on one another.
But that can hardly be the point. It would be offensive
for me to suggest that the United Nations should hold
itself to anything but the highest standards of ethical
conduct, and certainly we should never measure the
United Nations against those who would treat civilian
populations maliciously.

A peacekeeper who would exploit the
vulnerabilities of a wounded population - already the
victim of all that is tragic and cruel in war - is really
no different than a physician who would violate the
patient entrusted to his or her care or than the lifeguard
who drowns the very people in need of rescue. Actions
of that sort puncture, violently, the hope embodied by
the very presence of the person who is there to help
those in need. However rare they may be, therefore, not
only are abuses by peacekeepers repugnant to us, but
they strike at the very credibility of both the operation
in question and this Organization as a whole.

And we, the Member States, have refrained from
opening up that subject to public discourse over the
past 60 years because of what? Because sentiments of
pride, mixed in with a deep sense of embarrassment,
have often produced in us only outright denials. And
yet almost all countries that have participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations have, at one stage or
another, had some reason to feel deeply ashamed over
the activities of some of their peacekeepers.

If all of us are therefore guilty, so to speak, should
it not then be easy for us - each Member State - to
visit the transgressions of its own personnel openly,
with some measure of honesty and humility? Surely we
owe that to the victims of our abuse. Naturally, if one
is to propose such a change to the manner by which we
confront this problem, then one is obligated also to set
a good example.

I once served as a United Nations peacekeeper. I
have worked in the field with my compatriots -
military and police peacekeepers alike - and know
what good they do. I have seen them perform
extraordinary feats of courage and kindness, often in
the most trying conditions. And they, like many others,
have done so with an unswerving sense of dedication
to this world Organization. But I also recognize - and
now do so publicly in the Security Council - that on
occasion my Government has had to confront some
appalling cases of criminal conduct by a few of our
own peacekeepers, including, a few years ago, the
brutal rape of a local woman by a Jordanian in what
was then East Timor and, more recently, in Kosovo, the
murder by a Jordanian civilian police officer of a
fellow officer. While those are two of the worst cases,
sadly, there have been other allegations, and for those
reasons the Jordanian Government, and Jordan's
military and police authorities, are completely
committed to seeing an end to this. Again, if we are to
overcome these difficulties, we the Member States
must resolve ourselves as best we can to recognize the
truth openly and be closer friends to it, however
painful that may sometimes be.

Only days ago, the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly examined and adopted a significant
number of the recommendations put forward by the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for the posts submitted by the Secretariat
relating to sexual exploitation and abuse following on
from the adoption by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the first set of
recommendations contained in the comprehensive
report. This is all very encouraging. We expect the
Secretary-General to announce, soon, the appointment
of a group of legal experts required, by the Committee,
inter alia,

"To provide advice on the best way to
proceed so as to ensure that the original intent of
the Charter can be achieved, namely that United
Nations staff and experts on mission would never
be effectively exempt from the consequences of
criminal acts committed at their duty station, nor
unjustly penalized, in accordance with due
process". (A/59/19/Add.], para. 40 (a))

The expert group is invited to make available its
views to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.

In the meantime, Jean-Marie Guehenno and Jane
Holl Lute have worked with extraordinary
determination over many months to resolve the
difficulties on the ground, actions for which they must
be commended thoroughly. However, I would like to
repeat what both of them have said on previous
occasions: that, despite the progress we have seen, it
would be prudent for us to expect that further
allegations will emerge over the next year and beyond,
due to the Secretariat's strengthening of the systems by
which complaints can be lodged in United Nations
operations.

As the weeks ahead of us unfold, we can also
expect that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
will continue to coordinate smoothly on developing a
standing procedure for how investigations are to be
launched. In due course, the relationship between the
OIOS and the troop-contributing countries on
investigations will also need further refinement.
Similarly, my hope is that the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations will next year take up those
recommendations and ideas found in the
comprehensive report which were not addressed at the
Committee's April session, either for lack of time or
because it was deemed more appropriate for us to visit
those items at a later date. In that context, I intend to
propose again the holding of in-mission courts martial
for the worst offences, and I will argue before the
Committee that, at the very least, we should encourage
those countries that can do so to, in fact, do so.

In conclusion, we will eliminate sexual
exploitation and abuse from United Nations
peacekeeping operations only when we have put into
effect most, if not all, of the recommendations
contained in the comprehensive report, over the next
two years. However, that will not be possible as long as
there are colleagues in the general membership, as well
as in the Secretariat, who would have us believe that
the furore regarding sexual exploitation and abuse is an
exaggeration - a media-inspired public relations issue
and nothing more, which will surely soon lapse into the
past. With the adoption of the draft presidential
statement and the measures contained in it, the
Council's position will be read as being equally clear:
such an opinion is profoundly mistaken. Sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations is a
most serious and tragic issue, especially for the
victims, many of whom are young women living in the
most difficult conditions. Sexual exploitation and
abuse would carry with it the most serious
consequences for the future of peacekeeping if we were
to prove ourselves incapable of solving this problem. I
therefore applaud you, Madam President, and the rest
of the Council for taking this decisive action today, for
you have brought us that much closer to removing this
dreadful stain on the reputation of the United Nations
generally and on United Nations peacekeeping in
particular.

