Mr. Fulci (Italy): I wish to thank the United States
delegation for preparing this draft resolution, on which it
was possible, with few amendments, for the members of the
Security Council to reach a full consensus, thereby making
it possible to transform it into a presidential draft.

Italy welcomes the results of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Summit of
17 August and the appointment of Ms. Perry as Chairperson
of the Council of State of Liberia. I would be grateful to
our colleague Ambassador William Bull if he would kindly
convey to the new Chairperson all Italy's best wishes for a
successful chairmanship with a view to the reconciliation
and reconstruction of her country.

The results of the meeting of 17 August prove once
again, in our opinion, the ability of the African regional
organizations to play a major constructive role in crisis
management. Italy fully supports the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the
framework of the ongoing attention my country dedicates
to regional organizations, particularly in the African
context. In this regard, I wish to express my particular
appreciation for the role played by ECOWAS, through the
good offices provided by our colleague and good friend
Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria, to rescue some Italian
families trapped in a difficult situation and bring them to
the safety of the American compound in Monrovia.

We would be remiss, however, to think that the Abuja
Agreement will put an end to our apprehension over
Liberia. Too many times, alas, we have applauded new
agreements there, only to see them violated a few days or
a few weeks later. We sincerely hope that this will not
happen again this time, and that the faction leaders of
Liberia will finally show the political will to fully respect
and implement the terms of the Agreement they have just
signed. Should they not do so, the international community,
as the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, will be left
with no alternative but to withdraw altogether from Liberia.

The Somalia precedent should make the faction leaders
aware of their responsibilities and of what to expect should
they fail to honour the agreements just reached.
Unfortunately, the theft of almost 900 motor vehicles
belonging to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and to
United Nations agencies is hardly a positive sign in terms
of the attitude of some of the warlords towards the
international community. This is why we insisted that terms
be indicated for the Secretary-General to report to the
Council on the effective return of the stolen property,
property which belongs to the international community.
Ambassador Jonah, during his briefing to the Council,
mentioned that the warlords were taken aback by world
reaction to their behaviour. Thus, they must become even
more aware that the international community will hold
them personally responsible for breaches of human rights
and humanitarian law in the country.

Let me once again voice our horror at one of the
most despicable actions of the Liberian warlords: their
practice of recruiting, training, and deploying children for
combat. Training and often drugging children, many of
them aged seven to fourteen, who often end up killing
relatives and terrorizing their neighbourhoods, is an
unconscionable crime. Words alone do not suffice to
condemn this heinous behaviour. This behaviour must be
stopped immediately, by every means the international
community has available, including that of writing some
provision, the framework of what will soon become the
international criminal court, in order to bring to justice the
perpetrators of such intolerable acts.
Finally, we fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) mandate to 30 November
1996. For all these reasons, and in complete agreement
with the rest of its content, Italy will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

