We thank all briefers for their interventions. The objective of today's debate is to address the main achievements and challenges in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. I would focus on the following points. The foundation of the women and peace and security agenda is built on human rights. Violations of human rights are recognized as one of the triggers of conflict. Restrictions on women's full enjoyment of human rights and the absence of gender equality increase the risks they face in conflict and undermine their full, equal and meaningful participation in peace processes. Women's access to sexual and reproductive health care and rights is equally relevant in conflict and can be life- saving for survivors of sexual violence. Pushback on the human rights of women also weakens the women and peace and security agenda. We cannot accept that. Turning to implementation and accountability, all of us have undertaken concrete commitments on women and peace and security - nationally, regionally, at the United Nations and as the Security Council. Our record of fulfilling them is mixed. We welcome the steps to increase accountability for the implementation of actions related to the women and peace and security agenda. That was one of the reasons for Estonia's decision to join the Generation Equality Compact on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action as a catalytic member. We are also preparing Estonia's third national action plan on women, peace and security. We welcome the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946) and its recommendations. Making women and peace and security an integral part of each Council discussion and outcome is vital. The Council has taken a clear decision in that regard. Yet often it is not able to agree to live up to its decision in mandate renewals and country-specific resolutions. We also need to improve our follow-up on the deliberations and recommendations arising from the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security. With respect to participation, the data is clear: the inclusion of women increases the chances for sustainable peace and thus the effectiveness of Council action. Yet women constituted, on average, no more than 13 per cent of negotiators and 6 per cent of signatories in major peace processes between 1992 and 2019, and this proportion remains low. Given the shrinking political, civic, and physical space for women's participation, the Council needs to speak up for this clearly. Cooperation by various stakeholders, in particular the key role of civil-society organizations and women peacebuilders, is important. The women and peace and security agenda would not have come into being and it would not have been possible to make it a reality without them. The cooperation of diverse women civil-society representatives with the Council needs to be broader and more meaningful. We need political will and joint action to stand up to threats and reprisals against women human rights defenders. The United Nations has verified that in the four years leading up to 2019, 102 women human rights defenders, journalists and trade unionists were killed for their work; in reality, this is an undercount. In terms of resources, we need to back up commitments with funding. For United Nations peacekeeping and political missions, that includes supporting women protection advisers, gender advisers and human rights officers. It also means adequate resourcing and gender expertise in all sanctions expert groups. Furthermore, it entails support for women's organizations and initiatives. Each of those challenges has been magnified by the coronavirus disease epidemic. The Secretary-General pointed out that there have been notable achievements on the women and peace and security agenda, but that progress has been too slow, too narrow, with setbacks and easy to reverse. As a member of the Security Council, which adopted resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years ago, we reaffirm our conviction that we need to do better and that we cannot take a step back from the clear commitments that we have made.
