I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this important and timely meeting on the Democratic Republic of Congo. We would also like to thank and commend the Secretary-General on his comprehensive report on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the activities of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2020/919), and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, on her comprehensive briefing. Today the A3+1 wishes to focus our intervention on the political processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the security and humanitarian situation; regional processes; and support for MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The prevailing political situation in the country provides a rare opportunity to build a stable long-term future and a unified country. In that regard, the unity of the current establishment is paramount in order to address the myriad challenges that the country is facing. Against that backdrop, the A3+1 delegations commend the continued efforts by the Congolese to resolve their political differences in a peaceful manner. We are also pleased with the ongoing constructive dialogue aimed at resolving political tensions, as reflected in the public commitment and reaffirmations to the coalition made by President Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi and former President Joseph Kabila. This is vital to lasting peace and national reconciliation. On the security front, the A3+l remains deeply concerned by the ongoing instability and insecurity as a result of the belligerent actions by armed groups in North Kivu, which continue to draw due attention, particularly as the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) are carrying on with attacks on civilians, the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO. The situation is similar in South Kivu, where the redeployment of the FARDC to other areas in the east has created a security vacuum, leading to active recruitment by some armed groups. That illustrates the need to put in place sustainable and enduring security measures in the areas affected. Nevertheless, we are encouraged by the progress registered in the peace agreements between the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and armed groups in Ituri province. However, we are concerned that the delay in the implementation of the demobilization and reintegration process, partly due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, could impact the situation negatively. It is in that context that the A3+1 underscores the centrality of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region as a long-term solution to create stability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We note the consolidated force presence in Ituri province to respond to militia violence and in Beni territory to address the threat posed by the ADF. In that regard, the A3+1 emphasizes the importance of fully supporting MONUSCO's role in stabilizing the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and recognizes the efforts of the Force Intervention Brigade in addressing the threat posed by the armed groups. The Force Intervention Brigade requires the continued support of the Council in that regard, and needs to be fully trained to remain effective in addressing the threat against the civilian population in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite enormous expectations and the complexity of the task. Although we have seen some progress in the stabilization and strengthening of State institutions, the A3+1 remains concerned about the prospect of a hastened and rushed drawdown of MONUSCO. It is our view that the Mission's drawdown should be based on a comprehensive plan to improve the capacity of the State to deliver while MONUSCO reduces its presence in the country. That plan should include completed security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes; fully functional State institutions, such as immigration and border control; improved police and army, and a strengthened judiciary. Lastly, the drawdown of MONUSCO should be predicated on a positive evolution of the situation on the ground in order to ensure a successful handover of Mission tasks to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Turning to the regional cooperation efforts, the A3+1 reiterates the importance of fostering strong and effective regional relations and cooperation, as reflected in the Government's campaign to build bridges and not walls. In that respect, we are satisfied by the Government's continuing efforts to engage regional partners to address common threats to the region. For the period under review, the A3+l1 welcomes the meeting between President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and President Denis Sassou Nguesso, as well as the cooperation agreement signed between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola on security and public order in border areas. Furthermore, we continue to support the long-standing commitment of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo to achieve sustainable peace, security and stability. In that respect, we are pleased with SADC's deployment of a technical mission in September, which resulted in the adoption of a phased approach to the demarcation of the affected border. The A3+1 also commends the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region for its efforts alongside MONUSCO and welcomes their commitment to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo to achieve sustainable peace, security and stability. The A3+1 remains concerned about the current humanitarian situation. The slowdown in new reported cases in the COVID-19 pandemic is a welcome development, but the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic continues to be a concern. In that regard, we commend the ongoing swift response and decisive efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, other United Nations agencies, the African Union and the World Health Organization. Our delegations welcome the multisectoral response plan for the Ebola outbreak, which aims to strengthen the effectiveness of a health system struggling to provide basic social services and to reach those affected, mainly women and children. It is our hope that major challenges such as insufficient funding and the lack of decentralized access to testing and treatment will be addressed in a timely manner, with the assistance of the international community. The A3+1 remains deeply concerned about the extreme levels of hunger in the country, with the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification analysis revealing that more than 21 million people are experiencing a crisis level or worse of acute food insecurity. We also reiterate our concerns about the high levels of displacement in the eastern parts of the country as a result of clashes between armed groups, intercommunal violence and excessive rainfall and flooding. Our delegations call for sustained international support to enable the country's authorities to mitigate the negative impact of these humanitarian challenges for the people and the economy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate the need for flexible financial arrangements to bolster development efforts within the country, in line with national priorities and in accordance with the aims of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The A3+I also calls for further efforts by regional and international partners to tackle the illicit extraction of, and trade in, mineral resources, which remain a major source of revenue for armed groups in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In conclusion, on behalf of the A3+1, I commend the efforts and commitment of the United Nations, MONUSCO, troop-contributing countries, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and international partners to stabilize the country and protect civilians from ongoing threats, despite the prevailing challenges. Our delegations therefore reiterate calls to the international community and partners to mobilize the necessary resources to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its efforts to strengthen its institutions, as well as to advance the security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes. The A3+1 is of the firm view that it is imperative for the international community - through the African Union, the United Nations and international partners - to maintain solidarity with the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and provide the necessary political, financial and other support in order to build on the gains made thus far.
