Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate, and
I also thank the briefers for their insightful statements.
The topic of today's meeting has great significance
to Japan, a country where water has played a vital
role throughout its history. On a positive note, sound
and peaceful water resource management, including
the development of watercourse networks from the
seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries, helped to
form a basis for the peaceful development of modern
Japanese society.

The sound development and use of water resources
are crucial to achieving peace and prosperity. However,
the importance of water has often invited disputes
among States. There are 276 international water basins
around the world, and, historically, disputes on the
usage or distribution of the shared water resource have
destabilized the relations among States, sometimes
leading to violence. A 2013 report in the UNESCO
quarterly journal A World of Science noted that there
were 44 examples of acute disputes involving violence
over water between 1948 and 2008, including over the
Jordan, Indus and Nile Rivers. Moreover, more recent
cases serve to highlight the fact that water-related
infrastructure can be subject to attacks by parties to
a conflict. Examples of that include the attacks on a
water-treatment plant in Aleppo and the attacks on a
desalination plant and wastewater treatment plants
in Gaza .

On a different note, the protection of water in conflict
situations poses a challenge. In the face of conflict,
we must ensure access to water for those affected in
order to prevent humanitarian crises. I would like to
recall here that under international humanitarian law,
in particular article 54 of the 1977 Additional Protocol
I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and article 14 of the
Additional Protocol II to the same conventions, it is
prohibited to attack, destroy, remove or render useless
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population, including drinking-water installations and
supplies. The Security Council should remain vigilant
about potential humanitarian threats posed by the lack
of access to water in conflict situations.

In the 2013 UNESCO report it is striking to see
that of all of the water-related events between nations,
1,705 events were cooperative ones, while 759 were
conflict-related, with 44 acute disputes involving
violence. As the Secretary-General and the President
of the Council noted today, when managed properly,
water resources can be a unifying force rather than a
cause of conflict. As such, it is only natural that the
Security Council should pay attention to this topic.
Japan believes that improving water access, developing
water management and governance capabilities and
establishing international rules for water usage will
help stabilize societies and de-escalate underlying
tensions between States. I would like to share some of
Japan's efforts on that front.

Improved access to water can help alleviate
insecurity among people. In relation to the briefing
by Mr. Turk, Chair of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace, Japan, as a troop-contributing
country to the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan, has built roads to improve access to
water resources and has also directly provided water to
the people of Juba in South Sudan. As one of the main
providers of water to the local population, the presence
of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in South Sudan is undoubtedly significant. In
that regard, Japan wishes to work closely with the ICRC
to improve access to water in that country.

In the Sudan, Japan has supported post-conflict
reconstruction and recovery efforts through a
multisectoral approach focused on water provision
and capacity-building in agriculture, health and rural
governance. By enabling people to share in the peace
dividend, the population now has greater confidence in
the reconstruction efforts, which thereby contributes to
social stability.

From the legal perspective, Japan has led discussions
on the International Law Commission (ILC) draft
articles on the Law of Transboundary Aquifers, which
provides a valuable platform for countries to establish
agreements for the proper management of their aquifer
systems. This year, Japan worked as the coordinator
of the draft resolution on the ILC draft articles, which
was adopted in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly this month.

Water is essential to every aspect of human life.
That is only natural, given that almost 70 per cent of
the human body is water. Humankind should be wise
enough to use water as a source of cooperation, not of
conflict. I believe that it is important for the Security
Council to pay attention to this topic, which might not
otherwise receive the attention it deserves. I therefore
wish to commend Senegal for taking the initiative to
raise this complex but important cross-cutting theme.
Japan will continue to support countries in improving
their water governance and access as a building block
for sustaining peace and security.

