Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs and the Secretary General of
INTERPOL for their very specific and useful briefings.
I also want to thank you, Mr. President, and Australia
for your commitment to this issue and for organizing
today's debate. It allows us to consider sanctions, a tool
increasingly used by the Security Council.

Last week, on 19 November, Ansar al-Sharia Derna
and Ansar al-Sharia Benghazi were placed under
sanctions. The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities
thereby showed its vital role in support of the political
process carried out in Libya by Special Representative
Bernardino Leon. The designation of Ansar al-Sharia
sends a clear message to the terrorists: it confirms the
determination of the international community, and it
encourages moderate Islamists to distance themselves
from terrorists and to rejoin the political dialogue.

Increasingly, Security Council sanctions are a way
of assisting States in restoring stability. That was one
of the goals of the Security Council this year when
it established a new sanctions regime in the Central
African Republic. In imposing sanctions against
individuals who threaten the return to peace and in
restricting the flow of arms or trafficking in natural
resources, the international community is assisting the
Central African Republic in its stabilization process.

Indeed, sanctions are not an end in and of
themselves. They are a tool at our disposal to achieve
a political objective. In that context, the application of
sanctions requires maintaining a firm attitude while
remaining open to dialogue as part of a dual approach.

As I said earlier, sanctions are not punitive but
rather preventive instruments. The Security Council is
not a judge and has no intention of becoming one, but
it does bear the responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. It is clear that sanctions are an
important instrument at the Security Council's disposal
in exercising its responsibilities. We welcome the
increased use by the Council of this tool, and it is a
positive development that its usage has evolved in recent
years. Sanctions are now targeted, and procedural
guarantees have been put in place.

Among the procedural guarantees, mechanisms
aimed at enabling the delisting of persons are key, as
stressed earlier by Jeffrey Feltman. It is vital to respect
the fundamental freedoms oflisted persons and to ensure
that the regimes have adequate procedural guarantees.
That is why France supported the establishment of a
focal point for delisting requests regarding the other
sanctions regimes and the gradual strengthening of
the Ombudsperson's mandate within the AI-Qaida
sanctions Committee, who is working specifically on
the issue of persons seeking to be delisted. I take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the high quality of the
work carried out by the Ombudsperson.

Moreover, sanctions lists are useful only if they
accurately reflect the status of the threat. Sanctions
must therefore be based on a political strategy that
is continuously being tailored to the context. Here I
Wish to highlight the specificity of each of the various
sanctions regimes.

It is vital that sanctions be implemented in
a universal manner. Here cooperation between
INTERPOL and the sanctions Committees has been
exemplary. The establishment of special INTERPOL-
United Nations notices allows the services responsible
for the application of the law around the world to be
informed of whether an individual or entity is subject
to Security Council sanctions. With the threat posed
by the issue of foreign terrorist combatants and in the
framework of the struggle against Daesh, this type of
mechanism is all the more vital.

Finally, the private sector, like States, has a key
role to play in the implementation of sanctions regimes.
It would be desirable if the United Nations and Member
States stepped up their dialogue with the private sector.
Economic operators should be encouraged to adopt
good practices in terms of the application of sanctions
in the form of the implementation of specific prevention
measures and through increased cooperation with
public authorities, in order to facilitate the interception
of illicit merchandise and combat trafficking.

All measures that can be taken to assist States in
their efforts to implement that goal must be supported.
Sanctions are the only instruments at our disposal that
contain a coercive dimension but that do not include the
use of force. They are valuable instruments that help
us to shoulder our responsibilities in the area of peace
and security, and it is in our interest to improve their
effectiveness and universality.

