Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by extending a particularly warm welcome to
the Foreign Minister of Somalia on his first appearance
at this Council. He and his Government are very
welcome at our deliberations, and we congratulate him
on his appointment. We also thank him for his well-
considered, thorough and, if I may say so, well-judged
statement. Of course, we also welcome our old friend,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. Lamamra, whom we have just heard speaking.

All speakers have pointed to the encouraging
developments of the last several months. They did not
emphasize one of them, which was the smooth
withdrawal of Ethiopian forces at the beginning of this
year, but we can all recognize that that was an
important step, as were, of course, the election of
President Sharif, the formation of a new transitional
Government and, in particular, the decision,
highlighted by the Foreign Minister, to base the new
Government in Mogadishu. President Sharif has also
shown much personal courage in reaching out to the
different factions in Somalia in an effort to establish
political reconciliation, and in that he has our full
support.

While welcoming the progress that has been
made, we should not underestimate the scale or
complexity of the challenges that Somalia continues to
face. There are four particular areas where progress is
urgently needed and which we believe should be the
focus of the Council's attention. The first is tackling
the humanitarian crisis. More than 3 million people
need assistance in Somalia. The international
community must continue to provide aid and support
the Government in delivering basic security,

employment and services, and the new Government
needs to develop its own revenue streams and set its
budget priorities.

Secondly, there is the political track. We need
Somali solutions to Somali problems, and the Djibouti
process has given us a very good start on that. The
international community must continue to support the
new Government and also give that Government the
space to act and to pursue reconciliation politically.
Over time, the new Government will need to establish
wider justice and reconciliation processes, helping to
create an environment in which different groups can
live together.

I encourage the United Nations Political Office
and other United Nations staff to continue to work with
President Sharif's Government and to make regular
visits to Mogadishu.

Thirdly, we need to create a secure environment
in which the new Government can work. Some good
work has been done, including by the United Nations
Development Programme, in training the Somali
police. There is still much to be done in strengthening
the joint security forces. We warmly welcome their
creation; this is the only long-term solution. We should
all consider how we can best help.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) continues to play a critical role, by
providing security in the centre of Mogadishu, key
installations there, providing a base for President
Sharif's Government to operate in the capital. I pay
tribute to our brothers from Uganda and Burundi for
their continuing commitment to this difficult operation.

I would like to announce today that the United
Kingdom will be giving this month an additional
£10 million to the United Nations AMISOM. trust fund.
That is in addition to the £5 million that we have
already given directly to the African Union for
AMISOM. We encourage others also to contribute.

The Council will need to return in May to the
issue of a possible United Nations peacekeeping
operation. As the Secretary-General says in his current
report, there remains uncertainty about whether a
classic United Nations peacekeeping operation is the
right tool to support the political process in Somalia
(S/2009/132). We look forward to his next report in a
month or so.

The fourth area we need to pay attention to is
piracy. We need to continue to work to ensure that
security exists on Somalia's seas as well as on its land.
We have to tackle both piracy at sea and its root causes
on the land. We welcome the work of the Contact
Group and agree with the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report, particularly on developing
regional capability. On the operational front, the
United Kingdom is providing the commander and the
headquarters of the European Union naval mission off
of the coast of Somalia. We look forward to continued
progress in tackling this problem.

Recent developments in Somalia give us some
grounds for cautious optimism. This is a country that
has endured almost 20 years of conflict and
humanitarian tragedy. The challenges that President
Sharif and his Government will face in the coming
months remain immense and we must urgently provide
practical support to the new Government, as well as to
AMISOM, if we are to help bring about the stability
and security that the people of Somalia deserve.

