Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure to welcome the presence in this Chamber of
Mr. She Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

My first words will be to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno and Mr. Olara Otunnu for their brilliant
presentations on the situation and to extend warm
wishes for the recovery of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamel Morjane.

The mission that the Security Council carried out
recently to the Great Lakes region was exceptionally
important. It made it possible to make certain progress,
limited yet concrete. The peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is showing
encouraging developments. The ceasefire is being fully
respected. Disengagement proceeds. Several States
have begun to withdraw their troops from the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
Uganda, Zimbabwe and, soon, Namibia.

The inter-Congolese dialogue is also progressing,
with visits to all the provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by envoys of Mr. Masire, aimed
at appointing representatives for the dialogue; the
preparatory meeting will start on 16 July. Finally, the
announced reopening of the River Congo, with the
arrival of the Uruguayan riverine unit, is a harbinger of
hope for millions of Congolese from Kinshasa to
Kisangani. None of the parties should threaten this
hope in any way. All must participate actively in the
Congo River Basin Commission.

The Security Council had an opportunity to
address these various points during the consideration of
the report of its mission to the Great Lakes region.
Today, we have before us the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), document S/2001/572. As we work on a
draft resolution to extend the Mission's mandate, we
must assess the current situation and consider the
message the Council should send to the parties.

The Council shares the cautious optimism to
which the Secretary-General refers in his report. But
the peace process has not yet reached the point of no
return. It remains fragile, and the parties to the conflict
must continue their efforts. First of all, the
disengagement phase must be completed; the parties to
the conflict have prepared and signed disengagement
plans, and these must be implemented in full.

The Front de liberation du Congo (FLC)
announced that it would disengage to agreed positions
with effect from 1 June. That announcement is
described in the account of the meeting of the Political
Committee and the Security Council mission. Mr. Jean-
Pierre Bemba reiterated that commitment during his
meeting with the Security Council mission on 25 May.
That promise must be kept through concrete action.
The FLC must redeploy without delay to the positions
of the Harare sub-plans.

The demilitarization of Kisangani is another
priority. Rwanda and Uganda have withdrawn their
troops from the city, and the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie (RCD) must do the same. It is
unacceptable that those troops remain there a year after
the adoption of resolution 1304 (2000), which called
for the demilitarization of Kisangani.

Finally, both the FLC and the RCD, must fully
cooperate with MONUC. The obstacles that those two
movements are placing in the way of MONUC's
deployment and of its verification and monitoring
teams, which are described in the report of the
Secretary-General, are unacceptable and are
incompatible with the pursuit of the peace process.

While the ceasefire is generally being respected
by the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
we note that foreign armed groups that are not
signatories to the Agreement have acted to engage in
clashes. These could jeopardize the peace process. The
civilian populations of Congo and of neighbouring
countries, particularly Burundi, will have to foot the
bill for this. All parties to the Lusaka Agreement, and
especially the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, must ensure that all support for those
foreign armed groups ceases. This issue must be
resolved through a negotiated process of the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement of those groups.

The Council encourages the development of a
dialogue among the heads of State concerned to
address this important problem in accordance with the
Lusaka Agreement. The Council takes note of the
assurances just given by Mr. Okitundu; they must be
acted upon as soon as possible.

Human rights violations are another cause for
great concern within the Council. All parties to the
conflict must do much more in this area, especially in
the eastern part of the country. We are concerned to
note that local human rights organizations are
everywhere subjected to serious harassment. As Mr.
Otunnu has so eloquently reminded us, children
continue to be the most vulnerable victims of the
conflict. His recommendations, especially the
demobilization of child soldiers, should be a priority
for everyone.

The plundering of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must cease. The
Council has taken note of the initiatives announced by
some States, such as Uganda, to shed light on this
matter. But here again, we are awaiting results. This
summer, the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which was established by the Council, will submit a
further assessment of the situation. We are determined
to take whatever measures may be necessary to put an
end to this plundering, which has come to fuel the
conflict.

Only complete respect by the parties for the
commitments they themselves negotiated will enable
the dynamic of peace to continue. The primary
responsibility for the implementation of the Lusaka
process lies with the belligerent parties themselves. For
its part, the Security Council is determined to assist the
parties in their efforts - if they fully respect their
commitments. The Council has demonstrated this by
authorizing the deployment of MONUC. MONUC is
today in its second phase of deployment, in which it is
following the disengagement process.

Like the Secretary-General, we consider that in
order to support the dynamic of peace we must prepare
for MONUC's next phase. In the third phase, the
Mission will assist the parties to implement the
withdrawal plans and the process of disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration. But
again, the ball is in the parties' court. Overall plans
have been prepared, and they are an excellent point of
departure. But they must be finalized as a matter of
urgency. For the Secretariat to begin its planning, it
requires detailed information on the location and
composition of foreign forces and on their withdrawal
routes. The Secretariat also needs information about
the composition and location of foreign armed groups
and about the sites where they will gather for the
purpose of demobilization. All the parties must provide
this information as soon as possible; without it,
MONUC will be unable to provide support.

The Joint Military Commission must be
co-located with MONUC headquarters to make it
possible for those two bodies to engage in daily
cooperation.

The parties to the Lusaka Agreement have
established a partnership with the Security Council.
Beyond the Council, the entire international
community must today marshal its efforts. It must
speedily provide substantial economic assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so that the return of
peace can be accompanied by improved living
conditions for the Congolese. The international
community must also be prepared to assist all the
States of the region in implementing solutions
developed by those States themselves with a view to
ensuring stability in Central Africa. Here, I am
thinking, inter alia, of the proposed regional
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development. But here again, it is efforts by the parties
to the conflict that will enable that partnership to bear
fruit.

Because the Council is to extend the mandate of
MONUC, we must continue our close contacts with the
signatories of the Lusaka Agreement to enable us to
assess our support for the peace process as best we can
and as accurately as possible. As Ambassador
Greenstock has suggested, we could take advantage of
the opening of the fifth-sixth session of the General
Assembly, in late September or early October, when
ministers members of the Political Committee of the
Lusaka Agreement will be in New York, to organize a
further meeting with the Security Council. In that way,
we could deepen our confidence-building dialogue and
our cooperation to the benefit of peace for the people
of Congo and for all the other peoples of the Great
Lakes region.

