Mr. Kobler: At the outset, I would like to extend
my most heartfelt congratulations to New Zealand for
its current leadership of the Security Council.

(spoke in French)

Since it is the Fourteenth of July, I would like to
pay due tribute to France on its National Day.

(Spoke in Arabic)

Also allow me to express my best wishes to all
Muslims during this month of Ramadan and on the
upcoming festival of Bid Al-Fitr.
(spoke in English)

I wish to thank the Security Council for renewing
our robust mandate. I have no doubt that its fulfilment
will pave the way to a more stable, more secure and more
peaceful Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
the success of our mandate depends upon a continued
constructive partnership with the Government. Today,
I would like to update the Council on three issues that
deserve our persistent engagement: first, the security
situation in the east; secondly, the electoral process;
and, thirdly, the strategic dialogue between the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the
United Nations and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The protection of civilians is at the core of the
MONUSCO mandate and at the forefront of all our
military activities. Allow me to begin by telling the
Council about a ray of hope that I have just seen on one
of our front lines. As we speak, the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) military
cordon and search operations, supported by MONUSCO
forces against the Forces de resistance patriotiques en
Ituri (FRPI), are ongoing. Those operations have been
the most effective since the fall of the Mouvement du
23 mars. They are a testament to what our collective
efforts can achieve.

Let me be clear: not to use force is always our
preferred option. Our priority was to ensure that the
FRPI disarmed voluntarily. We actively participated
and supported the negotiations that would have allowed
the combatants to reintegrate into civilian life. However,
the use of force proved to be inevitable this time. After
missing three consecutive deadlines to surrender,
MONUSCO forces, in support of the Congolese army,
engaged the FRPI in a jointly planned and coordinated
response. The Congolese army's ground offensive,
aided by our attack helicopters and unmanned aerial
vehicles, proved to be effective. In that regard, I wish
to thank the Deputy Force Commander and my Deputy,
Mr. David Gressly, for their active engagement in the
negotiations.
Since 3 June, our joint efforts have neutralized
about one fourth of the total FRPI strength. Beyond
purely military successes, peace consolidation will also
necessitate the restitution of State authority and the
creation of job opportunities, especially for the youth,
and solutions for ex-combatants who would otherwise
see better opportunities with the armed group. The
operations demonstrate that, by joining forces, we can
more effectively protect defenceless populations. By
unifying our stance, we can consolidate peace. And by
working together, we can restore hope.

(spoke in French)

The operations against the F RPI clearly
demonstrate what we can achieve when the forces
of MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo work together. Allow me to commend the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the cooperation between MONUSCO forces and the
FARDC in the operations against the FRPI. The results
of the partnership clearly strengthen our commitment
and determination to combat the threat represented by
the armed groups.

(spoke in English)

While success in neutralizing the FRPI is possible,
joint operations against the FDLR in North Kivu, South
Kivu and Katanga have been at a standstill now for five
months. However, we need to overcome the current
impasse that has stalled our joint efforts against the
FDLR. I have repeatedly highlighted an undeniable
fact, that is, the Congolese Government has made great
strides over the past 10 years in restoring security.
However, in many parts of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the population remains at the
mercy of a number of armed groups.

In early February, our support to joint operations
against the FDLR were put on hold. Since then, the
Congolese Government has elected to pursue those
operations unilaterally. The suspension of joint
cooperation by the FARDC goes beyond the original
question on human rights. We have revised the human
rights due diligence policy and are looking for ways to
resume cooperation within the framework of our - and
the Government's - commitment to human rights.

Despite the FARDC's progress in dislodging the
FDLR from some of its strongholds, the Congolese
army is finding it difficult to consolidate its hold on
liberated areas. Today, the FDLR is returning to some
of its previous strongholds. As a result, the population
has been dragged into another cycle of violence. In
Rutshuru and Nyiragongo territory - the theatre of
anti-FDLR operations - insecurity is again on the rise.
Incidents of targeted killings, rapes, armed robberies
and abductions for ransom are becoming more common.
United Nations staff and humanitarian relief workers
have also been targeted.

Regrettably, the paralysis of anti-FDLR operations
has cascaded into other fields of operation. The
repercussions on the ground ofthatparalysis are tangible.
In Beni, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continues
to instil fear in the hearts of a defenceless population.
I continue to stress that we must not underestimate the
Islamist nature of the ADF. Since October 2014, 327
civilians have lost their lives in terrorist attacks, and
two of our Tanzanian peacekeepers paid the ultimate
price in the course of their duties.

However, in the past week, MONUSCO'S robust
patrolling by 156 personnel and the United Nations
police engagement in monitoring and advising nearly
900 Congolese policemen has probably prevented even
more carnage. Nevertheless, I call on the Government
to join forces, to work hand in hand and to provide
the Congolese population its basic right to security
and safety. Waiting is simply not an option. Every day
we wait, more Congolese women cannot tend to their
fields out of fear of being raped. Every day we wait,
more Congolese villagers are forced to pay illegal
taxes. Every day we wait, more Congolese children are
recruited into armed groups, exploited and abused. We
are united in purpose; let us also reunite in action.

The electoral process is at the core of the political
discussions in Kinshasa. Peaceful and credible elections
are the most reliable litmus test for any democracy.
Elections alone are not a guarantee for stability, but
the absence of credible elections is increasing the risk
for instability. In November 2016, the Congo will hold
presidential and legislative elections. The imperatives
of resolution 2211 (2015) are crystal clear. A transparent
and credible electoral process must be ensured, while
respecting the Constitution and the electoral calendar.
However, the responsibility for credible elections
ultimately lies with the Government.

I see four significant difficulties that must be
overcome to ensure a credible and transparent electoral
process that meets the expectations of the Congolese
population. First, a budget is urgently needed. Secondly,
the electoral calendar has to be realistic. Thirdly, the
voters' registry needs to be updated to include, for
example, young adults who have reached voting age
since the last elections in order not to disenfranchise
the young population. Fourthly, as in any elections,
political space must be given to the opposition and civil
society.

I welcome President Kabila's initiative to reach
out to a wide range of stakeholders to find a way to
ensure consensus on the electoral process. These
consultations, however, should not delay the presidential
and legislative elections that are to be held in November
2016, as foreseen by the Constitution and resolution
2211 (2015).

The strategic dialogue between MONUSCO and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
began in March. Since then, we have met at the highest
levels with a common purpose in mind - setting in
motion a gradual, mutually agreeable exit strategy and
reinvigorating our sincere collaboration on issues of
security, elections, human rights and communications,
which are areas lying at the very heart of our mandate.
I wish to thank the Government, and especially His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond
Tshibanda, for engaging with us so actively on the
dialogue and for working tirelessly on this process. I
am very pleased that the talks are progressing in a spirit
of mutual confidence and trust.

In May, teams composed of MONUSCO staff and
Government officials conducted joint missions in 29
territories across the 4 conflict-affected provinces.
Armed with detailed questionnaires and following
jointly agreed methodology, the teams travelled
through most of the remote areas to obtain a first-hand
understanding of the security situation prevailing in the
east. They did not look for hearsay, academic analyses
or reported facts. They wanted and reported on the
reality on the ground as they saw it. Their findings
are now being discussed with the Government and
will serve as a basis for drawing joint conclusions on
how and when we will eventually leave the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There are still differences on
that issue. While the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo would like to immediately suggest
a further reduction, we would rather have a phased and
structured approach along the lines of the provisions of
resolution 2211 (2015).

We all agree that MONUSCO must progressively
leave the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. We have, in
fact, already begun the drawdown. Of the 2,000 troops
earmarked to be reduced under the current mandate,
1,420 have already been repatriated, and other units
will follow very soon. It is our common understanding
that once we depart, peacekeeping forces do not have to
return. The timeline for our departure should depend on
the progress on the ground. The sooner the Government
and MONUSCO join forces, the sooner armed groups
will be eradicated. The sooner armed groups are
eradicated and State authority is restored, the sooner
more troops can be reduced.

In conclusion, allow me to touch briefly on a
number of other important issues facing the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo. As I mentioned earlier, economic
opportunities are vital for peacebuilding. When it
comes to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there
is one often-repeated truth - its natural riches could
easily provide the Congolese population with what they
want. Yet, despite abundant resources, a considerable
growth rate and the availability of untapped resources,
such as agriculture and human capital, the Congolese
remain one of the poorest people in the world.

The fall of commodity prices and investors'
concerns about the stability of the country ahead of the
elections are worrying signs. I welcome the efforts of
Special Envoy Said Djinnit to organize an investors'
conference in Kinshasa in February 2016. I invite
national and international partners to invest in the
young people, whose future should be not be hindered
by high unemployment rates and a lack of opportunities.

The fight against armed groups will not be
sustainably successful if questions of economic
development and employment are not addressed. In
this context, I want to highlight the visit of the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ambassador Dina Kawar, and her delegation
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May
2015. That visit underlined the importance of good
governance in the mining sector, focusing further on
the arms embargo and fostering cooperation between
MONUSCO, the sanctions Committee and the Group
of Experts.

Lastly, I have been monitoring the situation in
Burundi very closely as the country has descended into
violence over the past two months. As of today, over
140,000 people have fled into neighbouring countries,
including 12,800 to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I highlight those events to remind us again of
the importance of respecting the Constitution and of
creating the necessary political space for a national
consensus around elections.

The implementation of the national, regional
and international commitments of the Addis Ababa
agreement requires the joint efforts of the international
community. In this context, it is a pleasure to
congratulate Mr. Ibrahima Fall on his appointment as
the African Union Special Representative for the Great
Lakes Region and Mr. Thomas Perriello as the new
United States Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region
of Africa. This strong team of envoys for the Great
Lakes can indeed accompany the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the times ahead.

By tradition, I always conclude by thanking the
national and international staff of the United Nations
for their commitment to securing a better future for the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today,
I wish to commend the performance of the troops of
the Ituri brigade for their achievement in its protection
mandate. They have truly demonstrated tremendous
courage in actively engaging and pursuing the Forces
de resistance patriotiques de l'Ituri over the past weeks.
This is precisely this type of peacekeeping that the
Force Commander and I have always advocated for.
But even more importantly, this engagement is what the
population and the Government expects from us.

I thank the Council for its continued and unrelenting
support. We are all witnesses to a momentous moment
in the history of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The seeds of a stable, secure and resilient Congo have
already been planted. It is my hope that we will see
them flourish in the coming years.

