Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also
thank the briefers for their presentations: Mr. Eliasson,
Ms. Jean, Mr. Laborde. Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Boutellis.

There can be no doubt that in recent times
peacekeeping operations find themselves deployed in
increasingly complex theatres, in which armed groups
continue to pursue their criminal objectives through
the use of asymmetrical and terrorist tactics. They
deliberately target civilians and also the staff of United
Nations missions, and they are doing so at an ever
greater rate. Against that backdrop, we pay tribute to
each and everyone of those members of peacekeeping
operations in the United Nations who have lost their lives
as a result of the such attacks. We also acknowledge the
heroic work of the many thousands of contingents who
daily risk their lives to protect civilians in extremely
complex and dangerous environments.

This reality is shared by several United Nations
peacekeeping operations, such as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, among others, which poses a
great challenge not only to United Nations staff but also
to the implementation of mandates.

As the the concept note prepared by Senegal
(S/2016/927, annex) correctly mentions, the purpose
of this debate is not about mandating peacekeeping
operations to engage in military combat against
terrorism. On the contrary, the objective of this debate
is to address the subject of adapting the presence of
peacekeeping operations to such scenarios, ensuring
that they have the skills needed to operate safely and
that they can fully undertake their mandated tasks,
especially the protection of civilians.

Uruguay understands that it is necessary to make
a clear distinction between two concepts: the first is
protection against asymmetric or terrorist threats
present in the operating environment of peacekeeping
operations; the second is the fight against terrorism,
including counter-terrorist offensive military
operations. In that regard, I reiterate the statement
made in the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations to the effect that "United Nations
troops should not undertake military counterterrorism
operations" (S/2015/446, p. 12) and that

"[w]here a parallel force is engaged in offensive

combat operations it is important for United

Nations peacekeeping operations to maintain a

clear division of labour and distinction of roles"

(ibid).

In the view of my delegation, the proactive
engagement of a peacekeeping operation must not be
manifested in direct actions or attacks in the fight
against terrorism because that way would alter their
nature and purposes. For these reasons, Uruguay does
not believe it appropriate to give any peacekeeping
operation a mandate to engage in military activities
against terrorism or asymmetric threats.

Now, the question arises: If peacekeeping
operations are not suitable to undertake military
activities against terrorism or asymmetric threats,
who or what should do so? First, the State affected
must act through its relevant national institutions.
Secondly, if the State is not able to carry forward the
fight against terrorism, resort may be made to the
use of an instrument supplementary to the presence
of a peacekeeping operation that can combat terrorist
threats or asymmetrical - that is, a multinational force
equipped and trained to fight terrorism, and mandated
by the United Nations, could take charge of that task.
One example of the various tools available to United
Nations peacekeeping operation is the case of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which is tasked,
inter alia, with reducing the threat of the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group and other armed opposition groups.
Thirdly, and as I shall note shortly, the peacekeeping
operation itself can play a role in support ofdevelopment
and the strengthening of the institutional capacities of
the State in preventing terrorism.

It is evident that we must work to improve the
operational capacities of peacekeeping forces, which
would result in increased security for personnel and
greater efficiency in the implementation of the mandate,
particularly the task of protecting civilians. As noted in
the report ofthe High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, Uruguaybelieves it critical for peacekeeping
operations be equipped with the capacity and training
required, which requires better equipment and training
oriented to the tasks to be undertaken. In addition, we
must ensure appropriate operational concepts and rules
of engagement, adjusted to the situation and existing
threats, that allow troops to protect themselves and
fulfil their mandates, exercising effective use of force
adjusted to international humanitarian law.

In this sense, it is appropriate to thank and
congratulate the Secretariat - in particular the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and the Integrated
Training Service - for their work to improve the
effectiveness of military operations and the training of
forces through the development of manuals for infantry
battalions and other units. My delegation would suggest
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in
collaboration with Member States, should also develop
tactics and techniques for the use of United Nations
peacekeeping forces against terrorists undertaking
asymmetric actions.
In addition, peacekeeping operations could benefit
directly from increased cooperation with United Nations
agencies engaged against terrorism, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, and other relevant organizations engaged
in the fight against terrorism. Dialogue and exchanges
of information can be very useful, especially during the
stages of planning or reviewing a mission.

Finally, peacekeeping operations can play a
support role in the development and strengthening of
the institutional capacities of the State in preventing
terrorism, especially through security sector andjustice
reform. I would cite as one example the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, whose mandate includes
such tasks, including the provision of strategic and
technical advice to the authorities of the Central African
Republic in the design and implementation ofa security
sector reform strategy; support for the authorities in the
development and implementation of a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme; and
support for the justice system.

Finally, I reiterate the importance that Uruguay
attaches to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations as the principal body to review questions
related to peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
and where Member States can discuss and move forward
in all aspects addressed in this debate.

