Mr. Badji (spoke in French): In my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, allow me,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. I am confident that under your able
leadership the work of the Council will be successfully
carried out.

I wish also to take this opportunity, Sir, to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Susan
Rice, Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, on the efficient and exemplary manner in
which she steered the work of the Council during the
month of September.

I would like to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Security Council His Excellency
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian Authority, and express my appreciation to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his report.

On behalf of the Committee, I would like to
express my appreciation for the convening of this
extremely important debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, which
continues to be a burning issue. In my statement today
I shall not belabour the issue of how many times over
the years the Council has taken up issues related to the
status of Jerusalem nor of how effective its
intervention has been. But I shall certainly call on the
Council to follow up this monthly discussion with a
concrete decision that would help to bring about an
appreciable and positive change on the ground and
thereby move the political process forward.

The Council's latest decision on the issue,
resolution 1860 (2009), dated 8 January 2009, spelled
out a number of necessary steps in that direction.
Regrettably, they have, for the most part, remained
unfulfilled. The situation in Gaza is still devastating.
Reconstruction work has not yet begun. Israel
continues its blockade of the territory. There are at
present no signs that a genuine political dialogue, let
alone serious negotiations on all permanent status
issues between Israel and the Palestinian Governments,
is about to begin.

This situation allows the illegal Israeli occupation
of Palestinian land to perpetuate. Settlement
construction in the occupied West Bank continues, with
hundreds of new housing units being built and new
construction projects approved by the Israeli occupiers.

The situation in occupied East Jerusalem is
deteriorating by the day. Only last week, the Bureau of
our Committee issued a statement in which it expressed
alarm at the serious worsening of the situation in East
Jerusalem and called attention to the ongoing
demolition of houses, expulsion of Palestinian
residents, construction of settlements and transfer of
settlers aimed at altering the status, physical nature and
demography of the holy city.

The Bureau stated that those policies and actions
constitute violations of international law and that the
occupying Power must immediately put an end to
them. Those policies and those actions have also
invalidated the considerable efforts made by the
Quartet and its partners to give fresh momentum to the
permanent status negotiations. Moreover, they have
again called into question the credibility of the official
statements of the Israeli Government regarding its will
to resume serious negotiations towards reaching a two-
State solution.

As our Committee has underscored on numerous
occasions, the continuing occupation of the Palestinian
territories, which embrace the Gaza Strip and the West

Bank, including East Jerusalem, is a violation of
international humanitarian law. The relevance of the
Fourth Geneva Convention to the Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian territory has been confirmed by the high
contracting parties and by the Security Council. The
military invasion of Gaza by the Israeli army during
Operation Cast Lead demonstrated that Israel flouts its
obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian law. That is also borne out by the number
of dead and wounded among the population of the
Gaza Strip, mainly civilians, and by the extensive and
deliberate destruction of property and infrastructure.

The international community reacted promptly
and unanimously to the violations carried out in Gaza.
Several fact-finding missions have been dispatched by
different international bodies in recent months in order
to establish the facts surrounding the events of
December 2008 and January 2009. The results of those
inquiries have brought to light a very large number of
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, and even war crimes, committed by both
parties to the conflict. Civil society organizations have
drawn up reports that all conclude that egregious
violations of international law were indeed committed.

Our Committee has commended the work of
those fact-finding missions and supported calls for
accountability. Last July in Geneva, our Committee
convened the United Nations International Meeting on
the Question of Palestine, which brought together
renowned international experts and the representatives
of Member States and of intergovernmental and civil
society organizations. The participants in that meeting
called for the implementation of the recommendations
of all United Nations fact-finding missions and urged
all States to honour their commitments under the
Geneva Conventions and other legal instruments.

On 15 September, the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission, established by the Human Rights
Council and chaired by Justice Richard Goldstone,
presented its report on the Gaza conflict
(A/HRC/ 12/48). It is a very comprehensive document
that merits thorough study. The report ends with a set
of recommendations, some of which are directed at the
parties to the conflict, some to the international
community and others both to the parties to the conflict
and to the international community. Those
recommendations should be considered by the
competent bodies and given the necessary follow-up.

Our Committee believes that the perpetrators of
serious crimes, whatever side they may be on, must be
brought to justice and held accountable for their acts.
The Committee calls for resolute action by the
international community to ensure full and complete
adherence to and respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law. In particular, the Committee asks the
high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention immediately to fulfil their obligations
under common article 1 to the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, which requires the high contracting
parties to respect the Convention and ensure respect for
it in all circumstances.

The United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council, should be invited to consider what steps to
take to effectively address violations of international
law. A negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has to be based on the principles of
international law, which must be scrupulously
observed.

The international legal system can achieve its
purpose only by ensuring respect for international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law. Indeed, international justice can be restored only if
all actors of the international community are resolved
to end impunity by calling for the perpetrators of
violations of international law to answer for their
actions. The Security Council, which, under the terms
of the United Nations Charter, is charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
take the lead role in that vitally important undertaking.

