Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this important debate.

Brazil wishes to reiterate its support for a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security. Brazil encourages the parties to seek a
constructive political environment conducive to a
return to meaningful negotiations. The situation in
Gaza continues to highlight the need for a fair, just and
mutually agreeable political solution to the conflict. In
that spirit, Brazil encourages all of the parties involved
to engage in new and creative diplomatic efforts with an
open mind in order to achieve ajust and comprehensive
settlement. Peace will be achieved only with difficult
decisions and concessions being made by all sides.

Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil remains
concerned about the escalation of violence in the north-
west of the country, while welcoming the memorandum
on the stabilization of the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. We reiterate the importance of all
parties fully complying with the ceasefire in the region
and strongly condemn air strikes impacting civilians,
including those on medical facilities and medical
workers, who must be protected at all times.

Brazil underscores its support for the work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, and hopes that we will soon see
further progress on the Geneva track, including
through the prompt convening of the constitutional
committee. That will be a crucial step towards
achieving an urgently needed political solution based
on the parameters set forth in relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2254 (2015),
and the Sochi declaration. We remain convinced that
only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led United Nations-
facilitated political process will deliver lasting peace
and allow for the relief of the humanitarian suffering of
the Syrian population.
Brazil welcomes recent reports of a general
reduction in violence and in the number of victims of
the conflict in Yemen since the Stockholm Agreement
on a ceasefire in the port city of Al-Hudaydah entered
into force. We are nonetheless concerned about the
recent increase in tensions in the country. As we heard
at the latest Council briefing on the matter (S/PV.8578),
the humanitarian, political and security situations in
Yemen remain extremely fragile. We therefore call on
the parties to refrain from any actions that might lead to
a further increase in hostilities and to take the necessary
steps towards the full implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement. We also urge the parties to continue
to work with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, in seeking
a comprehensive political solution to the conflict.
Brazil reiterates its commitment to the monitoring of
the ceasefire by the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement, to which we have agreed to
deploy Brazilian military and police officers.

Finally, Brazil condemns the attack on the detention
centre near Tripoli on 2 July and urges all sides to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid an escalation of violence and
engage with the United Nations, the African Union
and relevant stakeholders in order to achieve a full and
comprehensive cessation of hostilities throughout the
country. We remain convinced that establishing peace
and national unity in Libya and countering terrorism
and transnational crime in the region ultimately require
an inclusive, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
process, in accordance with the Libyan Political
Agreement and the United Nations action plan for
Libya. We therefore call on all parties to work with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame, towards achieving a
comprehensive political solution to the security crisis
and the dire humanitarian situation in Libya. We
maintain our hope that the Libyan national conference
will be held at the earliest possible opportunity.

