Mr. Sisa (Botswana): First of all, I would like to
congratulate Italy on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November and
on convening an open debate on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. My delegation welcomes the
debate on this topic, which is increasingly receiving
global attention due to the sharp rise in the numbers of
victims ofhuman trafficking and kidnapping for ransom
committed by terrorist groups in conflict situations.

Reported cases of human trafficking have been
on the increase in areas affected by conflicts, such
as the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, countries of the Lake Chad
basin, Iraq, Libya, Myanmar, north-eastern Nigeria,
the Philippines, Somalia, the Sudan, Syria, Colombia
and Yemen. It is worth emphasizing that no country is
immune to human trafficking.

My delegation applauds the Security Council for
adopting resolution 2331 (2016), which condemned
trafficking of persons as a violation of the victims'
human rights.

Trafficking in persons is a serious crime that
threatens human security and dignity and is often
associated with severe atrocities, such as organ
harvesting, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Trafficking in persons often affects women, children,
refugees, migrants and internally displaced persons.
Accordingly, Botswana reaffirms its commitment to the
political declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1), which the
General Assembly adopted on 27 September.

Botswana deplores trafficking in persons, which is
exploited by terrorist groups and trafficking networks
for the purposes of financing terrorist activities and
transnational organized crime. This type of crime
fosters instability, forced labour, prostitution, slavery,
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse, thereby
undermining human rights, the rule of law and
sustainable development. Similarly, my country also
condemns the recruitment and use of child soldiers in
armed conflict.

It is pleasing to note that there are 189 States parties
to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and 172 States parties to the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, which are the key
international instruments that guide global efforts to
counter trafficking in persons. In addition to being
a party to the Organized Crime Convention and the
Trafficking in Persons Protocol, Botswana passed the
Anti-Human Trafficking Act of 2014 and established
the Human Trafficking Prohibition Committee to
prohibit, prevent and combat human trafficking as well
as to protect and assist victims of trafficking in persons
and other matters incidental thereto.

Botswana has also developed an anti-human
trafficking national action plan for the years 2017 to
2020, whose full implementation is estimated to cost
$11,118,500. In this regard, we deeply appreciate the
continued support that we receive from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other United
Nations agencies to train prosecutors and law-
enforcement and judicial officers on such emerging
crimes as human trafficking, terrorism and money-
laundering. Through such assistance, Botswana has
conducted public-education campaigns and capacity-
building and training workshops for different actors
to raise awareness of the phenomenon of trafficking
in persons. To create public awareness of this heinous
crime, since 2015 Botswana has been commemorating
the World Day against Trafficking in Persons on 30 July.

At the regional level, the Southern African
Development Community has adopted a ten-year
strategic plan of action on combating trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, which
runs from 2009 to 2019, in order to ensure a
comprehensive and coordinated response to human
trafficking through research, information-sharing and
exchange of experiences, expertise, best practices and
capacity-building.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Botswana's commitment
to the Transnational Organized Crime Convention and
the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. Botswana calls for
strengthened international cooperation, partnerships
and technical assistance so as to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons and to protect and assist victims
of human trafficking.

