Ms. Rice (United States of America): This is the
third time in 10 months that two members, Russia
and China, have prevented the Security Council from
responding credibly to the Syrian conflict. The first
two vetoes they cast were very destructive. This veto is
even more dangerous and deplorable.

The draft resolution (S/2012/538) just vetoed
demanded that all parties cease violence. It invoked
Chapter VII of the Charter to make more binding on
the parties their obligation to implement the six-point
plan of the Joint Special Envoy and effect the political
transition plan agreed by the Action Group for Syria
in Geneva on 30 June. It also threatened the only party
with heavy weapons, the Syrian regime, with sanctions
ifit continued to use those weapons brutally against its
own cities and citizens. But it would not even impose
sanctions at this stage, and despite the paranoid, if not
disingenuous, claims of some to the contrary, it would
in no way authorize or even pave the way for foreign
military intervention. What the draft resolution would
have done was to provide the political support to the
United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic (UNSMIS) that might have given it a fighting
chance to accomplish its mandate. It is a shame that the
Council was unwilling to do so.

There should be no doubt about this. The only way
that unarmed United Nations observers could ever
deter violence is if their reports of the Syrian regime's
persistent violations of the Annan plan and of their own
commitments led the Security Council to impose swift
and meaningful consequences for non-compliance, as
requested - indeed, demanded - by our Joint Special
Envoy. As the United States explained when voting for
the establishment of UNSMIS three months ago (see S/PV.6756), we were and remain deeply skeptical of the
Syrian regime's intentions, and thus of the efficacy of
the observer Mission.

Week after week, the Secretary-General, the Joint
Special Envoy, the Head ofUNSMIS, General Mood, and
others have told the Council that the Al-Assad regime
continued to fire heavy weapons in population centres,
in contravention of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012). Week after week, they told us that the Syrian
Government continued to detain and torture citizens
and to maintain a horrific posture of intimidation and
harassment. They reported recently that the Syrian
regime had escalated its crackdown, employing tanks
and helicopter gunships. They reported on various
occasions that the Syrian-backed shabiha militia were
terrorizing entire communities, including by sexually
assaulting women and children.

The escalation of the regime's attacks against its
own people is even more troubling because of its large
stockpiles of chemical weapons. We have made it clear
that those weapons must remain secure and that the
regime will be held accountable for their use because,
as the situation deteriorates, the potential that this
regime could consider using chemical weapons against
its own people should be a concern for us all.

On 13 July, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon wrote
a letter reiterating his call on Council members to

"insist on the implementation of the Council's
resolutions and to exercise their common
responsibilities by taking necessary collective
action under the United Nations Charter".

Yet the United Nations Mission's reports of persistent
and flagrant violations and the appeals of the
Secretary-General the Joint Special Envoy have been
met only with intensified violence and Security Council
inaction.

The blame for that unacceptable situation does
not lie with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Joint
Special Envoy Annan or the United Nations monitors.
Unarmed United Nations military observers and
civilian staff have performed their tasks bravely under
very dangerous conditions, and we thank them and
the troop-contributing countries profoundly for their
dedicated service.

Rather the fault lies squarely with the heinous
Al-Assad regime and those Member States that refuse
to join the international community and their fellow
Council members in taking firm action against the
regime. Their position is at odds with the majority of
the Council that voted in favour of the draft resolution
today. It is at odds with the League of Arab States. It is
at odds with over 100 countries in the Group of Friends
of the Syrian People that called for decisive action
under Chapter VII to stop the killing and start a process
of transition to post-Al-Assad Syria. And it is at odds
with the wishes and aspirations of the vast majority of
the Syrian people, who deserve so much better from the

Security Council.

We have missed yet another critical opportunity to
work together. We, and especially the people of Syria,
cannot afford to miss any more. Yesterday's dramatic
attack in Damascus was indicative of how the situation
in Syria will continue to deteriorate in the face of the
Council's inaction. The perpetuation of the status quo
is in no way static. It is in fact a recipe for intensified
conflict, increased terrorism and a proxy war that could
engulf the region. It is simply not credible to argue that
the mere continuation of an unarmed observer mission
in the midst of these threats and spiraling violence can
or will fundamentally change anything. Everyone in
this Chamber knows that.

The United States has not and will not pin its policy
on an unarmed observer mission that is deployed in
the midst of such widespread violence and that cannot
even count on the most minimal support of the Security
Council. Instead, we will intensify our work with a
diverse range of partners outside the Security Council
to bring pressure to bear on the Al-Assad regime and to
deliver assistance to those in need.

The Security Council has failed utterly in the most
important task on its agenda this year. This is another
dark day in Turtle Bay. One can only hope that one day,
before too many thousands more die, Russia and China
and will stop protecting Al-Assad and allow the Council
to play its proper role at the centre of the international
response to the crisis in Syria.

