Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Mrs. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her briefing
on the biannual report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602).
I would also like to thank my colleague the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and the observer of the European Union for
their briefings. And we welcome the participation ofthe
Permanent Representative of Germany in this meeting.

We meet today on the agenda item of nuclear
non-proliferation to discuss the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), against the backdrop of the
reports under consideration (S/2018/60l, S/2018/602 and S/2018/624), and in the wake of the recent
developments with regard to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the decision of the United
States to withdraw from it. My delegation has reviewed
the three reports before us, including the content
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/602) on
Iran's implementation of its commitments regarding
its nuclear programme. We welcome its assertions
about that implementation in accordance with the
nuclear agreement, as mentioned in the reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that have
been submitted to the Security Council since January
2016 (see S/2018/624). In that regard, we affirm that
Iran should continue to meet all its commitments
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the IAEA Safeguards Agreement. Iran
should also quickly ratify the Additional Protocol in
order to maintain its position as a non-nuclear State.

The State of Kuwait supports all ongoing efforts to
ensure security and stability in the region, which has
long endured turbulence and war. However, we want
to emphasize our firm position on all non-proliferation
issues in general, and specifically on declaring the
Middle East a zone free ofweapons ofmass destruction.
Nearly three years ago, the State of Kuwait welcomed the
adoption of the agreement on Iran's nuclear programme
under the JCPOA (see S/PV.7488), although we believe
that it does not address all the concerns of the region.
However, in the spirit of cooperation and support for
diplomatic efforts, at the time we expressed the hope
that the agreement would help to promote security
and stability in the Middle East. Notwithstanding the
deteriorating security situation in the Middle East, the
ongoing interference in the region's internal affairs
and the destabilization of security and stability at
the regional level, we believe that it is important to
support and encourage all the parties to the agreement
to uphold it and implement its provisions. The State
of Kuwait respects and abides by Council resolutions.
Nonetheless, the grounds for the withdrawal of the
United States from the JCPOA must be highlighted
in order to address all the regional and international
concerns related to that agreement.

We are concerned about the findings of the
Secretariat involved in the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) pertaining to the ballistic missiles fired at
Saudi Arabia from Yemen, as well as the issues related
to the transfer of arms and military equipment to other
States in the region. Although the Secretariat was
unable to determine dates for the arms transfers that
are mentioned in the report, it remains a very serious
issue that threatens security and stability in the region.
In that regard, we reiterate our condemnation in the
strongest terms of firing ballistic missiles at the sister
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as they are a threat to its

national security and the civilian facilities of our sister
countries in the Gulf.

We underscore the position of the League of Arab
States in its last summit, which calls for maintaining
security and stability in the countries of the region,
ensuring the safety of their peoples, committing to
non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
respecting their sovereignty and maintaining good
neighbourliness, in accordance with international
instruments and norms. Meanwhile all acts of
provocation that undermine trust and threaten security
and stability in the region must cease.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms that
the Security Council should continue to shoulder
its responsibilities.

