Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): First of all, my
delegation wishes to join previous speakers in
welcoming the Presidents and Prosecutors of both
Tribunals to the Council and in thanking them for their
comprehensive briefings on the progress of the
implementation of the completion strategies of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Let me also use this
opportunity to reiterate our continued support to the
effective contribution of the ICTY and ICTR to
bringing to justice those responsible for crimes against
humanity in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.

My delegation, like others, underscores the
importance of the completion strategies to the
performance of the ICTY and ICTR in their final
phases. In that regard, Indonesia notes with
appreciation that various concrete measures have been
taken to implement the completion strategies and
significant progress has been achieved towards
completion of the work of the two Tribunals. We also
welcome their joint efforts to ensure their legacies after
the completion of the mandate and the work of the two
Tribunals.
We also note that the current and upcoming
workloads of the Tribunals are exceptionally high. We
therefore welcome their continued endeavours to
achieve greater efficiency in their work by exploring
further ways to expedite proceedings while respecting
the rights of the accused.

My delegation recognizes that naturally there will
be some functions of the Tribunals that will remain in
place following completion of their work. The Council,
in our View, needs to consider a temporary
international mechanism for addressing all residual
functions, particularly those related to the fugitives at
large, transfers of cases to national jurisdiction, witness
protection, sentence supervision and archives. Such a
mechanism, which would address the necessary
residual functions that should be retained, should be
small, temporary and efficient.

My delegation would like to specifically
acknowledge that the informal Working Group on the
tribunals chaired by Belgium has successfully achieved

some areas of agreement in identifying the residual
functions and their possible solution. We also note that
the Working Group has reached significant progress in
the drafting of a Security Council resolution. It is
indeed our hope that there will be adequate common
ground for the Council to speed up the finalization and
adoption of that draft resolution.

To conclude, my delegation, once again, would
like to reassure both Tribunals of its full support and
cooperation towards ensuring that their mandates are
fully discharged, including the implementation of their
respective completion strategies. We would also like to
express our appreciation for the contributions of the
two Tribunals to bringing those responsible to justice.

