The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poakre-
Kano (Central African Republic), took a seat at
the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council commends the
Central African authorities, the political parties
and civil society of the Central African Republic
for the efforts they have made for the ongoing
success of the transition process. The Security
Council welcomes in particular the spirit of
consensus which the Central African parties have
shown and which attests to their determination to
continue the transition process to the end'

"The Security Council encourages the
Central Africans to continue their efforts to
ensure the success of the constitutional
referendum in November and the satisfactory
organization of free, transparent and democratic
presidential and legislative elections in January
2005.

"The Security Council also pays tribute to
the United Nations system in the Central African
Republic and in particular to the Secretary-
General's Representative, General Lamine Cisse',
for his work at the head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) and reaffirms to
him its full support. The Security Council is
pleased that the Secretary-General intends to
renew the BONUCA mandate until 31 December
2005.

"The Security Council welcomes the
assistance provided by the international
community to the stabilization and recovery of
the Central African Republic, as well as the
considerable efforts made by the member States
of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CEMAC) in the political, economic
and security fields.

"The Security Council calls upon
international donors and the international
financial institutions to continue to provide
resolute support to the Central African Republic,
including on the preparation of the upcoming
legislative and presidential elections. It also
emphasizes that their support will be essential for
the country's economic and social recovery and
encourages them to formulate in close
consultation with relevant development agencies
and with the Government of the Central African
Republic a concerted development strategy for
the country.

"However, the Security Council expresses
its concern at the deterioration of the State's
finances and of the public sector, and calls on the
Central African authorities to act with
determination in order to address this situation.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the CEMAC Multinational Force and
calls for the continuation of the restructuring of
the Central African Republic's defense and
security forces.

"The Security Council also encourages the
Central African authorities to continue to combat
with determination human rights violations.

"The Security Council again expresses its This statement will be issued as a document
concern at the possible consequences to the of the Security Council under the symbol

Central African Republic of the crises in the S/PRST/2004/39.
subregion. Accordingly, it welcomes with
satisfaction the Secretary-General's initiative in
asking BONUCA to assess the potential effects of
developments in neighbouring countries on the
situation in the Central African Republic and vice The meeting rose at 3:10 17.111.
verso."

agenda.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its

