Mr. Duale (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to participate in this
debate on Somalia and to briefly address the members
of the Security Council.

First and foremost, allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of November, as well as, through
you, to congratulate your predecessor for the month of
October.

I had the privilege and honour to address this
body on 16 October 2012 (see S/PV.6848). Among the
points I rasied then were the achievements thus far
with regard to the six pillars of Somalia's future policy.
Those pillars, which I think we have already heard
about several times, have mostly been implemented
in the past year when it comes to their most important
parts. On 30 October 2013, our Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Her Excellency
Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, addressed this body and
sincerely stated that the Council had been supporting
Somalia for a long time, which is true (see S/PV.7054).
Our partners have also helped sustain Somalia for
a very long time. We hope there is no fatigue in that
regard, for - we also hope - there is now light at
the end of the tunnel. The Council's commitment and
sustained partnership in support of the critical priorities
in Somalia is today at a turning point. Resolution 2124
(2013) clearly states that the Security Council and the
international community are still seized of Somalia's
problems and issues, including its peace and stability.

We fully appreciate the fact that the Council has
taken note of the work and assistance of the valiant
brothers and sisters in the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) to rid Somalia from the scourge
of Al-Shabaab. We also appreciate the assistance
provided to Somalia thus far in the area of training,
among others, to be able to completely free itself of the
residual Al-Shabaab elements in the country.

That leads me to the point that, while we fully
appreciate that AMISOM. has received full support and
an increase in troop strength, as well as logistical and
other enabling support, we also hope that the Somali
army contingent fighting together with AMISOM. to
defeat the last AI-Shabaab strongholds will also be
supported by United Nations funds in a more consistent
and timely manner. While the United Nations trust fund
that has been proposed here is acceptable, a problem
arises when it comes to the matter of when it will come
about.

AMISOM. has been granted a period of 18 to
24 months to complete its tasks and mandate. Will
that be with the assistance of the trust fund? Will it
also be possible, in a timely manner, to assist the
Somali contingent fighting with AMISOM. to be able
to liberate the rest of the country so that the goal of
preparing for and holding elections and approving
federal components and achieving reconciliaiton can
be realized before 2015-2016?

On behalf of my country, our Permanent Mission
here in New York and the people of Somalia, I once again
thank the Council. I hope that all the means possible
will be brought to bear in ensuring that funding for the
trust fund and its implementation will materialize as
soon and as urgently as possible. Otherwise, it will be a
disaster for Somalia once again.

