The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

Allow me to start by thanking our colleagues the
Ambassadors of Kuwait, Peru and the United Kingdom
for their very comprehensive briefings and for their
efforts in organizing the visit. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the authorities of Kuwait for
their generosity and for facilitating our mission, and
to the authorities of Bangladesh and Myanmar for
their hospitality.

The Security Council visit to the region should
really be seen as the success of the two or so previous
Council presidencies. Thanks to their commitment,
we were able to witness the humanitarian situation on
the ground. What we saw in Cox's Bazar was a true
eye-opener. The scale of the crisis is horrifying, and
it will not change in any way for the better during the
monsoon season. There is a race against the clock in the
refugee camps, and we are collectively losing it.

We believe that the Council's visit can serve as
a trigger for more robust Council action. Council
members are obliged to take action and to respond
with concrete solutions followed by thorough financial
and material support for not only the refugees but also
the host communities in Bangladesh. In that regard,
I want to thank the authorities of Bangladesh and the
host communities for their efforts in easing the heavy
burden of the Rohingya refugees.

We call on the Myanmar authorities to grant full
and unhindered access for United Nations agencies to
Rakhine state and to develop close cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme. We further call for Myanmar to
commit to addressing the recommendations of the
Annan Commission.
Lastly, we hope that after voluntary repatriation,
the Rohingya community will be properly reintegrated
into society with unrestricted access to health-care
services and basic education for all, including women
and children.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.

