Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on your successful stewardship of this month's
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
this open debate. This debate could not have been more
timely, as we are approaching the first anniversary of
the adoption of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (Samoa Pathway), a blueprint for sustainable
development for small island developing States (SIDS),
while in September a historic summit will take place
here at the United Nations for the adoption of a universal
post-2015 development agenda that would call for global
action towards inclusive, sustainable development and
universal prosperity in a peaceful, safe and just world.

The Republic of Cyprus aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union and would like to make the following
remarks in its national capacity.

The international community has recognized the
particular challenges facing SIDS, especially through
the outcome documents of international conferences,
such as the Barbados Programme of Action, the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States and, most recently,
the Samoa Pathway.

Their small size, the limited nature of their
economies, their lack of capacity and resources, and
their geographical isolation and exposure to natural
disasters render those States more vulnerable to
subsequent threats that adversely affect their economies
and societies. Such challenges are, inter alia, lack of
human capacity, land degradation, weak infrastructure,
food insecurity, brain drain due to migration, organized
crime, including the trafficking of drugs, small arms
and persons, as well as piracy, and, most importantly,
the adverse effects of climate change.

The 2012 World Bank report entitled "Turn Down
the Heat" warns that if current commitments and
pledges are not fully adhered to, a warming of 4°C could
occur as early as the 20605 and that an associated sea-
level rise of 0.51 metre or more by 2100 will threaten
the very existence of entire countries and many SIDS.

Needless to say, all of those grave challenges have
a serious, cumulative impact on the stability and peace
of many SIDS. Following the Security Council's recent
Arria Formula meeting on the role of climate change
as a threat to global security, especially for SIDS, this
debate is an excellent opportunity for SIDS to further
contribute to the discussion on how we can collectively
address the peace and security challenges related to
climate change that small island States have to face.

Climate change, as the greatest threat multiplier
for global security, can be considered the root cause of
many of the various challenges that threaten SIDS and
make them socially, environmentally and economically
more susceptible.

Ecosystems and marine biodiversity are also
susceptible to aggressive changes in the environment,
something that directly affects coastal and marine
resources and, eventually, tourism and fisheries. Climate
change can lead to or intensify structural adversities
and increase communicable and noncommunicable
diseases. It deepens social and economic disparities, as
climate-induced migration illustrates.

Cyprus, as a small island State in the Mediterranean,
is familiar with those challenges. Our small size,
remoteness, limited natural resources - such as water
scarcity - render us exposed and vulnerable to many
challenges similar to those currently facing SIDS. That
is why we have always maintained the view that the
interest of small island States can best be served and
protected collectively, within the framework of the
United Nations. It must be emphasized, in this context,
that building alliances and partnerships between
SIDS and all relevant actors - including regional
organizations, global financial institutions, the private
sector and civil society - is crucial in addressing the
numerous and diverse challenges of the small island
States.

SIDS rely on the support and solidarity of the
international community. In our national capacity and
as a member of the European Union, we support and
contribute to the realization of many of the shared
objectives of SIDS, including that of addressing climate
change globally.

Development, peace and security go hand in hand.
The sustainable development goals, which our leaders
will adopt next September, have clearly established that
peace and security cannot exist without development
and development cannot be achieved without peace.
International cooperation and effective collective
measures to remove any threats to peace lie at the core
of our preventive actions, and with the involvement of
all actors, governmental and non-governmental, and all
other stakeholders, we can help SIDS build resilience
and a more prosperous and sustainable life. It is in our
collective interest to do so, and it is in the interest of
global peace.

