Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway would like to join
other delegations in welcoming this debate. We
commend Singapore's initiative, and we commend you,
Mr. Minister, for coming to New York to preside over
this important meeting.

The United Nations capacity to conduct effective
peacekeeping operations is crucial in order for the
Security Council to fulfil its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. The
Brahimi report has pointed out important challenges in
that regard, and includes timely recommendations that
have Norway's full support.

Norway remains firmly committed to United
Nations peacekeeping and to supporting the primary
role of the Security Council with regard to peace and
stability. Over 1,200 Norwegian soldiers are serving in
United Nations-mandated peace operations today. One
per cent of our total civilian police force now serves
under the flag of the United Nations. We are working
to improve our capacity to participate with military and
civilian personnel and resources in ongoing and future
United Nations operations.

As an elected Council member and as a troop
contributor, Norway is very conscious of the need for
close cooperation between the Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat in order for
the United Nations to be successful in peacekeeping.
We therefore warmly welcome the initiative of
Singapore to arrange this open debate. We highly
appreciate your presence here today, Mr. President.

In the Council, Norway will continue to advocate
transparency and openness towards non-members, in
line with Nordic positions on Security Council reform.
Improving arrangements for consultations with troop
contributors is part and parcel of that effort. This goes
to the heart of key issues raised in the Brahimi report:
the need for clear, credible and achievable mandates;
and the need to close the commitment gap between
adopted mandates and available troops and resources.

Norway is adamant that countries providing
troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations must
be given due opportunities to participate in the
preparation and revision of mandates. We need
mechanisms that address the legitimate interests of
troop contributors during all phases of an operation.
That will promote, not hamper, the process of
preparing and implementing achievable mandates.
We therefore welcome resolution 1327 (2000),
which states the Council's commitment to strengthen
significantly the existing system of consultations.
While the arrangements established during the 19905
led to obvious improvements for troop-contributors, it
nevertheless became clear that closer interaction was
needed. The decision to hold private meetings with
troop-contributing countries, including at their request,
at various stages of peace-keeping operations, is thus
an important step. Such meetings should become an
integral part of both the Council's and the Secretariat's
planning and conduct of peace operations.

We welcome the presidency's initiative to invite
troop contributors to consultations prior to the
Secretary-General's release of his new report on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. This is a
practical initiative that is in accordance with what we
are debating here today.

It is now up to all of us - troop contributors,
Council members and non-members alike - to make
maximum use of the joint meetings with the Secretariat
in order to utilize their potential for successful
interaction, decision-making input and information-
sharing. This requires the active participation of all
parties involved at the appropriate level.

Looking ahead, we believe that due consideration
should be given to the proposal of the Brahimi Panel to
establish ad hoc subsidiary organs of the Security
Council, as provided for in Article 29 of the Charter, as
a way to institutionalize troop-contributing countries'
advice to the Council during the mandate-formulation
process. Due consideration should also be given to the
possibility that regional organizations taking part in
United Nations peace operations with coordinated
forces could participate in consultations with the
Council and troop-contributing countries.

We are ready to consider proposals to establish a
more permanent mechanism under the Security Council
in order to follow-up the recommendations of the
Brahimi report and other issues related to
peacekeeping. Troop contributors must be provided
with satisfactory ways of participating in such a
follow-up effort. We must all strive towards
transparency in our work on peacekeeping operations.

Norway believes that countries that have
committed military units to an operation should have
access to Secretariat briefings to the Security Council
during the existence of an operation on matters
affecting the security of their personnel. In order for
the Secretariat to fulfil the crucial task of providing
information to troop-contributing countries, it must be
given the necessary resources to gather, analyse and
distribute relevant information in a timely manner. This
is of no little importance to smaller countries with
limited information-gathering capacities of their own.
We must strengthen the planning capacity of the
Secretariat in order to provide troop-contributing
countries with the necessary material as a basis for
decision-making.

Norway welcomes the actions already taken in
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretariat to follow-up the Brahimi report. I have
listened very carefully to the legitimate concerns and
concrete proposals presented today by important troop
contributors, including Jordan, India, Fiji and Nigeria.
Norway is determined to work closely and
constructively with them, both in the Council and in
the Assembly, and with other members and troop
contributors to ensure implementation of the Panel's
recommendations.

In conclusion, my delegation would also like to
thank all the outgoing members of the Council for their
contributions to the work of the Council during the past
two years.

