Mr. Michel (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for kindly giving me the
floor in order to speak on behalf of the Secretary-
General at this public debate devoted to the theme
"Strengthening international law: rule of law and
maintenance of international peace and security". Had
the Secretary-General not been on a mission abroad
today, he would have very much liked to welcome you
personally, Mr. Minister, to thank you warmly for your
presence and to commend you both for the way in
which your country is presiding over the Council and
for having organized today's debate on the topic you
have chosen. It is also an honour and a pleasure for me
to welcome and warmly greet the President of the
International Court of Justice.

It is quite easy for me to speak on behalf of the
Secretary-General today, for his convictions and
positions with regard to international law and the rule
of law are well known. I will just refer to the
memorable statement he made on 21 September 2004
during the opening of the general debate of the fifty-
ninth session of the General Assembly (see A/59/PV.3).
In fact, his attitude represents a contemporary
expression of the values and resolve that inspired the
founders of the United Nations.

The Preamble to the Charter in fact expresses the
resolve "to establish conditions under which justice
3
and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained".
The founders wanted to see an international community
grounded in law. For them the law was not an
instrument, but a culture. Justice and law were the
fundamental conditions for international peace and
security. At the same time, the founders also reaffirmed
their faith in fundamental human rights and in the
dignity and worth of the human person.

The presence of the President of the International
Court of Justice prompts us to recall the fundamental
principle requiring States to settle their international
differences through peaceful means, as well as the
specific role entrusted by the Charter to the main
judicial organ of the United Nations. The judgements
of the Court have made a valuable contribution to the
cause of peace. To cite a recent example, I am pleased
to note the conclusion of the agreement between
Cameroon and Nigeria to effectively implement a
decision of the Court. In addition, the Court has
clarified key points of international law through its
advisory opinions. It is true that, with some exceptions,
those opinions are not in and of themselves legally
binding. But the rules of law that they interpret, and
whose scope they clarify, fully exercise their legal
effects vis-a-vis the legal subjects on which they are
binding.

The excellent discussion paper provided by the
presidency of the Council to stimulate and guide
today's debate sets out numerous interesting and
important questions. The necessary limitation on
speaking time compels me to make a difficult choice
among them that is not necessarily a faithful reflection
of the legitimate concerns of all participants in the
debate.

In addressing first the issue of promoting the rule
of law in conflict or post-conflict situations, I should
like to begin by recalling the report that the Secretary-
General sent to the General Assembly on that subject in
August 2004. I would also join in welcoming the
meeting to take place tomorrow to establish the
Organizational Committee of the new Peacebuilding
Commission. In that context, the Secretariat is tasked
with identifying more precisely the means it already
possesses to support actions to promote the rule of law,
those that it will require in the future, and the best way
of organizing those resources in order effectively and
competently to meet its needs.
In that respect, the proposals that have been made
by some Member States are extremely useful. The
measures to be taken should take into account the
needs of the Commission and of those that may arise in
all the other many situations that will require
assistance without figuring on the Commission's
agenda. The promotion of the rule of law, including the
promotion of human rights, cannot be limited to
situations associated with an ongoing or recent
conflict.

The second topic proposed for discussion is that
of impunity. In recent years, the Security Council has
taken a number of decisions that reflect its resolve to
put an end to the impunity of perpetrators of
international crimes. The recently adopted resolution
concerning the transfer of former Liberian President
Charles Taylor is the most recent example of that
resolve. By taking such action, the Council is keeping
pace with one of the major evolutions of the culture of
the international community and international law over
the past 15 years. Allow me if I may to note three
aspects of that evolution.

First, justice and peace must be regarded as
complementary requirements. There can be no lasting
peace without justice. The problem is one not of
choosing between peace and justice, but of the best
way to interlink the one with the other, in the light of
specific circumstances, without ever sacrificing the
duty ofjustice.

Secondly, amnesty for international crimes has
been regarded as unacceptable in international practice.
Today, its rejection must be enshrined as a standard to
be enforced.

Lastly, the system of international penal
jurisdictions, which has steadily progressed towards
greater universality, is a primary responsibility of
States and, within the constraints of the Rome Statute,
a complementary responsibility of the International
Criminal Court. If the system is to function efficiently,
it will be essential to heed the appeals of States that
require assistance in their efforts to build the necessary
domestic capacities, provided that they are prepared to
take international standards into account.

As regards the third topic suggested for our
consideration - enhancing the efficiency and
credibility of United Nations sanctions regimes - I
wish to refer to the letter recently addressed by the
Secretary-General to the presidency of the Security
Council, which I would request to be distributed to all
Council members. Largely on the basis of the outcome
document of the 2005 world summit, the Secretary-
General, in a non-paper annexed to his letter, sets out
his views concerning the listing and delisting of
individuals and entities on sanctions lists. According to
the non-paper, the minimum standards required to
ensure that the procedures are fair and transparent
would include the following four basic elements. Since
the paper has been distributed in English, I will now
state them in that language.

(spoke in English)

First, a person against whom measures have been
taken by the Council has the right to be informed of
those measures and to know the case against him or her
as soon as and to the extent possible. The notification
should include a statement of the case and information
as to how requests for review and exemptions may be
made. An adequate statement of the case requires the
prior determination of clear criteria for listing.

Secondly, such a person has the right to be heard,
via submissions in writing, within a reasonable time by
the relevant decision-making body. That right should
include the ability to directly access the decision-
making body, possibly through a focal point in the
Secretariat, as well as the right to be assisted or
represented by counsel. Time limits should be set for
the consideration of the case.

Thirdly, such a person has the right to review by
an effective review mechanism. The effectiveness of
that mechanism will depend on its impartiality, degree
of independence and ability to provide an effective
remedy, including the lifting of the measure and/or,
under specific conditions to be determined,
compensation.

Fourtth, the Security Council should, possibly
through its Committees, periodically review on its own
initiative targeted individual sanctions, especially the
freezing of assets, in order to mitigate the risk of
violating the right to property and related human
rights. The frequency of such review should be
proportionate to the rights and interests involved.

The non-paper indicates also that those elements
would apply mutatis mutandis in respect of entities.
06-40028
(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I should like to note one of the key
points referred to early and most relevantly in the
discussion paper submitted by the presidency.

Noting that the purpose of today's thematic
debate is to consider the Security Council's special role
in promoting international law, the document states
that the Council "operates within the framework of
international law in all its functions" (5/2006/367, annex, p. 2). That is both an objective and a rule
enshrined by the Charter.

Your initiative, Sir, therefore deserves to be
approved and supported, and I thank you for it on
behalf of the Secretary-General.

