Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like first of all to express our gratitude for the
report given to us by Mr. Bernard Kouchner and to say
that we highly value his presence at this meeting.

A year ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), which marked the end of a
humanitarian tragedy whose main Victims were
thousands of innocent civilians - fundamentally
Albanian Kosovars - who were subjected to a brutal
process of ethnic cleansing and whose fundamental
human rights were subjected to systematic and
persistent violations over at least a decade. With that
resolution one of the most difficult undertakings ever
faced by the Organization also began, one which may
continue to be one of the most difficult efforts made by
the United Nations for many years to come. Of course,
anniversaries are an opportunity to draw up balance
sheets. Although Mr. Kouchner may not wish to do that
today, it may be possible to do so provisionally: a
balance sheet of goals achieved and goals still pending.

Our main concerns a year ago centred on the
return of refugees and displaced persons, on
preparations for the approaching winter, on the
demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
and on the building of a multi-ethnic Kosovo. As the
Secretary-General indicated, in the first months of the
deployment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over
700,000 refugees returned to their homes, and the
beginning of the rebuilding of housing, schools,
hospitals and public buildings got underway, as did the
restoration of basic services. We were able to confirm
that through the Security Council mission, in which I
had the privilege to participate. Winter arrived, but the
feared humanitarian tragedy did not take place. The
Kosovo Liberation Army was formally demilitarized,
and with that began the long and thorny process of
transforming its members into useful members of
society.

We never believed that this would be an easy
process. The objective of achieving a multi-ethnic
Kosovo, on the other hand, is a pending task. Everyday
reality shows that society in Kosovo does not live in an
integrated way and that for now there is only a
precarious existence that is obtained, or perhaps
imposed, by the presence of UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR).

When Argentina voted in favour of resolution
1244 (1999) a year ago, it did not thereby endorse
revenge, hatred, intolerance and crimes of all sorts. It
did not give its consent for the Kosovo Albanians to
attack the Kosovo Serbs or other minorities. Nor did it
give its consent to a mono-ethnic Kosovo or to the
campaigns against the Kosovo Serbs. This is why we
firmly urge the leaders and the population of Kosovo to
put an end to these senseless acts and to begin to work
hard towards building a society in which all can live in
safety and security and within a state of law.

The international community can provide human
and financial resources. It can provide international
judges and prosecutors. It can contribute police
officers. It can help to rebuild institutions. But it
cannot assume a sincere commitment to live in peace
and harmony on the part of the people of Kosovo.

In this context of violence, which we regret, we
cannot fail to condemn all the acts that are being
committed against the members of UNMIK and KFOR.

We believe that October's municipal elections,
despite the difficulties they present, are an excellent
opportunity for everyone in Kosovo - the population
and political leaders - to understand that the future of
Kosovo is a shared endeavour for which everyone is
responsible, not only UNMIK and KFOR. We hope that
all the communities will register on the electoral lists
and that the political parties will include in their
platforms strategies and commitments to combat
violence.

We believe that the municipality is the basis of
democracy. This is why we agree with the Secretary-
General, who in his report indicates that the
strengthening of municipalities is an essential element
for the establishment of an autonomous Government in
Kosovo. In this context, we view with interest the
proposal made by the Secretary-General in his report
regarding agreement on a social contract that would
include all the principles of Rambouillet and the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), ensure the
protection of all those residing in Kosovo, as well as
displaced persons, and that would also offer confidence
in the future. We have no doubt that such a process
would be complex and take a number of years to
realize.

As we have indicated on other occasions,
clarification of the question of missing persons and the
situation of those detained in prisons in Serbia are
issues vital to beginning a process of reconciliation. In
this respect, we continue to believe that it is necessary
to appoint a United Nations special envoy.

Lastly, I would like to express my Government's
appreciation to UNMIK and KFOR. In particular, we
wish to express my country's support for the work
being accomplished in Kosovo by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner.

