The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of France.

I would like to begin by thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca for his very
informative briefing. The perspective he has presented
reminds us ofa reality to which France has always tried
to draw the Security Council's attention: in a region that
has been shaken by major crises for years, the oldest
conflict in the Middle East has still not been resolved.
Time has not made the Israeli-Palestinian conflict less
dangerous. Far from being an acceptable status quo, the
situation on the ground has been deteriorating every
day, particularly thanks to the Israeli settlements,
which create circumstances capable of degenerating
into a genuine crisis at any time. That has been a regular
occurrence in the past few years, including recently in
relation to the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Year after year, the
notion of peace has faded in people's words and minds
as successive generations of Palestinians and Israelis
have lost all hope of peaceful coexistence. Nor have
the increasing numbers of regional crises marginalized
or trivialized the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. They
have increased its potential for destabilization and
made its resolution more necessary than ever. Because
of its gravity, its central position in the Middle East,
its symbolic dimension and its place in the collective
imagination, the conflict has a profoundly destabilizing
influence whose scope goes far beyond the borders of
Israel and the Palestinian territories. Any escalation of
the conflict carries with it the risk of uncontrollable
consequences in the region, and its persistence creates
a platform for recruitment to the terrorist groups that
are active in the region, which we should be especially
wary of.
We must come to grips with the fact that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict will not resolve itself on its own. It
will not be settled through the inertia of its principal
actors or by way of illusory shortcuts. The only avenue
is the difficult path towards peace based on mutual
respect and negotiation. For while the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the oldest of those that have torn the Middle
East apart, it is also the only one whose solution is fully
understood and agreed upon within the international
community. Despite the constant deterioration of the
situation on the ground, the parameters of a future
agreement have not changed. They still require two
States living in peace and security within secure and
recognized frontiers, drawn on the basis of the pre-
1967 borders, with a mutually agreed-on exchange of
land, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States and
including an agreed, realistic, just and lasting solution
for Palestinian refugees.

There is no alternative to a two-State solution
and the vision of a region with two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side. The destinies
of the two peoples are intertwined. Neither State can
sustainably satisfy its national aspirations by denying
those of the other. But the colonization of the Palestinian
territories is imposing a different reality on the ground.
It is expanding at a pace unequalled since 1967, and
ultimately threatens to create a one-State reality in
which two citizenship regimes coexist, an unequal
situation that would therefore be both unacceptable on
principle and produce disastrous consequences.

Violence is already recurring on the ground, as
was shown by the attack that left three dead at the
entrance of a West Bank settlement towards the end of
September. To be clear, we firmly condemn violence
and every kind of incitement to violence, which is
also required under resolution 2334 (2016). In an
already volatile environment, further settlement risks
increasing tension.

With nearly 600,000 settlers in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank, we are approaching the point of
no return. In this year alone, Israeli authorities have
approved the construction of 12,000 new housing
units - three times more than last year. In the past
few days, the construction of new housing in the centre
of Hebron was approved for the first time in 15 years.
Yesterday, 1,300 new housing units were approved in
the West Bank, the majority of those in settlements
deep into the West Bank, which is far from compatible
with a future peace agreement. Just today, the approval
of more than 1,300 additional units was announced.

Faced with such developments, France's position
is clear. We condemn the construction of settlements,
which is not only illegal under international law, as
recalled in resolution 2334 (2016), but is also dangerous,
because it destroys the possibility of a two-State
solution, both politically and on the ground. Moreover,
from a practical point of view, we are implementing
a differentiation policy between Israel, with which
we hope to continue and deepen our discussions, and
the occupied territories. Within the framework of the
European Union, that approach is reflected in provisions
that exclude Israeli settlements from the benefits of the
agreements that we have signed with Israel, as well
as in specific recommendations on identifying the
origin of goods from those settlements. Let us be clear,
however, that distinction, which is also called for under
resolution 2334 (2016), is in no way related, either
directly or indirectly, to any kind of boycott. I reiterate
once again that France will remain extremely firm in its
refusal and condemnation of appeals to boycott Israel.

Beyond the violence that we are already seeing on
the ground, which we condemn, settlement activity
presents a double impasse - for the Palestinians that
constitutes the failure of their aspirations to become
a State, and for the Israelis the ruin of their national
democratic project.

Finally, while preserving the continuity of the
Palestinian territories is essential for a future agreement
on their final status, Palestinian political and territorial
unity is equally as important for such an agreement to
be viable. For the past decade, we have called on the
Palestinians to end the division between Gaza and the
West Bank and once again become unified, under the
authority of President Mahmoud Abbas and within the
framework of the principles endorsed by the Palestine
Liberation Organization: non-violence, the recognition
of Israel and respect for signed agreements.

The agreement signed in Cairo on 12 October by
Fatah and Hamas, preceded by a visit by the Palestinian
Authority Government to Gaza 10 days earlier, is an
encouraging development in that direction. That result
could not have been reaached without the considerable
and continuing efforts made by Egypt, which we would
like to commend. The discussions under way should
enable the Palestinian Authority to fully exercise its
prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in the area of
security. It must also put an end to the energy crisis
as quickly as possible, of which the population of
Gaza is the only victim. Finally, through appropriate
security arrangements, it must facilitate the lifting of
the blockade imposed on the people of Gaza.
France is a friend to both Palestinians and Israelis.
That is why we must speak plainly with them and
tirelessly call on them to return to the negotiating
table. In that regard, we want to continue to work with
our main partners. With our partners in the European
Union, we remain engaged to help resume negotiations
by using all of our collective tools. France associates
itself with the statement to be delivered shortly on
behalf of the European Union.

As for the region, the Arab Peace Initiative remains
an essential framework for making peace with the
Palestinians the first step towards Israel's regional
integration, which will benefit all. We hope that the
commitment of the United States Administration in its
new diplomatic effort will help to reignite a dynamic of
negotiation between the parties, within the framework
of international law and with the objective of the two-
State solution. As a friend of the Palestinians and the
Israelis, France cannot resign itself to a situation that
leaves either party at an impasse. It is high time to put
an end to that.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I would remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate their texts in writing and deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on today's open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

