Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, on behalf of
Major-General Joseph Kabila, President of our
Republic, and of my Government and people, as well
as on my own personal behalf, I extend our deepest
condolences to you, Sir, to the families of the victims,
to the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), and to the Governments of Switzerland and
Colombia over the cowardly murder on 26 April of six
members of the ICRC, including four nationals from
my country. My Government pays tribute to the
dedication of the people of the ICRC who have given
their lives to ease the suffering of my people. Despite
this tragedy, it is our hope that the ICRC and all other
humanitarian organizations will continue their efforts
to help the people of my country.

I express my delegation's pleasure at seeing you,
Sir, preside over this open meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are pleased that the Security Council is
currently being led by the representative of the United
States this month, a crucial and decisive moment for
putting a final end to the war of aggression that has
been waged against my country for 34 months. I also
take this opportunity to extend to you, on behalf of my
delegation and on my own personal behalf, my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, the principal organ
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation also acknowledges the excellent
work of the delegation of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland during its presidency last
month.

We also pay a well-deserved tribute to Mr. Kofi
Annan, Secretary-General of the United Nations. My
country is grateful to him for his outstanding efforts to
restore peace to the Great Lakes region and to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular. He has
shown enormous energy and perseverance in seeking to
end the useless and senseless violence that has taken so
many lives in our country. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo, through its highest authority, Major-
General Joseph Kabila, President of our Republic,
hopes that the Secretary-General will be able, in a
second term, to maintain the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as one of his top
priorities and to pursue his most commendable work
towards lasting peace and reconstruction in my
country.

Lastly, I would thank Mrs. Safiatou Ba-N'Dow
and all members of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
their essential report, which is of great political and
historic significance to us in the Congo. It
demonstrates that the false pretext of border insecurity
is no longer tenable and that the real motive for the
aggression is the systematic plundering and illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The aggressor countries have
occupied Congo because of their vast economic
interests there, which fuel their warmongering. We
therefore welcome the report in document S/200l/357.

We bitterly regret, however, the fact that the
report confirms rather belatedly what my country has
loudly proclaimed since the very beginning of the
aggression, namely, that the main objective has not
been the security concerns of the three aggressor
countries: Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi. The
memorandums and all the white books that my
Government has conveyed to the Security Council
since August 1998 clearly show the double link
between the illegal exploitation of our resources and
the unleashing of the war, as well as between the illegal
exploitation and the mass violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. These documents
have been submitted to the Council, which has issued
them as official documents.

In paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, "Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples", whose provisions are essentially duplicated
in resolution 2625 (XXV), it is stated that

"The subjection of peoples to alien
subjugation, domination and exploitation
constitutes a denial of fundamental human rights,
is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations
and is an impediment to the promotion of world
peace and co-operation".

We thank you, Sir, and all members of the
Security Council for having included on the Council's
agenda the item on the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in violation of its
national sovereignty. The item is indeed within the
competence of the Security Council because of the
Council's principal responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The subject logically falls within the Council's interest
in a swift return of lasting peace to my country and my
people.

My delegation is pleased that a consensus is
clearly emerging today within the Council and the
international community on the direct linkage between
the planned massacre of the Congolese people, the
shameless looting of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of fighting.
All of this ends up seriously impoverishing our people.

My delegation is pleased that in order to delimit
the goal of its work, the Panel of Experts decided to
define and interpret the concept of "illegal
exploitation". This deals with all the extracting,
producing, marketing and exporting activities carried
out in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
violation of its sovereignty, in violation of mining and
environmental measures and in violation of
international contractual and customary law.

We would remind the Council of the following.

First of all, in the Corfu Channel case, in 1949
the International Court of Justice issued a ruling in
which it affirmed that among independent States,
respect for territorial sovereignty is one of the essential
bases of international relations. The concept of
sovereignty includes exclusivity, autonomy and full
authority within the territorial region.

Secondly, General Assembly resolution 1803
(XVII) of 14 December 1962, entitled "Permanent
sovereignty over natural resources," in paragraph 7
states that violating the rights of peoples and nations to
sovereignty over their natural resources and wealth is
contrary to the spirit and letter of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and hinders the
development of international cooperation and the
maintenance of peace.

The report of the Panel of Experts describes most
eloquently the structures used by the occupying forces,
namely, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, whose
iniquitous and villainous methods are unequalled in the
darkest chapters of modern history.

Death threats against the members of the Panel of
Experts are unacceptable. It is up to the Security
Council, which gave them their mandate, to ensure
their security and to require that all States concerned
cooperate fully with the United Nations so that the
truth can burst forth.

The greed of the aggressor countries has sown
death and destruction throughout my country. The
Council will recall the terrifying figures cited by Ms.
McAskie, Emergency Relief Coordinator ad interim, in
her report on 28 November 2000. The report noted the
16 million Congolese who were directly affected by the
war of aggression - that is 33 per cent of the entire
population of the country. Two million died as direct
and indirect victims of the war, including
approximately 600,000 children under five years old.
Many other millions of innocent Congolese civilians
have become refugees in other countries or are
internally displaced. These figures have been
confirmed by the European Office of Humanitarian
Assistance and the International Rescue Committee,
which reported on nearly 3 million dead in the areas
occupied by the aggressors. This is an appalling,
intolerable situation.

The Council will recall the massacres of peaceful
Congolese civilians, the assassinations and murders of
civilians and Congolese prisoners, the deportation of
entire populations, attacks on individuals, rape and the
deliberate spreading of the AIDS virus.

The Council should remember the suffering of the
city of Kisangani, where three times the Rwandan and
Ugandan troops clashed, bombing residential areas,
cultural objects and places of worship despite their
being protected by the provisions of article 53 of
Additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions of 12
August 1949, and thus causing loss of human life,
especially among the vulnerable, mostly women and
children. Following these hateful acts, the Council
adopted resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000 and
called for the immediate, unconditional withdrawal of
Ugandan and Rwandese troops. We deplore the fact
that today, about a year later, despite measures taken by
the International Court of Justice in The Hague last
July, the city is still occupied.

More recently in Ituri, Ugandan troops caused
deadly clashes between the Hema and Lendu, two
important ethnic groups in our Orientale province, who
until then were living in peace.

On the moral, material and physical levels, the
damage that has been done is enormous. The
Congolese people, who warmly welcomed the report of
the Panel of Experts, are now entitled to call for
appropriate reparations pursuant to article 91 of
Additional Protocol 1 of the Geneva Conventions. It
provides that a party to a conflict which violates the
provisions of the Conventions and the Protocol shall, if
the case demands, be liable to pay compensation. It
shall be responsible for all acts committed by persons
forming part of its armed forces. Paragraphs 87 to 93 in
the report of the Panel of Experts clearly indicate the
names of individuals implicated in the looting.

Let me offer a few arguments proving that what
has happened in my country did not happen by chance,
but was rather premeditated and carefully planned. On
31 August 1998, my Government submitted a
memorandum on the armed aggression by the
Rwandan/Ugandan coalition against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The memorandum, issued as an
official document of this Council, showed how
powerful alliances of interests made use of the move by
aggressor countries to serve their goal of dismembering
Central Africa for the purposes of economic
domination and control of the sources of important raw
materials.

The geographic zones of expansion of this
Balkanization strategy extend from the north of the
mining province of Katanga to the southern Sudan,
passing through the forests of the province of
Maniema, the Ruzizi valley in South Kivu, the
province of North Kivu and Orientale province. These
vast geographical areas contain enormous, coveted
wealth, such as strategic minerals, gold, diamonds, oil,
niobium, columbo-tantalite (coltan), timber, coffee,
quinine and so forth.

At the environmental level, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
violation of its sovereignty, has had devastating and
perhaps irreversible consequences for the management
of the flora and fauna. Entire national parks -
Virunga, Garamba, Salonga, Kahuzi-Biega - that were
classified by UNESCO as the heritage of mankind have
been completely devastated. First they were victims of
the flood of Rwandan refugees and people displaced by
successive conflicts. Then the parks became the target
of poaching established as a practice of war and of
organized illicit trafficking.

My delegation made a heartfelt appeal to the
Security Council that it should call on the international
community to react and help us protect unique species.
Because of the savage slaughter with automatic
weapons by the occupying forces, Congolese elephants,
bonobos, gorillas in the eastern plains, mountain
gorillas, chimpanzees, baboons, white rhinoceroses,
okapis and Congolese peacocks are all being
exterminated.

As a result of this enormous undertaking, only the
people of the Congo are losing. Continuation of this
unjust and senseless war and the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources and other forms of wealth have
greatly increased the suffering of our people.

We were outraged to hear that even yesterday
Uganda was being praised by the Bretton Woods
institutions when at the same time the report of the
Panel of Experts, in paragraphs 187 to 190, shows how
the systematic looting of Congolese resources has
directly contributed to improving the balance of
national accounts in that country and in Rwanda. The
fact that our aggressors are on the list of countries
benefiting from the Highly Indebted Poor Countries
Debt Initiative is seen by my people as rewarding them
for their crimes.

My country endorses the recommendations by the
Panel of Experts in paragraphs 236 to 242. These relate
to reparations and compensation for the Congolese
people and show that it is necessary to set up a
framework for the reconstruction of the country. To
that end, the conditions should be created to bolster the
powers of the State and to enable it to provide
improved safety and security for people throughout its
national territory.

In paragraph 239 of its report, the Panel of
Experts recommends the establishment of an
international mechanism that will investigate
individuals named in that paragraph as being involved
in economic criminal activities. That list should be
expanded to include those named in paragraph 211 as
being on the verge of becoming the godfathers of this
illegal exploitation. My Government considers that the
Council should act swiftly on the basis of these
relevant recommendations.
With all due respect for Rwanda, the systematic
looting of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has helped finance and support
the war in my country. My delegation would recall that
pillage is prohibited under article 33 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.

The aggressors bear the shame of claiming to
teach the people of the Congo a lesson in democracy
and good governance. But in fact, they are bands of
looters. They will answer to history for this barbarism,
which will go down in the annals of mankind, along
with their attendant atrocities and massacres.

I wish most sincerely to thank Angola, Namibia
and Zimbabwe, which have come to my country's
assistance in the framework of the self-defence
provisions of the statute of the Southern African
Development Community and in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter. I
must point out that, in the absence of the aggression of
which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is victim,
the allied troops of Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe
would certainly not be on Congolese territory.

My Government wishes also to pay hearty tribute
to the entire Congolese people, which has tirelessly
stated, loud and clear, its devotion to the Congolese
nation and its keen wish to coexist within a united,
strong country, in line with the founding accord of the
republic and with the self-determination achieved on
30 June 1960.

My delegation assures the Council and the
international community that His Excellency Major
General Joseph Kabila, President of the Republic, is
determined on behalf of the Congolese people to
restore peace through a diplomatic solution to the
conflict. On 2 February 2001, the Security Council
heard His Excellency Major General Joseph Kabila,
President of the Republic, speak at length about the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and other forms
of wealth in my country. That exploitation must end
immediately: the consequences for present and future
generations are already extremely grave.

The illegal exploitation of the mining resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo by aggressor
States and their nationals violates the right of the
Congolese people to self-determination. It also violates
the principle of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which the
Security Council has repeatedly reaffirmed in all its
resolutions on the situation in my country.

With a view to attaining the peace demanded by
my people, and in the light of the gravity of the
situation, my Government calls on the Security Council
to call for protective measures comprising an embargo
on looted products in transit through, inter alia, Kigali,
Bujumbura and Kampala. And principally we call on
the Council to implement all the recommendations of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including: order
the demilitarization of the city of Kisangani,
reparations for material damage, and compensation for
the population in accordance with resolution 1304
(2000) of 16 June 2000; state that only the total and
final withdrawal by the aggressors can guarantee an
end to the looting of the wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; recognize the grave moral,
material and physical damage suffered by the
Congolese people as a result of this war and the
concomitant mafia-like activities; order meaningful
reparations for that damage in order to restore the
rights of the Congolese people; and order that legal
action be taken against the perpetrators of this looting
and their accomplices.

