Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency.
Your energy and fairness have already been of
immeasurable help this month, and I am sure they will
continue to be. I would also like to warmly thank the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda for his hard work
during December.

Let me join my colleagues in welcoming our new
colleagues to what is going to be a very busy period for
the Security Council and in thanking those who have just
completed their term. Of course, through the Italian
Mission, we would very much like to welcome Foreign
Minister Martino; we are glad he was here.

The sanctions regime that the Council has enacted
over time is vital to our effort to persuade the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the
Pale Serbs that a peaceful resolution of the Bosnia
conflict is in their interest. The resolution we have just
adopted is an indication that our effort to persuade
Belgrade to pressure the Pale Serbs to accept a just and
viable peace has begun to show results. There should be
no doubt that my Government's willingness to support
this resolution was a direct result of our conclusion that
the Government in Belgrade has moved to implement its
decision to close the border by making it less porous over
time, a process which it significantly augmented by
imposing new measures in recent weeks.

But further efforts must be made to ensure that the
border is more effectively closed. In that context, we are
especially gratified that the Council is today reaffirming
its prohibition of transshipments through Bosnian territory
controlled by the Pale Serbs. By doing so, we are not
adding any sanctions provisions. Transshipments through
Bosnian Serb-controlled territory to the United Nations
Protected Areas in Croatia without the permission of the
relevant Governments were, and continue to be, clear
violations of paragraph 12 of resolution 820 (1993). The
United States expects that paragraph to be complied with.

There have been suggestions made, not by members
of this Council, that the provisions of paragraph 12 of
resolution 820 (1993) do not apply to shipments from
Serbia and Montenegro to Serb-held territory in Croatia.
This contention is obviously inconsistent with the
Council's previous decisions, including the border closure
we are reviewing today. Tolerating illegal transshipments
to the United Nations Protected Areas in Croatia without
an assurance that these goods would not find their way
back into Bosnian Serb-controlled territory undermined
the logic of the border closure. There can be no doubt
that these illegal transshipments were an obvious
contravention of the letter and spirit of our resolutions.
The Security Council is reaffirming that these
transshipments are prohibited. We expect that others will
accept the Council's decision and take their guidance
from it.

 

However, the effectiveness of the border closure will
require continued vigilance by the international community,
the monitoring Mission of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) and the officials of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We cannot allow any
backsliding towards Belgrade's earlier, inadequate level of
compliance. Although we believe that the border closure is
now effective - in large part because of the actions taken
by officials of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
ICFY Mission in the 40 days leading up to our decision
today - we expect to see continued improvement over the
next 100 days.

In particular, we expect that there will be physical
closure of all border crossing points not covered by the
ICFY Mission on a 24-hour basis; dismantlement of river
ferries and physical closure of ferry sites; continued
monitoring of train shipments transiting Bosnia and
Herzegovina; an end to exports exiting from Bosnia and
Herzegovina; control of smuggling, even by individuals; an
end to all logistic and other support for the Bosnian Serb
military; the thorough investigation and diligent prosecution
and punishment of persons violating the border closure; and
the severance of telecommunications links between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Pale Serb-held
territory, which the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia itself
imposed but recently rescinded.

We look forward to the Secretary General's periodic
reports on the status of the border closure and, in particular,
to the certification on transshipments required under
operative paragraph 5. An inability to make such a
certification will have consequences. During the next 100
days we expect that Belgrade will continue to implement
the measures described in the Co-Chairmen's 4 January
report and move ahead on additional measures, including
those I have mentioned, that are needed to ensure effective
compliance with its commitment to close the border.

