The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Erwa
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2005/60, containing a letter dated
31 January 2005 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting the report of the International Commission
of Inquiry on Darfur.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2005/218, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
If I hear no objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Benin, Denmark, France, Greece,
Japan, Philippines, Romania, Russian Federation,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania

Against:
None

Abstaining:
Algeria, Brazil, China, United States of America


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 11 votes in favour, none against and
4 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1593 (2005).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


