Mr. Mahiga: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to present the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/283) and to provide
the Council with additional briefing on Somali. I thank
the Council for its continued support to me and to the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia. I also
recognize the presence of His Excellency Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, President of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) of the Somali Republic, who has
just addressed the Council. His presence here today is
an expression of his commitment to partnering with the
international community to end the transition. I also
wish to thank the President and the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia for the excellent
working relations we enjoy in Mogadishu in our
working with the Transitional Federal Institutions.

We are entering the most critical stage in ending
the transition in Somalia by August. We have made
considerable advances in preparing for that end state.
We have taken significant steps in the constitution-
making process for Somalia, as required by both the
Mbagathi and Djibouti agreements. The draft
12-33979
constitution will be submitted to the principals,
pending its submission to a national Constituent
Assembly for provisional adoption later this month.
That is essential for ending the transition and sets the
stage for further deliberation on the document in the
post-August period.

To that end, we have brought together in
Mogadishu a group of 135 traditional elders who are
currently engaged in selecting 825 members of the
national Constituent Assembly, in line with the
traditional system of 4.5 clan representation. In the
absence of direct elections now, the traditional elders
are the basis of legitimacy for the Constituent
Assembly.

The elders, who have been brought from all over
Somalia, including the newly recovered areas, are a
symbol of national unity and of the commitment to
ending the transition. Furthermore, the elders will
dissolve the current Parliament and proceed to select
members of a new, leaner Parliament on more merit-
based criteria. The new Parliament will proceed to give
us a new political leadership in July and a new
Government in August.

Since their arrival in Mogadishu, the elders have
engaged in a self-validation exercise on their authentic
origins and representativeness. The principal signatories
will meet later this week to appoint a technical selection
committee to manage the Constituent Assembly and
other issues related to the provisional adoption of the
draft constitution and the selection of the new
Parliament.

Those processes constitute one of the pillars of
the road map that will continue beyond August. The
inclusion of areas newly recovered from Al-Shabaab
insurgents remains a top priority in political outreach
and reconciliation as the Transitional Federal
Government continues to bring more territory under its
control beyond Mogadishu. Through the allied militias,
supported by an expanded African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the engagement of Ethiopia,
the insurgents are retreating and fast losing control of
swathes of territory.

The new territories bring with them a new
population under Government control. However,
Al-Shabaab's retreat is creating new challenges.

Retreating insurgents are spilling over into the
relatively stable regional states of Puntland and
5

Somaliland from south-central Somalia. There is also
an increase in asymmetrical warfare behind AMISOM
lines in Mogadishu and other recovered areas.
Therefore, as Al-Shabaab retreats, the TFG must be
assisted in carrying out the following functions:
establishing local administration, which would include
previously elected leaders who were displaced by the
insurgents; establishing political and administrative
authority at the local level; and consolidating security
through local security committees. The recovery of
new territory must be accompanied by the provision of
basic social services, including the rule of law and
other social infrastructure, as well as economic
services, as part of a peace dividend package.

Efforts to strengthen outreach and reconciliation
with the regional and emerging administrations
continue. In that regard, both the Transitional Federal
Government and Somaliland have appointed committees
through which the two entities will engage in dialogue
on the future of Somalia, as called for at the London
Conference in February. The two stakeholders are
committed to dialogue and have sought my good
offices to keep the dialogue alive as we work out the
modalities, including the agenda and timing for the
discussions.

AMISOM, for its part, is now on a more secure
and predictable funding footing, following the adoption
and implementation of resolution 2036 (2012). That
should enable the force to project itself with greater
effectiveness in the three new sectors of its operations.
I would like to express my appreciation to the
international community for the generous contributions
it continues to make to AMISOM. In particular, I
would like to mention the support of the European
Union, which covers the allowances of AMISOM
civilian and military personnel. The United States of
America has also made significant contributions of
equipment and supplies to AMISOM. I would also like
to commend the United Kingdom, Japan and other
donors that have provided generous financial
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of AMISOM. Since the maintenance of
international peace and security is a collective
responsibility, I encourage other Member States to join
those traditional supporters in their commendable
efforts to support AMISOM.

At the meeting of the Joint Security Committee
held in Mogadishu on 7 and 8 May, the participants
agreed on more coordinated formation of Somali forces
6

and stressed the importance of integrating the
Transitional Federal Government's allied forces under
a unified command. They also agreed, among other
things, on the importance of the National Security and
Stabilization Plan being put in place as an exit strategy
for AMISOM. and on the need for greater coordination
and cooperation in dealing with disengaged former
combatants ~ or defectors, as they are sometimes
called.

I thank the Government of Japan for its
comprehensive assistance in building the TFG police
force. The security sector development of the TFG also
needs greater focus on developing the justice and
corrections system, to strengthen rule-of-law
institutions.

There is progress in the area of promoting human
rights, and resources are needed in that area, including
in the protection of children and of human rights
defenders and journalists.

The humanitarian situation remains fragile in
Somalia. While a rapid scale-up in aid was effective in
ending famine conditions in the country, the gains are
very fragile and can easily be reversed without
continued assistance.

In our continued efforts to address the problem of
piracy, we held a ministerial-level meeting in London
on 12 May, at which the Djibouti Code of Conduct was
addressed, in accordance with article 13 of the Code.
There have also been significant efforts, following the
London Conference communique, in evolving a
comprehensive strategy against piracy, as an emerging
challenge that needs to be addressed both on land and
at sea. However, the fundamental issue in dealing with
piracy remains the establishment of the rule of law in
Somalia.

We face a number of challenges in our efforts to
complete the implementation of the road map,
including tight timelines and the unavailability of
resources. However, in the absence of the requisite
resources, and of financial, logistic and human
requirements, we can accomplish only so much. The
lack of funding for implementing the road map in the
remaining three months is of serious concern to all of
us, including the TFG, as President Ahmed has just
expressed.

Finally, allow me to raise the issue of the threat
posed to the peace process by spoiler behaviour in
12-33979

Somalia and beyond the region. We must deal with
those elements before they succeed in undermining the
peace process. The spoilers feel that the end of the
transition will jeopardize their privileged positions and
standing in Somalia. They are therefore employing
various methods to obstruct and reverse the gains made
in the implementation of the road map. On 1 May, in the
spirit of collaboration, UNPOS, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and AMISOM
issued a warning to all potential spoilers that
non-compliance with or active obstruction of the road
map will be followed by the naming and shaming of
individuals. People named could subsequently be
referred to the IGAD Council of Ministers, along with
our recommendations for the immediate imposition of
specific measures and restrictions, such as regional
travel bans on some individuals. The effectiveness of
such measures will of course be greatly enhanced if
they are supported by the authority of the Security
Council.

As Somalia faces the greatest opportunity to end
the transition, after so much investment by the
international community, we must complete the tasks at
hand. We must provide timely logistical and financial
support to enable us to complete the implementation of
the road map before August, with strengthened
international cooperation and coordination. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative of the Government of
Turkey to partner with the United Nations in convening
the international conference in Istanbul early next
month. The conference will add momentum and focus
attention on the road map to end the transition. It will
also define elements of the post-August strategy and
strengthen Somali ownership of the process, in
partnership with the regional and international
stakeholders. We look forward to that conference.

