Mr. Aass (Norway): I join in the many, well-
deserved congratulatory remarks that have been expressed
to you, Mr. President.

In substance, Norway supports the comments
expressed in particular by the presidency of the European
Union. Specifically, as underlined in the European Union
statement, there is no viable solution outside political
dialogue. Dialogue is the only way to achieve lasting
peace and national reconciliation in Burundi.

My Government has been paying a great deal of
attention to the situation in the Great Lakes region and
has adopted a plan of action for assistance to the region.
As part of this plan, the Government has allocated in
excess of $20 million in bilateral humanitarian assistance
and support for peace and reconciliation efforts in
Rwanda and Burundi for 1996.

Norway strongly supports the international mediation
efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, as it does those of the
Organization of African Unity and prominent African
leaders such as former President Nyerere of Tanzania. We
also welcome the recent appointment by the European
Union of a special envoy for the Great Lakes region. We
hope that this international presence has impressed on
potential perpetrators the seriousness with which the

 

international community views violent threats to the process
of negotiated change. From the outset we have supported
the efforts to convene an international conference on
cooperation, security and stability in the Great Lakes region
and we hope to see progress achieved soon.

The situation in Burundi is not without encouraging
signs. The "Campagne de Sensibilisation" - the raising of
awareness - which the Government has promoted seems
to have contributed to a decline in violence, and we
strongly hope that this development will continue. However,
there is still reason to be deeply concerned about the
security situation for the civilian population as well as for
international humanitarian relief agencies and their workers.

In our view, without a strong commitment from the
Government to reconciliation and peace, as well as
adequate security guarantees and respect for human rights,
it will not be possible for the international community to
provide the necessary assistance to the authorities for
rehabilitation and national reconstruction.

It is with this humanitarian aim in mind that the
international community has discussed possible measures
and contingency plans for improving the security situation
in Burundi. These measures should be appreciated for what
they are intended to be: a means of support, a handshake
for the Government's own efforts towards peace and
reconciliation.

