We wish to thank the German presidency for organizing this debate and the invited speakers for their briefings and testimony. Slovenia aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 25) and of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20). We would like to make some additional remarks in our national capacity. Slovenia welcomes the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487) and strongly condemns the persistent and widespread occurrence of sexual violence in conflict. In the past decades, we have achieved a critical paradigm shift whereby conflict-related sexual violence is no longer considered a side effect of conflict but is understood as a threat to international peace and security. Sexual violence in conflict is a tactic of war and a means of repression, terror and control, used to humiliate and injure survivors, their families and entire communities. Survivors, not just women and girls but also men and boys, are traumatized and stigmatized for life. These hideous acts remain in the vivid recollection of whole communities for generations. A survivor-centred approach to sexual and gender-based violence is therefore central. Comprehensive support should be provided to the victims, including access to sexual and reproductive health and rights, as well as psychosocial and socioeconomic assistance. Impunity for conflict-related sexual violence has to end. We need to hold perpetrators accountable in order to provide justice to victims and to prevent these horrific crimes from happening in the future. It is the responsibility of States to investigate, prosecute and punish those who commit these crimes. However, ensuring accountability for conflict-related sexual violence committed by both non-State and State actors remains a major challenge. International mechanisms for the investigation and prosecution of such crimes, including the International Criminal Court, play an important role in that regard. As a member of the international Justice Impact Group in The Hague, Slovenia supports the Hague Principles on Sexual Violence in order to enhance the understanding of what constitutes an act of sexual violence in conflict from the perspective of its survivors. Impunity is not an option and should be exempt from amnesty provisions in the context of conflict resolution and transitional justice processes, as highlighted by resolutions 1820 (2008) and 2106 (2013). Slovenia joins the call on the Security Council to fully integrate the issue of conflict-related sexual violence into the work of its sanctions committees by expanding the designated criteria to sexual violence in the context of armed conflict. Slovenia continues to support the response of the International Committee of the Red Cross to sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo, for which we pledged €100,000 in 2019 for a period of three years. Furthermore, for the period of 2020-2022, we have earmarked €400,000 to support the implementation of two humanitarian projects, selected at the public tender for non-governmental organization proposals focusing on gender-based violence and raising awareness of child marriages in Lebanon. This year, while we mark important milestones for gender equality and women's empowerment, we also face the biggest global crisis of the modern world. By revealing the structural inequalities, the coronavirus disease pandemic has demonstrated the devastating effects of undelivered promises and unachieved goals. However, at the same time it has demonstrated the central role and the power of women's leadership. We have now been given an opportunity to rebuild more carefully, and it is our responsibility to seize it. Ending sexual and gender-based violence and impunity, as well as promoting equality and inclusion, must be building blocks in our efforts to build a better and more peaceful future for all.
