The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

I thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his work to advance
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Two weeks ago, we renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
That vote was an important step in reinvigorating
efforts to set the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
a path towards a democratic transition of power. That
is the only way to ensure the long-term stability of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Certainly the
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
immense, and we are deeply disturbed by the violence
and reports of mass graves in the Kasais.

We recognize the importance of investigating
these atrocities and urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to work with and
not act as an impediment to MONUSCO and other
relevant parts of the United Nations to swiftly conduct
these investigations. We are also deeply disappointed
by the lack of progress in the implementation of
the 31 December political agreement between the
Government and the opposition. We continue to support
this agreement, which represents the best path forward
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
for ensuring upcoming elections and a peaceful
transition of power. The United States continues to
urge both the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the opposition to resolve outstanding
issues, make concessions and work constructively in
the implementation of the agreement.

It remains clear that our collective efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be matched
with strong simultaneous efforts to address all the
regional sources of instability. Now more than ever
we need the focus of Special Envoy Djinnit to be on
addressing problems related to the armed groups
operating in the region and the legacies ofpast conflicts.
In this regard, we appreciate the efforts made over the
past six months to reform the Government structures
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
to reinvigorate its implementation. We are also pleased
that there have been some improvements in relations
among the Great Lakes countries, most notably between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.

However, we share the concern of the Secretary-
General, as mentioned in his recent report (S/2017/208),
that the continued presence of armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
wider region pose acute challenges. In the last six
months, we have seen Mouvement du 23 mars (M23)
and South Sudanese fighters cross into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These militants are in addition
to Allied Democratic Forces, Forces Democratiques
de Liberation du Rwanda and Lord's Resistance Army
fighters, and numerous local militias that are already
operating in the region. Their arrival in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo comes at a time of increasing
inter-ethnic violence.

We echo the Secretary-General's call for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the leadership of the former M23 to resume their
implementation of the Nairobi declaration and ask
Special Envoy Djinnit to redouble his efforts in support
of these and other efforts aimed at reducing the threat
of armed groups.

Now is the time to advance the agreements and
processes that chart a path towards peace.

We must see honest, good-faith efforts by all
countries in the region to repatriate combatants and
stop support for armed groups. The problems are there,
and they are at risk of growing.

In our focus on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we must not lose sight of continuing challenges
in Burundi. We are grateful to President Mkapa for his
facilitation ofthe inter-Burundian dialogue, but stronger
and more sustained leadership from the region will
be necessary to generate the pressure needed on both
sides to make the dialogue a success and ensure that the
crisis in Burundi does not become an increasing source
of instability for the region. The current situation in
Burundi is not sustainable or acceptable.

We know that Special Envoy Djinnit has a very
challenging job. We will continue to work with him
and our allies to advanced stability in the Great Lakes
region, but those efforts cannot advance without strong
and consistent engagement from the region. I urge
him to continue engaging all of the stakeholders in the
region to reinforce the importance of following through
on the commitments that they have made. We are here
to make things work, and, if they do not work, we need
to change them.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

