Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
There is no doubt that nowadays there is a consensus
on the importance of collective international effort to
combat terrorism, suppress terrorist acts, arrest those
who commit them, and block their funding resources.

The tragic events of 11 September have focused
the world's attention on the fact that there is no
alternative to global international cooperation to
combat this phenomenon, which knows no boundaries
and belongs to no religion or culture. Those who
perpetrate these terrorist acts belong to all religions and
cultures, as do their victims.

Egypt is among those countries that have suffered
from terrorism, having been the victim of different
terrorist acts. This led it to adopt early on legal and
security measures in order to confront this
phenomenon. Experience demonstrated to us that the
fight against it cannot be confined to a security or a
political approach. In addition to the security and
political aspects, we must include economic, social and
legal ones, as well as questions of human rights, in
order to achieve concrete results when faced with this
criminal action.

Such an approach requires us to deal with
international terrorism comprehensively, in a way that
takes into account its many manifestations, different
causes, and the means to combat it under its different
guises.

In this context, we must not confuse terrorism -
which we refuse, condemn and combat - with the
legitimate right to self-defence against foreign
occupation. This is a legitimate defence that is in
agreement with the principles of resisting aggression,
occupation, the usurping of rights, and the obliteration
of identity. Exercising this right was illustrated by
popular resistance in Europe and in the United States in
order to end foreign occupation. It was also exercised
by people in Latin America, Asia and Africa, in order
to gain independence. It is a right confirmed by
international law and the United Nations Charter, and
by the resolutions and declarations promulgated by this
international Organization.

During the past year, the United Nations has
shown that it is an effective instrument for coordinating
international efforts to combat terrorism. On that basis,
Egypt resolved to be among the first countries to
respond favourably to Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). In fact, Egypt presented two complete reports
to the newly formed Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), pursuant to that resolution, describing the
measures and actions taken by the Government of
Egypt to combat terrorism.

Furthermore, within the same context, the
Egyptian parliament last June enacted a new statute to
combat money laundering. That ensures the integration
of the national measures to fight terrorism with
international criteria in this regard.

The war against international terrorism and its
manifestations must be waged forcefully. It is crucial,
however, when waging this war, that we be vigilant to
certain factors that cannot be neglected. Among these
is the fact that this war requires the involvement of the
entire international community, and not of a few
nations. In the context of these efforts, we should not
fall into any trap that international terrorism prepares
for us, namely, the appearance of disagreements or
tensions among different members of the international
community.

This war should rather be waged by a broad-
based international coalition, in accordance with
agreed-upon international laws and with Security
Council resolutions and other international
conventions.

We are convinced that what we have mentioned
previously is an extremely important point, one about
which we must be careful, given the dangers and
nefarious effects that this may have on our common
efforts. This point relates to kindling tensions between
the different entities of the international community.

Egypt is convinced that this international
Organization, as an effective instrument that represents
international will and legality, can play a pioneering
role in the fight against terrorism. We therefore expect
the United Nations to pursue its role and fulfil its
responsibilities in that regard. Egypt will honour its
obligations by supporting the efforts of the
Organization and by cooperating with it to collectively
succeed in combating terrorism and ending its evils.

In conclusion, we would like to recognize the
efforts of the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock. We appreciate his
hard work, patience, determination and complete
credibility in seeking to implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) without any problems or
tensions. It is thanks to his efforts that we have been
able to get to where we are today in our international
efforts. We thank him for his efforts.

