Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, Sir, allow me to express our congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that with your wisdom
and well-known leadership qualities you will guide the
Security Council to fruitful results in its consideration of
the important international issues now before it.

I must also express our thanks to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for his efforts as
President of the Security Council last month. I should also
like to join others in welcoming the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Italy to the Security Council today.

The delegation of Egypt did not come here today to
put forward new clarifications of, or explanations for, the
current, deteriorating situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The picture is clear to all. My delegation will merely
remind the Security Council of the many appeals made by
Egypt and other States, particularly regarding the need for
the Security Council to review its many resolutions on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have been approximately 60
such resolutions to date, the majority of which were
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter, and their
provisions have not been implemented. The Security
Council should look into taking immediate, firm and
effective measures to ensure the implementation of those
earlier resolutions before adopting new ones on the subject.

We also wish to remind the Council that it is the
fundamental duty of the international community,
represented by the Security Council, to deal with the real
causes of the current problem in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and that it should not limit itself to addressing just one of
its symptoms.

We had reservations when the Security Council
decided, under resolution 943 (1993), to gradually ease
sanctions, and we still have reservations today. No
concrete progress has been made towards a political
settlement of the military confrontation. Indeed, further
Serbian aggression, by the Krajina Serbs against the
Bihac safe area, took place in flagrant defiance of the
Security Council and the entire international community.
Furthermore, the report before the Security Council in
document S/ 1995/6 includes references to current
arrangements for channelling fuel shipments to the Serbs
in Croatia at a time when they are not respecting the will
of the international community, when their forces have
not withdrawn from the Bihac safe area and when they
have not acceded to the comprehensive agreement
between the Bosnian Serb party and the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on a cessation of hostilities,
which was concluded under the aegis of the United
Nations.

For years the Security Council has tried different
means of exerting pressure on the aggressor responsible
for the outbreak and continuation of the military
confrontation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Sanctions have
been among the effective means used by the Council.
Serbia and Montenegro was called upon to fulfil various
interrelated commitments, one of which was to cut off
supplies to Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Another
was to exert pressure on the Bosnian Serbs so that they
would respond to international efforts to accept the peace
plan put forward by the international Contact Group,
which included a commitment to international sanctions
against any intransigent party rejecting the plan. But the
Serbian party continues to hold its intransigent position,
while the Government of Bosnia has accepted the
international offer, with its concomitant international
guarantees, and has accepted the cease-fire agreement, as
called for by the United Nations. Therefore, the
international community must ensure implementation of
the settlement plan and continue to exert international
pressure, including sanctions, until the party rejecting the
plan abides by the will of the international community.

The position of the international community must be
based on the principles of international legitimacy. The

 

international community cannot simply put forward plan
after plan, only to meet with the rejection of the Serbian
party; that would only show the Serbians that intransigence
is rewarded, because the next step will be a new plan with
new concessions for them. For that reason, the delegation
of Egypt calls on the Security Council to adopt a draft
resolution under which international military observer forces
will be deployed along the borders between the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) so as to ensure
effective monitoring and the cutting of the supply line
between Serbia and Montenegro and the Serbs in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The Security Council is called upon today to look
anew into further measures to ensure the genuine protection
of the safe areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina, because these
are the only lands in that State Member of the United
Nations that are under the control of the Government. The
Council is also called upon to consider temporary measures
until a final, peaceful settlement to the dispute is reached
and the consequences of aggression are eliminated. That
can be done only through the full implementation of the
resolutions of the United Nations. The Security Council
must stand up for all States in all parts of the world,
without any discrimination.

