The Secretary-General: I am pleased to join the
Council today in this effort to tackle one of the key
challenges in preventing conflict in the next century. Small
arms and light weapons are primary tools of violence in
many conflicts taking place in the world today.

The proliferation of small arms, ammunition and
explosives has also aggravated the violence associated with
terrorism and organized crime. Even in societies not beset
by civil war, the easy availability of small arms has in
many cases contributed to violence and political instability.
These, in turn, have damaged development prospects and
imperilled human security in every way. Indeed, there is
probably no single tool of conflict so widespread, so easily
available and so difficult to restrict as small arms.

Not only are they the primary instrument of the
murder of civilians, who are increasingly targeted in the
civil wars of our era; unlike their victims, small arms
survive from conflict to conflict, perpetuating the cycle of
violence by their mere presence. Many of these weapons
are even recycled, passed on from area to area, from one
conflict to another, by unscrupulous arms merchants, who
in many cases take advantage of legal loopholes or
exploit inadequate national monitoring and enforcement
structures.

In an era in which the world will no longer stand by
in silence when gross and systematic violations of human
rights are being committed, the United Nations is
dedicated to addressing both the supply and the demand
aspects of the trade in small arms. From the Balkans to
Africa to East Asia, small arms have become the
instrument of choice for the killers of our time. We must
do our part to deny them the means of murder.

The United Nations has played a leading role in
putting the issue of small arms firmly on the international
agenda. The report on small arms which I submitted to
the General Assembly in 1997 has served as a catalyst for
a wider series of initiatives. Last year, I was very pleased
to note that the General Assembly decided to convene a
conference on all aspects of illicit arms trafficking no
later than 2001. The Security Council has also been
seized of the small arms issue, initially in the context of
the implementation of my report on Africa. Since then, in
the context of Angola, as well as those of children and
armed conflict and the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Council has shown wisdom in focusing on
the need to reverse the proliferation of small arms if any
of these issues is to be successfully resolved.

In my report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, I stated that
controlling the easy availability of small arms is a
prerequisite for a successful peace-building process, as it
is for conflict prevention. I appealed to the Council to
devote greater attention to conflict prevention and to
provide effective leadership in this area. In addition, I
wish to stress the importance of including in peace
agreements and mandates of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations specific measures for
disarmament and demobilization.

While great challenges still await us, we should take
note of a number of positive developments in the struggle
against small arms proliferation, and particularly illicit
arms trafficking.

In Africa, through an initiative led by Mali, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
declared a moratorium on the production and transfer of
small arms, covering 16 countries. The United Nations

 

Development Programme (UNDP) is assisting ECOWAS in
implementing that moratorium.
The Organization of African Unity has also moved
forward in deciding to hold a regional conference on small
arms in preparation for the international conference on
illicit arms trafficking.

In Europe, joint action by the European Union in
preventing and combating illicit trafficking in conventional
arms is another promising step. More specifically, in
Albania, UNDP, in close collaboration with the Department
for Disarmament Affairs, has been engaged in "Weapons
for Development" project. The success of that pilot project
has encouraged the Albanian Government to invite the
establishment of similar projects in other parts of the
country.

In the Americas, the Organization of American States
adopted in November 1997 the Inter-American Convention
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related
Materials.

The momentum for combating small arms proliferation
has also come from civil society, which has been
increasingly active on this issue. The establishment early
this year of the International Action Network on Small
Arms has helped sharpen public focus on small arms, which
has helped us gain the public support necessary for success.

The international community must seize the
opportunity provided by the international conference in the
year 2001 to demonstrate its political will and its
commitment to reversing the global proliferation of small
arms.

Our larger efforts to promote peace and security,
whether through conflict prevention, development,
diplomacy or, when necessary, intervention, depend to a
great extent on how we tackle the smaller, more specific
challenges of limiting the tools of war and violence.

In the struggle against small arms, there is a realistic,
achievable goal that can be met through foresight, action
and cooperation. With the leadership of the Security
Council, and the active efforts of your Governments, I am
confident that we can succeed.

