Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I deliver
this statement on the humanitarian situation in Syria
on behalf of the three co-penholders, namely, Kuwait,
Germany and Belgium.

We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his important briefing today on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

The Secretary-General stated last week that he was

"deeply troubled by the continued escalation in
north-west Syria and the prospect of an offensive
deeper into Idlib, which could trigger a new wave of
human suffering, possibly impacting up to 3 million
civilians [and] strongly condemns continued
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including on health-care and educational facilities."
(SG/SM/19705)

Over the past four months, the ongoing military
campaign using continuous air strikes, shelling
and - reportedly - barrel bombs has caused immense
human suffering and taken an enormous toll on the
population. It has caused death, displacement and
destruction. As described once again in detail by
Mr. Lowcock for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) during its briefing, over
500 civilians - including many children - have been
killed. Over 400,000 people have fled the violence
once or several times, not knowing where to spend
the night, with camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs) being overcrowded. Hospitals, schools, markets
and IDP locations have been targeted, hit and destroyed
by air strikes. Many of those strikes occurred in
de-confliction zones, which means that the parties that
launched the attacks were well aware of their location.

Time after time, we have called upon the parties
to uphold the September 2018 memorandum of
understanding on Idlib. We have called for the protection
of the 3 million civilians living in the region. We have
deplored the loss of innocent civilian lives. We have
condemned the violations of international humanitarian
law and have called for accountability.

We have also condemned the attacks perpetrated by
Security Council-designated terrorist groups while, at
the same time, reiterating that counter-terrorism efforts
can never absolve any of the parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including
the principles of distinction and proportionality.
We have called for a surge in diplomacy among key
players to urgently stabilize and de-escalate the
situation - tragically, for all concerned on the ground
in Syria, to no effect so far. OCHA has repeatedly
called for a unified Security Council to take action, a
call Mr. Lowcock repeated this morning.

Since the beginning of the de-escalation in Idlib
at the end of April, the humanitarian co-penholders
have strived to keep the attention of the international
community on this important humanitarian situation.
We have found support among many around this
table. Today we call for the Council to urgently take a
unified stance, with us, against this violence that has
caused so much human suffering. The situation cannot
continue. That is why the co-penholders regarding the
humanitarian situation in Syria - Kuwait, Germany
and Belgium 4 have presented a draft resolution to the
members of the Council that aims to urgently alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Idlib. We look forward to
working constructively with all Council members on
the text.

In the meantime, our attention also goes to other
parts of Syria. In Al-Hol camp, over 70,000 persons
still receive humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian
agencies have been able to scale up their response,
but the situation remains of deep concern nonetheless.
In southern Syria, across Dara'a, Quneitra and rural
Damascus, where high levels of population movements
continue to be recorded, 2.8 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance. In Rukban, the United
Nations was able to conduct an assessment mission last
week. This is welcome news, but what is crucial now is
that the United Nations be permitted back in Rukban
in the weeks to come in order to provide assistance to
those who decide to stay in the camp and to help others
leave in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner.

I would like to conclude this intervention by
recalling the following: with the crisis in Idlib in mind,
cross-border operations, as renewed under resolution
2449 (2018), are more than ever of life-saving
importance. There is no other way to provide adequate
support to the 3 million civilians in the area who rely
on that mechanism.
(spoke in French)

Allow me to continue with some comments in my
national capacity with regard to the political aspect.

First, I wish to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for
his briefing and his commitment. I wish to assure him
that he can count on our full support. We are all aware
ofwhat we are facing. There can be no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. It can be resolved only through a
negotiated political process, pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), under the aegis of the United Nations. We
support all Mr. Pedersen's efforts to implement the
resolution, including the implementation of a national
ceasefire, the initiation of a political transition through
the holding of national elections, to include the Syrian
diaspora, and the fostering of a safe, stable and
calm environment.

For my country, the establishment of a Syrian-
owned, Syrian-led constitutional committee, facilitated
by the United Nations, will be an important step forward,
provided that the committee is credible, in other words,
balanced, inclusive and representative, and that it
works under clear rules and is facilitated by the United
Nations. We are in favour of the Special Envoy and the
United Nations playing a central role in that process,
as envisaged by the Astana guarantors who initiated
the idea of the committee. We continue to support the
efforts of the Special Envoy in that regard and eagerly
await the rapid establishment of the committee. Its
establishment, however, is not an end in itself. It must
constitute the basis of a credible political process able
to bring together all Syrians who seek peace.

