Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): As it did last year (see S/PV.7353), our
delegation voted against holding a meeting on the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We would like to note that the request (S/2015/93l) to
convene this meeting was circulated to the Security
Council just two days after the adoption of the
programme of work of the Council for December. As
far as can be understood from the text of the request,
its authors did not link their request to any events that
taken place since the programme's adoption. In other
words, this issue was intentionally left out of the joint
work to undertaken by the members of the Council
under the December programme. We believe that such
an approach does not contribute to enhancing the
transparency and openness of the work of the Security
Council, a subject about which we speak so often.

With regard to the substance of the issue, the position
that we took a year ago has not changed. We believe
that the issue of the human rights situation in any given
country does not fall within the mandate ofthe Security
Council and should be taken up in the specialized
bodies, above all in the Human Rights Council. The
Security Council should focus on discussing issues
related to threats to international peace and security,
which does not apply to the human rights situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Burdening
the agenda of the Security Council with matters that do
not fall within its purview will only lead to duplication
of effort, thereby dissipating the Council's focus and
energy and consequently reducing the effectiveness of
its work.

At this juncture, priority should be placed on the
resumption of the Six-Party Talks, in which framework
it would be possible to resolve a range of complex issues
related to the situation on the Korean peninsula. Today's
meeting, unfortunately, only further distances us from
achieving that goal. As experience has taught us, in
particular in the context of the success achieved with
regard to the Iranian nuclear programme, collective
efforts, when based on good faith, facilitate solving the
most complex problems.

