Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and for the work
that he and his team do in difficult circumstances. I also
thank Ms. Raemer for her briefing and the perspective
that she shared, which was of great interest.

Three years since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) by the Council, the United Kingdom notes
with concern the Secretary-General's assessment
that the situation on the ground since then has only
deteriorated. In the light of the continued increase in
Israeli settlements, we reiterate that settlements are
illegal under international law, present an obstacle
to peace and threaten the physical viability of a two-
State solution.
The United Kingdom notes the Israeli Defence
Minister's instructions to act for the advancement of a
new Jewish neighbourhood in Hebron. We understand
that that does not signal the start of a formal planning
process. However, if such plans were to advance, it
would be of grave concern given the sensitivities of
the location.

Demolitions of Palestinian-owned homes and
structures have also increased. The United Kingdom is
concerned in particular by the targeting of donor-funded
structures in Area C, which are provided on humanitarian
grounds to support vulnerable communities. As we
have made clear before, any suggestion that parts of the
occupied Palestinian territories should be annexed is
contrary to international law and damaging to peace
efforts and could not pass unchallenged.

As the United Kingdom made clear last month
(see S/PV.8669), following the escalation of hostilities
in Gaza, the indiscriminate attacks against Israeli
civilians by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad were
completely unacceptable. All countries, including
Israel, have a legitimate right to self-defence and the
right to defend their citizens from attack. In doing so,
it is vital that all actions are proportionate, in line with
international humanitarian law, and are calibrated to
avoid civilian casualties.

It is critical that the Palestinian leadership continue
its efforts to tackle terror and incitement. The Israeli
security forces must also avoid the use of excessive
force, and we encourage Israel to properly investigate
all potential breaches of law, holding those responsible
to account.

The United Kingdom is concerned to hear of a
further increase in the number of attacks by settlers
on Palestinians. As the occupying Power, Israel has a
responsibility to protect the Palestinian population. We
urge Israel to thoroughly investigate every instance and
bring those responsible to justice.

Turning to positive steps, the United Kingdom
welcomes the progress made on the implementation
of the package of interventions for Gaza endorsed by
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians. However,
we remain concerned about the dire humanitarian
situation. We again call on Israel to ease restrictions
on water, electricity, movement and access, which
impact the livelihoods and life prospects of ordinary
Palestinians in Gaza and breed resentment.

We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and encourage partners
to step up with more funding and more predictable
disbursements, as the United Kingdom has done. We
also welcome continued work towards genuine and
democratic national elections for all Palestinians,
which is crucial for the establishment of a viable and
sovereign Palestinian State.

Finally, at this highly sensitive time in the region,
we call on the parties to show real leadership, including
the willingness to make tough compromises, in order to
achieve a secure Israel standing alongside a sovereign
Palestinian State.

