Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased, Sir, to see you, as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Denmark, presiding over today's

meeting. I congratulate the Danish presidency of the
Council and thank it for having organized this debate
on a subject of such great importance for the
international community. My thanks go also to Judge
Rosalyn Higgins, President of the International Court of
Justice, and to Mr. Nicolas Michel, Under-Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs, for their statements, which
provided insights that will prove most useful in our
discussions. I wish further to thank the delegation of
Argentina for having organized an Arria-formula
briefing, at which significant observations were made
on this matter.

Justice and the rule of law have always been
intimately linked with the harmonious functioning of
States. In international relations, they are viewed not
merely as essential for enhanced security but also as
vital to the maintenance of peace. We live in an
extremely interdependent world, and that demands
greater unity. The role of the United Nations and the
Security Council in adapting to this situation has thus
changed considerably, as the new challenges we face
have changed.

As the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change observed in its 2 December 2004 report
(A/59/565), a collective response is required to the new
and old threats that face us. That is particularly true
because States are today moving towards societies
based on common interests. Hence, the theme of
today's meeting is of fundamental importance. It gives
us the opportunity - beyond affirming the central role
of international law in the activities of the Security
Council - to consider how the Security Council can
make better use of the legal architecture at its disposal
so that it can take more effective action.

One approach focuses on streamlining the legal
machinery through which the Council seeks to promote
the rule of law, ensure respect for international law and
work to end impunity, consistent with the needs of
peace, justice and human rights. By creating ad hoc
courts, such as the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, the Council has given substance to the ideal of
justice as a prerequisite for the restoration of lasting
peace. International criminal justice provides
invaluable support for national reconciliation and
peacebuilding processes; it sends the message that the
perpetrators of crimes and other similar acts must
know that they will sooner or later pay for their deeds.
Yet we know that such courts do not always
possess the means to complete their tasks; they do not
always enjoy the cooperation they need to arrest
fugitives and alleged perpetrators. This explains the
delay that we have witnessed in carrying out the ad hoc
tribunals' completion strategies, in spite of their
considerable progress in streamlining their own rules
of procedure. Cooperation by States is now critical not
only to meet the expectations of victims but also - for
instance in the case of the International Criminal
Court - to promote the complementarity of the
jurisdiction of the Court and national jurisdictions.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Court was widely seen as a major step forward in the
promotion of law and justice. But we need to further
operationalize it and ensure its universality by calling
upon States not party to the Rome Statute to ratify it.
Clearly, recourse to a standing international court gives
the international community and societies in conflict or
post-conflict situations greater certainty that justice
will be done. States that have ratified the Rome Statute,
especially developing countries, need international
assistance to enable them to take ownership of justice
in their own countries by creating national or regional
judicial systems able to meet the challenges before
them.

In the ongoing quest for justice and the rule of
law in the service of peace, another legal institution
has demonstrated its capacity to determine the law,
establish the facts and define legal situations: the
International Court of Justice. Along with the President of
the Court, we might regret that there is a certain hesitancy
in recourse to the judges at The Hague - including on the
part of the Security Council and others - to assess the
international legality of given actions. But we must all
acknowledge the Court's contribution to building an
international order based on law, even though it does not
possess the obligatory jurisdiction that would enable it
more systematically to fill the justice gap that is often at the
origin of international crises and tensions.

Sanctions are a significant tool at the disposal of
the Security Council in the exercise of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security; they can enhance Council's
authority and help it to attain its goal of achieving
peace only to the extent that they are efficient and
effective. But it should be noted that the Council's
decisions have not always led to the desired change in
the conduct of the States concerned. In certain cases,

such decisions have been contested by the States or by
civil society, which often claim that there is a lack of
transparency in the procedures relating to the
establishment of the targeted sanctions lists, a lack of
recourse or material error.

The outcome document of the September 2005
world summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
reflected that concern and called for a review of the
methods and procedures so as to ensure that they are
both effective and credible. In this regard, we have
high hopes for the outcome of the deliberations of the
Council's Informal Working Group on General Issues
of Sanctions.

Promoting and strengthening the rule of law also
means that we must adapt the legal tools at our
disposal so that they can support our duty to act. That
is what the Council has been able to do by skilfully
adapting its powers under the Charter. In this regard,
we must highlight the importance of conflict
prevention, because in too many cases international
action has focused on the effects of conflict. Africa -
a region dealing with conflict and post-conflict
situations - is in a position to benefit from preventive
action geared to the nature of African conflicts, most of
which, it should be noted, are not direct conflicts
between States, but internal struggles resulting from
economic or sociopolitical problems. In such cases, the
best way to maintain and build peace is to deal with
situations before conflict breaks out.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which is to hold its first meeting
tomorrow, 23 June, represents a further major step
forward, because it clearly fills a number of gaps at the
international level in terms of conflict prevention and
emergence from crisis, in particular by ensuring that all
parties involved harmonize their actions with a View to
sustainably resolving crises.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
satisfaction that this debate has enabled us to renew
our commitment to promoting and strengthening the
rule of law, respect for which is the only means of
bringing about the collective security that we all wish
to achieve, in accordance with the Charter. My
delegation will fully support the outcome of this
debate, and in this context, we would like once again to
warmly thank the Danish presidency.

