Mr. Staur (Denmark): I thank you, Mr. President,
and I thank the delegation of Austria for organizing and
preparing this thorough discussion of this very
important subject. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict should be the centrepiece of any peace
agreement and conflict prevention effort. The need for
concrete action on the ground is more urgent than ever.
Civilians are increasingly being targeted during
conflict, which brings death, displacement, rape and
torture to populations affected by the conflict. Women
and children are subjected to sexual violence and
abuse, often as part of horrifying war strategies.

The Security Council has a responsibility to help
the thousands of people whose lives are threatened
because Governments are unable or unwilling to
protect civilian citizens living in conflict areas. It is
important to strengthen the enforcement of
international humanitarian law through the Security
Council. That implies that the Council is consistent in
its response to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and that it is receptive to information about
grave threats to civilians, as well as proactive in
seeking such information. The Council needs to be
ready to act using all available means at its disposal.

An important step to be taken in securing the
protection of civilians is to improve the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. Civilian protection is, of
course, at the very heart of peacekeeping. Still, we
have seen time and again that peacekeeping mandates
are incomplete, unrealistic and ineffective in
combating conflict and violence. Mission mandates
tend to have somewhat rigid parameters for analysing
and adapting to conflict settings, and they too often fail
to address the structural causes of conflicts.
Furthermore, they do not consistently ensure a whole-
of-system approach, linking in a comprehensive
manner the efforts of the United Nations and others in
both peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Mandates often
tend to be vague, overambitious and unrealistic in
terms of what can be accomplished and without
sufficient personnel or proper exit strategies.

It must be the responsibility of the Security
Council to provide better targeted, comprehensive,
realistic and robust mission mandates and to have clear
protection objectives. Mandates must be flexibly
adapted to swiftly changing political situations and
circumstances in countries. Also, the gap between
mandated tasks and allocated resources and capabilities
must be bridged, if we are to make a difference on the
ground - and that we must.

We call for a more concerted action on the ground
for the United Nations and for Member States and urge
them to get together to strengthen cooperation and
coordination of all efforts, from peacekeeping missions
through humanitarian action and early recovery
activities to development assistance. We need more
focus on impact and joint operation approaches and to
be less caught up in bureaucratic constraints and
squabbles over turf.

I wish to make two final points. First, there is
also a need to protect humanitarian aid workers. When
basic security and safety are not provided,
humanitarian organizations are forced to leave and
cannot provide assistance and protection to the people
who desperately need it. It is alarming that the
humanitarian space seems to be shrinking, leaving
millions of people without basic assistance and
protection.

Finally, be reminded that Denmark is a strong
advocate for fighting impunity. Ensuring that
perpetrators are held accountable not only serves as a
deterrent of future crimes, but it also recognizes the
suffering and dignity of victims and can thereby help
societies to move forward and reconcile after conflict.

