Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): I
take this opportunity to reiterate my delegation's pleasure
that the Council has been able to agree on the formula
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report of 19
July to ensure the United Nations presence in Haiti.

The United Nations presence in Haiti dates to 1990,
since when it has contributed - not without some
difficulties - to the establishment of democracy and
economic recovery in that country. It is clear that, without
that presence, it would have been impossible for the people
of Haiti to make the progress it has made to date -
progress on which the United Nations may justly pride
itself. Indeed, despite the difficulties that have been faced,
the Organization's main mission of bringing stability and
democracy to that country has borne important fruit. For the
first time, one democratically elected Government is
succeeding another. Considerable achievements have been
made in human rights and in creating and consolidating
basic institutions, such as the police and the judiciary.

Perhaps the best way to assess the success attained to
date would be to ask what would have happened in Haiti if
the United Nations had not been involved in this
stabilization phase. It is not difficult to imagine that, in
such a case, Haiti would have been plunged into a profound
political and economic crisis, with immeasurable human
consequences. Such a scenario is unacceptable, which is
why we should be rightly proud of our support for the
efforts of the democratic forces in Haiti.

The adoption of the draft resolution before us today
is in keeping with the same logic that led to the United
Nations presence in Haiti in 1990: providing that country
with the opportunity to rise from the swamp of
dictatorship, corruption, violence and poverty and
fostering institutional reconstruction, national
reconciliation and economic rehabilitation. We adopt this
draft resolution today aware that, while the Organization's
objectives have not yet been fully met, we are far further
along - almost at the end of that first great task.

When the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
has completed its work in four months, the democratic
regime must be minimally self-sustaining as the result of
the consolidation of the basic elements of a police force
committed to law and respect for human rights. This
minimum achievement will be fundamental to the ability
of the democratic forces of Haiti to continue on their own
from whom we also expect a deeper commitment to the
fate of their own institutions. This will require them to
have a long-term vision that sees beyond short-term
jockeying for power and to demonstrate greater flexibility
and the capacity to achieve a basic consensus.

We are all aware, however, that if democracy is to
function it must be planted in fertile ground. That is why
we are convinced that the international community must
subsequently address not only security and political
stability, as it is now doing, but also and with greater
emphasis the economic development of Haiti.

For this reason, we welcome the provisions of the
draft resolution before us, which stresses the need for
financial and economic assistance. We must break the
vicious cycle whereby, on the one hand, there is no
security without development and, on the other, there is
no development without security. The United Nations
must preserve its achievements by focusing on these two
closely interrelated aspects of stability. Failure to do so
would mean wasting all the efforts we have made in Haiti
and subjecting that country to the risk of being sucked
once again into the spiral of violence and chaos.

We trust that there will soon be well-directed and
tangible evidence of the commitment of the international
community and the international financial institutions. It
is important that the United Nations take the lead in this

 

regard. Our country is prepared to study any formulas
proposed in order to ensure this commitment to long-term
international support for Haiti.

Before concluding, I wish to express my sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General, to his Special
Representative and, through the Secretary-General, to all
the agencies operating in Haiti for the excellent work they
have done. I also wish to express my country's deep
gratitude to the Government of Canada for continuing to
provide the forces that are making it possible to stabilize
the situation in Haiti and to all the countries that are
contributing to this noble cause.

