Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Chad for having convened this meeting devoted
to the Sahel under its presidency of the Security
Council. My thanks also go to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Guebre Sellassie, for her
briefing on the progress achieved in the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Her statement rightly underscored the important need
for the international community to have a coherent and
coordinated regional approach that is complementary
to national policies to strengthen governance, security,
resilience and development in the Sahel region.

Since the last time the Special Envoy addressed the
Council, in June (see S/PV.7203), the security situation
has continued to deteriorate in the north of Mali, in
Libya and around Lake Chad. Armed conflicts, the
proliferation of arms, transnational organized crime
and drug trafficking, and the links between such
criminal activities and terrorist groups, continue to
pose a serious threats to peace and security region.

The rise in violence has for further exacerbated
the extremely fragile humanitarian situation in the
Sahel. As the Special Envoy has just recalled, at least
20 million people remain exposed to food insecurity
and more than 6 million children are at risk of acute
malnutrition.

Today no State is in a position to meet those
challenges alone. Business as usual is no longer
an option. Strengthening regional cooperation is
imperative. Two initiatives are under way to that end,
which we welcome. On the one hand, there is the
Ministerial Coordination Platform, chaired from 2013
to 2015 by Mali, which benefits from crucial national
and regional ownership and is supported by a technical
secretariat. On the other hand we have the Group of Five
Sahel, made up of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the
Niger and Chad. The third meeting of the Ministerial
Platform was held on 18 November in the presence,
for the first time, of the permanent secretary of the
Group of Five Sahel. In that context, I would like to
ask Ms. Sellassie to what extent closer work between
the two initiatives - the Ministerial Platform and the
Group of Five Sahel - could build trust among the
countries of the region to pave the way for stepped up
security cooperation.

In late October and early November, we witnessed
an unprecedented popular uprising in Burkina Faso,
which led to the resignation of the President and to the
establishment of transitional authorities in a peaceful
manner with respect for the Constitution. These
events illustrate the importance of strengthening the
legitimacy of States as a priority.

The Sahel countries will undoubtedly require
additional security capacities to meet the challenges
I have mentioned. At the same time, it is important
to encourage the emergence of institutions that are
accountable to citizens and able to provide basic
services to the entire population, including access to
justice. That would help to reduce internal tensions and
find lasting solutions to the root causes of instability
in the region. The participation of women, who are
often left outside decision-making process, must be
encouraged. Civil society must also be able to play
its full role. Governance that promotes development
and the resilience of democratic institutions serve as
effective bastions against violent radicalization and the
emergence of national and regional conflicts.

In parallel, particular attention must be paid to
border areas and to infrastructures that facilitate
regional integration. That will also make it possible to
improve territorial control and strengthen the authority
of the State throughout its territory. In that regard, I
should like to mention the fact that since 2012, as part
of our regional cooperation programmes, Luxembourg
has been financing, among other programmes, in
partnership with the West African Economic and
Monetary Union, a regional programme of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund known as Local
Cross-Border Initiative. The programme aims to
strengthen the governance framework for cross-
border cooperation in West Africa. At the regional and
national levels, it involves the adoption of strategies to
strengthen cooperation beyond borders. At the local
level, the programme has made it possible to develop
support tools for local authorities for financing cross-
order investment. The tranche of the programme
related to the Niger, Mali and Burkina Faso clearly
illustrates the resolve of the local authorities of these
three countries to work together to create cross-border
socioeconomic development areas, which are also an
important part of regional integration.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General of the full support
of Luxembourg in this task. Bolstered by these
cooperation programmes and Luxembourg's long-
standing relations with the countries of the Sahel region,
my country will continue to be resolutely engaged in
strengthening international efforts for peace, security
and development in the region - three objectives to
which the populations of the Sahel have long aspired.
Let us not dash their hopes.

