Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France regrets that military action has been engaged in
Iraq without the endorsement of the United Nations. To
the very end, in cooperation with the members of the
Security Council, the countries of the region and the
entire international community, France strove to
demonstrate convincingly that the disarmament of Iraq
could be achieved through the peaceful means of
inspections. We remain convinced that that approach
was both correct and viable. These efforts,
unfortunately, did not succeed. This conflict will be
fraught with consequences for the future.

Our prime concern today is the fate of the civilian
population in Iraq. That is why we hope that these
military operations will be as rapid and as least deadly
as possible and that a prompt end to the conflict will
spare Iraq's civilians further suffering. We urge the
belligerents to do everything they can to spare human
lives. They must scrupulously comply with the rules
imposed on them by international humanitarian law, in
particular the Geneva Conventions.

France is prepared to meet the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqis, in support of the efforts made by
the United Nations and the European Union. The
international community must mobilize. We recall,
however, that the primary responsibility to assist and to
meet the basic needs of civilian populations lies, in
accordance with international humanitarian law, with
the occupying forces in the areas under their control. It
is in that context that the Security Council must seek
the prompt adoption of a resolution to mobilize efforts
urgently to alleviate the humanitarian situation of the
Iraqi people, inter alia, through the resumption of the
oil for food programme. We hope that we will soon
reach agreement on such a text and that it will be
adopted shortly.

France reiterates its commitment to the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.
These principles are enshrined in the Charter and were
recalled in resolution 687 (1991) and subsequent
resolutions. They must be fully respected. Accordingly,
we call on the countries of the region to refrain from
any initiative that would further exacerbate the
situation. The sovereignty of Iraq belongs to the Iraqis.
The Iraqis must remain masters of the future of their
country. These principles must be taken into account
forthwith in order to facilitate a settlement to the crisis
that respects the framework they define.

The re-establishment of lasting peace will be
possible only in a collective context, in which the
United Nations must be central. As soon as the
situation permits, the United Nations will have to be
allowed to exercise its full responsibility, in strict
respect for its independence. It will have to verify the
disarmament of Iraq, as required by the resolutions in
force. It will have to help the Iraqi people to regain
control over its destiny and to choose its future.

Faithful to these principles, France will continue
to act to ensure that crises which threaten international
peace and security find fair solutions through collective
action in the framework of the United Nations.

