Mr. Hashmi (Pakistan): I have the honour to
present Pakistan's statement to the Council on behalf
of Ambassador Munir Akram, who sends his regrets, as
he is delayed as a result of heavy traffic.

Mr. President, we thank you for having convened
this timely debate. We welcome the decision to hold an
open debate in the Council. It is a rare privilege for
non-members of the Council to be able to discuss the
importance and relevance of resolutions 1540 (2004)
and 1673 (2006) in this Chamber.

We thank the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) for his comprehensive statement, and express
our appreciation also for the statements made by the
representatives of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the World Customs Organization.

Both resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution 1673
(2006) provide for coordination and cooperation with
international organizations so as to advance the
objectives of resolution 1540 (2004). At the same time,
resolution 1540 (2004) also affirms that none of the
obligations contained therein shall be interpreted so as
to alter the responsibilities of the IAEA or the OPCW.
We fully acknowledge the important work being done
by international organizations such as the IAEA and
the OPCW in building the capacity of the States
members of those organizations in many areas.

It is important that, in associating these
organizations with the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), their
own functions and responsibilities be fully preserved.
In any case, these international organizations predate
resolution 1540 (2004) and would have continued their
important work regardless of the resolution.

Some Council members, surely the permanent
members, may recall that concerns were raised in
December 2004 over the capacity of the 1540
Committee, in the context of its expertise, manpower
and resources, to promote implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Almost three years after the adoption of
that resolution, it is clear that the 1540 Committee has
done whatever it can within its capacity constraints.

The concept paper presented by Slovakia in
connection with this debate notes that 135 Member
States have submitted their first national
implementation reports and that 85 have provided
additional information. Pakistan has provided two
reports to the 1540 Committee. The concept paper
provides general information on the challenges faced in
implementing the resolutions. The reasons for non-
reporting by a number of States need to be examined in
a cooperative and constructive manner.

It is clear that many States lack the necessary
expertise and resources related to the implementation
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006). There are
also vast differences in the economic, industrial, legal
and financial profiles of Member States. More
importantly, there is a general perception that there is a
wide gap between the promises made and the provision
of the assistance required, especially by developing
States. An additional problem is reporting fatigue,
including for those States which have filed
implementation reports.

Resolution 1540 (2004) rightly affirmed that
prevention of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) should not hamper international
cooperation in materials, equipment and technology for
peaceful purposes, while the goal of peaceful
utilization should not be used as a cover for
proliferation. The growing global demand for nuclear
power generation underlines the need for equitable and
non-discriminatory steps by supplier States to strike a
balance between proliferation concerns and facilitation
of the legitimate trade in equipment, materials and
technology for the increased generation of nuclear
energy.

One of the ways in which such a balance could be
achieved would be to commence negotiations for truly
multilateral arrangements for governing the trade in
dual-use and sensitive items and technology. The
existing arrangements, and their selective application,
remain contrary to the spirit of resolution 1540 (2004).

We wish to take this opportunity to say a few
words on the working methods of the 1540 Committee,
especially with regard to the hiring of its experts. The
manner in which the contracts of some experts have

been handled reinforces the widely held perception
outside the Council that the whole process of
marshalling the resolution, its implementation, the
composition of the Committee, its experts and staff is
being led by the developed countries, to the exclusion
of a large number of countries from the developing
world. We hope that the Council and the Committee
will seek to ensure an adequate and equitable
representation of experts from the developing countries
in a transparent manner.

The level of implementation of national measures
by Member States, the gaps between assurances and
supply of assistance, and the lack of capacity on the
part of Member States as well as of the 1540
Committee, should lead to a critical assessment of the
competence and capability of the Council to promote
the non-proliferation agenda. Member States may also
have to evaluate the outcome of the "encouragement"
provided by resolution 1540 (2004) in the past three
years to fully implement the disarmament treaties and
agreements. In the context of the Council's growing
interest in preventing WMD proliferation, it is
important to reconcile and balance the lack of
implementation of disarmament obligations by certain
Council members with their zeal in promoting
non-proliferation. Discrimination and double standards
are the enemy of collective purpose and action.

When resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted,
Pakistan, then a member of the Council, joined the
consensus because we concurred that there was a gap
in the international rules relating to the acquisition and
illicit transfer of WMD by non-State actors. We also
agreed that the matter was important and urgent
enough to be addressed in an exceptional manner by
the Security Council. Now that the Council has
addressed the urgent dimension of the danger, it is
necessary to revert to the normal avenues for the
creation of international rules and norms, that is,
through the process of international treaty-making. The
time has now come to revive the multilateral
disarmament machinery, so that future challenges in
the area of non-proliferation can be addressed in open,
transparent and inclusive processes.

In that context, we believe that the General
Assembly should begin early discussions to authorize
the convening of an international diplomatic
conference, or request the Conference on Disarmament
in Geneva to negotiate an international treaty to
address the issue of the acquisition of WMD by
non-State actors or terrorists. Such a treaty could be
based on the provisions of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006). It should achieve what resolution 1540
(2004) did not, that is, provide clear definitions of non-
State actors, means of delivery, related materials, and
so on. That would facilitate the adoption of national
legislation.

The treaty should also create appropriate
executive and administrative bodies to promote
adherence and facilitate international assistance and
cooperation - along the lines, for example, of the
national authorities that are required to be established
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and which
are assisted in their work by the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. The International
Atomic Energy Agency also has a similar facilitation
role under its various conventions and programmes.
Finally, the treaty should also establish the mechanisms
necessary to ensure equitable implementation,
monitoring and compliance with its provisions.

