Mr. Cisse (spoke in French): I should like to
thank all those who have congratulated and encouraged
me as Representative of the Secretary-General. I would
like to touch upon various issues, focusing on points of
interest. I shall begin with human rights.

The human rights bureau of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) is very important, particularly in
the post-conflict period, and more so in a country that
has just experienced an aborted coup attempt that has
brought about some actions with ethnic connotations.
Currently, the bureau does monitoring and intervention.
It is very vigilant and highly sought after. People come
to the bureau to express their grievances or they write
to BONUCA, through the bureau, to report abuses. The
bureau has access to the entire judicial branch in the
country. It can go to see judges and it can turn to the
police and the gendarmerie. The Government is aware
of this. That bureau is swamped right now. Some of the
grievances are not justified. This is why we always try
to be very calm and discerning in our work.

I shall now turn to the strengthening of the
bureau, as requested in the presidential statement of 17
July, in which the Council called for the strengthening
of human rights monitoring and the implementation of
early-warning machinery.

On the question of resources, while we wait for a
response to the request for a budgetary assessment, I
would like to provide some data on the strengthening
of the bureau. There will be three additional
specialists - jurists, of course - who will be working
in the bureau so that it can provide legal assistance. In
other words, a person may seek to bring an action and
if we see that it involves a human rights violation in
some way, the bureau will have the capacity to provide
him assistance in prosecution.

Secondly, the actions of the bureau can be
decentralized by strengthening activities in the field, in
the provinces where there are departmental and
provincial courts, so that the bureau can also continue
to monitor human rights inside the territory. This also
applies to the early-warning section and others to
which I referred in my introduction.

I would like to address now the trial relating to
the coup d'etat of 28 May. The Office in Bangui wants
the assessment of that event to be carried out in a
transparent manner. I would like to point out that the
United Nations Office in Bangui is highly respected,
because the Government knows that we represent not
only international opinion but also international
institutions and the international community, first and
foremost, the United Nations. So the reports that we
prepare are of great interest to the Government of the
Central African Republic. The president has entered
into certain commitments recently and has asked that
those involved in the 28 May coup d'etat be dealt with
in an exclusively legal manner.

Concerning political and trade union dialogue,
political dialogue, as indicated in my report, no longer
existed between the opposition and the presidential
movement. As soon as we got to Bangui we met all
political parties, which had formed movements that
shared ideologies. For example, there is what we call
the Group of Six, at the far left, the Group of Nine and
the presidential movement. All these political actors
agree that dialogue must resume.

For some time now there has been a legal
investigative commission, which, it must be said,
somewhat impedes the resumption of dialogue, in the
sense that some people get cold feet easily and await
the conclusions of that commission. 1 can announce to
you that the commission has concluded part of its work
and was to furnish its conclusions last week to the
public prosecutor's office. Its mandate has been
extended for two months, in order to try to see other
phenomena related to the coup d'e'tat. Now, the public
prosecutor's office can proceed to undertake these
trials. We think that, once that starts, the political
dialogue could be resumed.

As far as the social dialogue with the trade unions
is concerned, we did address the Minister for the Civil
Service and brought together all of the trade unions in
the country at a working meeting. After that meeting
and after the meeting that they held with the Minister
for the Civil Service, the dialogue was resumed. It will
be recalled that trade unions utilized an arbitration
commission for some months. That union had made a
statement. All trade unions supported the negotiating
group, and the dialogue was restarted in that respect.

A regional approach has frequently been
mentioned. The Great Lakes region now extends, it is
true, to the territory of the Central African Republic.
No security problem can be addressed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without its having
an influence on the Central African Republic.

Here let me say that when the Minister was
appointed, one who deals exclusively with
restructuring, we met with him and decided that the
funds now in the United Nations Development
Programme would make it possible to begin to collect
weapons and to study restructuring, which had been
halted since the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA). A committee was set
up, and I think that in coming days we will see how we
can make the population aware. As I said, many
civilians have been armed since the last coup d'etat, in
addition to soldiers, police, etc. We will commence that
disarming without delay. In any case, we will
undertake some activities in that area as quickly as
possible.

With regard to refugee returns, 1 can say that
appeals have been made by the Government for
refugees to return to Central Africa. Several appeals
have been made. We ourselves have made proposals to
the President, who agreed with them. He has made
several statements, of which that of 17 September is
the most recent. It is a presidential communique in
which he calls upon his compatriots to trust the
committee of inquiry and to address any information to
it, rather than to him personally. He has made that
appeal several times now.

The defence and security forces in the Central
African Republic have dwindled somewhat, in terms of
both human and material resources. For example, the
army, which had 3,500 men, has only about 2,000 now.
There are more than 1,000 militia across from Bangui,
in Zongo, including 10 or 12 officers. Appeals have
been made, and some refugees have timidly begun to
return. Fear is really what holds them back, more than
anything else. I think that more appeals and more
confidence will lead to the return of a greater number.
Already, some deputies have rejoined the assembly.

I will conclude with refugees. In the Central
African Republic there are 24,250 refugees. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo there are 23,000, in
Zongo and in the neighbouring town of Libenge; in
Congo-Brazzaville there are some 1,250, in Be'tou. But
there are 48,870 refugees in the Central African
Republic. There are 370 Rwandan Hutus, including 19
officers, and approximately 1,500 Chadians in the
north and in Bangui. There are 35,000 Sudanese and
2,000 Congolese from Kinshasa in a UNHCR site.
There are some 10,000 urban refugees. I could perhaps
say that the Central African Republic is a spillway of
the unsolved problems in the neighbouring countries
which create specific problems within the Republic.

Regarding to refugees located near Bangui,
UNHCR has worked with MONUC. The survey has
been carried out and there is a plan to take them 50
kilometres from the border.

We are going to try to revive an already existing
committee that was to study the reopening of the
Ubangi River. As the President said, the closure of the
Ubangi has caused disasters in the Central African
Republic, because three quarters of the trade was
transported on the Ubangi, and the remainder went by
land to Cameroon - more than 1,500 kilometres on a
very poor road. We are trying to contact the individuals
involved, including Mr. Bemba, who controls that area.
If the Ubangi is opened, we think the economic
situation can be improved.

I think I have touched, quite briefly, on some of
the problems that have come up in the discussion.

