Mrs. Gondjout (Gabon) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the President of the Gabonese Republic, His
Excellency Mr. El Hadj Omar Bongo Ondimba, whom
I have the honour to represent here, I would like to say
how pleased our delegation and I myself are to see
Mr. Mbeki presiding over this high-level meeting on
the role of regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

As the Council knows, the President of the
Gabonese Republic is very interested in questions
related to international peace and security, particularly
in Africa. He thus fully supports the initiative that the
Council presidency has taken to organize this meeting
to examine questions related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council can be
3
assured of his solidarity with the resulting
recommendations.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security
(8/2008/186) has proposed interesting paths for
reflection on strengthening cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

While today we have reasons to be pleased with
developments in recent years in this area, particularly
in Africa, we must acknowledge that a great deal
remains to be done so that this cooperation can have
more solid content. With a constant and significant
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to our own, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, Africa has shown
its will and capacity to mobilize for the resolution of
conflicts and crises that threaten collective security.
That is the case with the African peacekeeping mission
in Burundi, African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the recent African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

The President of the Gabonese Republic, in
consultation with his peers in the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC), is contributing to the search for solutions to
the crises in the subregion. As Chair of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Situation in the Central African
Republic, he encourages consultations and inclusive
dialogue to reach political and economic stabilization
of that country.

The President of the Gabonese Republic has also
been active in the deployment of the Multinational
Force of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (FOMUC). The same is true of the case of
Chad, where Gabon is working for an inclusive
dialogue between the various stakeholders.

Gabon is also in the contact group to follow up
the Dakar agreement signed on 13 March 2008
between Chad and the Sudan at the initiative of
President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal. The group held
its the first meeting of Foreign Ministers in Libreville
on 10 April 2008. Another meeting of the contact
group, this time at the level of experts on defence,
security and intelligence, will be held in Tripoli, Libya
at the end of this month to consider and plan for the
rapid establishment, with the support of the United
Nations and the European Union, of a surveillance
force at the border between Chad and the Sudan.

Unfortunately, all of these African initiatives
come up against the insufficiency of resources, in
particular with regard to financing, human and
institutional capacity-building and peacebuilding.
Because of this, my country supports the Secretary-
General's proposal to quickly create a panel of eminent
experts for an in-depth consideration of predictable and
stable financing of peacekeeping operations initiated
by regional organizations.

Capacity-building in preventive diplomacy is
another area of concern, which was addressed in
resolution 1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005. From
that perspective, joint mediation and good offices
missions could help defuse the brewing conflicts and
crises.

On a completely different topic, Gabon would
like to launch a strong appeal to the international
community for assistance to developing countries
facing increases in food prices, which could produce
socio-economic troubles likely to degenerate into
lasting crises.

I express the wish that the resolution to be
adopted at the end of this debate will strengthen the
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, the African Union in
particular, in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

