Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): I thank
Jeffrey Feltman, the Permanent Representative of Spain
and the head of the Delegation of the European Union
for their briefings.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed in
Vienna and resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed it,
are a year old. At the time of their adoption, we paid
tribute to an historic moment for international peace
and security. After more than a decade of concern
by the international community in facing the Iranian
proliferation crisis, the Vienna agreement has paved the
way for the re-establishment of trust in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme, thereby
consolidating the non-proliferation regime.

Where are we one year after the conclusion of
the agreement? The International Atomic Energy
Agency has continued its verification and surveillance
activities of Iran's implementation of its commitments
on the nuclear component under the Vienna agreement,
and it has done so without any impediment. We will
continue to ensure the rigorous implementation of all
nuclear provisions under the Vienna agreement, which
remains a priority for us.

As required by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, Iran has the right to use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The Vienna agreement
has defined the framework for the development of
civilian nuclear cooperation with Iran. France is
committed to the implementation of the agreement in
all its dimensions. That is why our two countries have
held discussions on bilateral cooperation in the field
of nuclear fusion, within the framework defined by
the agreement.

With regard to the lifting of sanctions, I wish to
emphasize that we have met all our commitments
under the Vienna agreement since the 16 January 2016
implementation date. The French Government, in line
with its European Union partners, has provided all the
necessary information and guidance on the scope of the
sanctions that have been lifted. The lifting of sanctions
is already beginning to bear fruit, as the resumption
of Iran's oil exports, among other examples, attest. We
also understand Iran's concerns about the slowness
of the effects on its economy of lifting sanctions. We
have spared no effort to provide companies with the
necessary clarifications on the lifting of sanctions, and
will continue to do so. We call on all our partners to
continue their efforts on that issue. However, I would
like to point out that other factors also come into play
when a business decides to invest in Iran. For the lifting
of sanctions to be fully felt in the Iranian economy, it is
also incumbent upon Tehran to create an environment
of trust for businesses.

I now come to my final point. We are concerned
about the numerous reports on Iran's non-compliance
on several important provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) over the course of the past six months. That
information is detailed in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/589) just presented to us. In that
regard, I thank the Secretary-General for his report,
which is comprehensive, factual and balanced and
lays the foundation for rigorous monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in the coming
years. Iran's destabilizing actions are numerous. I will
listjust a few.

Last March, Iran launched several ballistic missiles
capable of delivering nuclear weapons, contrary to the
provisions of paragraph 3, annex B, of resolution 2231
(2015). France, in collaboration with its European 3+1
partners, has therefore notified the Security Council.
In addition, the United States and France informed the
Security Council of two Iranian weapons seizures, last
June and July, respectively, constituting violations of
paragraph 6 (b) of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).

Finally, we are equally concerned about
information relating to travel abroad by Major
General Qasem Soleimani, who is still subject to
travel restrictions imposed by the Security Council, as
confirmed by resolution 2231 (2015). We believe it is
essential for international security and the stability of
the region that Iran refrain from any destabilizing and
dangerous activities.

In conclusion, I appeal to all parties to redouble
their efforts for the rigorous implementation of all the
provisions of the Vienna agreement and resolution
2231 (2015). The Vienna agreement and the adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015) will be a singular diplomatic
success if the measures of the provisions are rigorously
observed. France will ensure throughout the process
that the Security Council remains quite vigilant.

