Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Permanent Representatives of
Australia, Morocco and the Republic of Korea for their
reports on the Committees they head. What they do is
an important contribution to strengthening the central
coordinating role of the United Nations and its Security
Council in the area of international cooperation on
anti-terrorism.

Unfortunately, despite all our efforts, terrorism
remains one of the chief threats to international peace
and security. We are reminded of this by the unceasing
terrorist attacks in various regions of the world that
claim the lives of innocent people, including children,
day after day. It is clear that terrorism is rapidly
adapting to new realities. Terrorists are making active
use of the latest advances in the field of information
and communications technologies. They recruit new
extremists in cyberspace, move freely across porous
borders and take advantage of gaps in criminal law.

One extremely dangerous trend today is how
terrorism has become woven into the fabric of regional
conflicts, a phenomenon that continues to have serious
explosive potential in North Africa, the Sahel, the
Middle East and the Afghanistan-Pakistan region.
Terrorist methods are widely used by anti-Government
groups in Syria. Eradicating the threat of terrorism can
only be achieved by intensifying the collective efforts
of all members of the international community, focused
around the United Nations, and in strict compliance
with international law.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism (CTC)
remains the cornerstone at the base of the entire
counter-terrorism architecture of the United Nations.
Ambassador Loulichki's skilful chairmanship has
contributed in no small measure to its effective
functioning during the reporting period. In our view,
that the recent reforms improving the Committee's
procedures and changing the format of its evaluation
documents, together with continuing the important
practice of sending visiting missions, are helping the
CTC fulfil its mandate under resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1963 (2010).

There is growing attention being paid, including
in the Security Council, to an integrated approach to
counter-terrorism with an emphasis on preventive
measures for combating this evil. In that connection, a
hugely important task is preventing the radicalization
of social attitudes and incitement to religious and
sectarian confrontations collisions all over the world.
It is therefore vital that States continue efforts, under
the auspices of the United Nations, to reduce the
attractiveness of terrorist activity and to combat the
production of terrorist ideology and violent extremism,
as well as terrorists' use of the media and the Internet.

We believe it is important to strengthen the CTC's
contacts with other structures and organizations in
order to expand the network of antiterrorist cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. In that regard,
we note the collaboration of the CTC, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) at the Conference on Terrorism
Issues for chiefs of special services and security and
law enforcement bodies held by the Federal Security
Service of the Russian Federation. We intend to continue
the practice of holding briefings for representatives
from the Conference and the CTC.

We value the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) in assisting the CTC and
commend the energetic efforts of the new Executive
Director, Mr. Laborde, aimed at tackling the major
tasks facing CTED under his mandate. We hope that
the concerns we voice today will be taken into account
in the preparation of the draft resolution extending
CTED's mandate, scheduled to be adopted next month.

The 1267/1989 Committee is one of the Security
Council's most effective mechanisms in the field
of combating terrorism, and we would like to note
the active efforts of Ambassador Quinlan in his
capacity as its Chair. The Committee's sanctions list
should adequately reflect the terrorist threat posed by
Al-Qaida, and we support proposals by Member States
for the inclusion of new entities on the list. We also
believe it is essential that the Committee react rapidly
to the changing nature of the threat of terrorism and
without unnecessary red tape when considering relevant
requests. In that context, it is regrettable that the
Committee has still not listed Storsjo, Djabrailov and
the non-governmental organization Imkander, whose
links to an Al-Qaida entity on the list, the terrorist
organization Imarat Kavkaz, are more than compelling.

The powers of the Ombudsman and the procedure
for considering delisting requests laid down in
resolution 2083 (2012) ensure an optimal level of
transparency in the Committee's work. A more
important task, however, is improving the effectiveness
of the sanctions mechanisms, which are entirely
dependent on States' implementing their obligations in
that area. Unfortunately, as practice has shown, there
are still unresolved problems here. Thus, for example,
despite paragraph 4 of resolution 2083 (2012), the
Kavkaz Centre website, the information arm of Imarat
Kavkaz, is still active.

The task established in resolution 1540 (2004)
of preventing weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery from falling into the hands of
terrorists remains relevant. Russia has consistently
pushed for the resolution's implementation by every
State and with full recognition of the complexity and
long-term nature of its requirements. We are grateful
to Ambassador Joon Oh and his predecessor Kim Sook
for their effective leadership of the 1540 Committee,
and we note the useful work of Committee's Group of
Experts in giving them substantive support. Among
the Committee's activities over the past six months,
we would highlight the efforts to help build States'
capacities to meet the requirements of resolution 1540
(2004).

The Committee continues to develop cooperation
with States and specialized international and regional
organizations. One of the outcomes of that work has
been the reduction in the number of States with reports
still pending, now that both Liberia and South Sudan
have submitted their first reports in implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We hope that further progress
in that area will take place next year, when we are due
to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
resolution.

The adoption in September ofresolution 2118 (2013)
on the destruction of the Syrian chemical-weapons
arsenal has again reaffirmed the role of resolution 1540
(2004) as a key non-proliferation instrument. We should
remember that States are now committed to briefing the
Security Council on any violations, so that the Council
can take appropriate steps. In the light of reports of the
use in Syria of chemical weapons by opposition armed
groups, a number of which are linked to Al-Qaida, that
point is particularly pertinent.

With regard to the further work of the Committee,
we believe that it is necessary to continue prioritizing
the provision of assistance to States. The coordinating
role of the Committee in the efforts of the international
community to comply with the resolution is extremely
important. For its part, Russia will continue to actively
participate in those activities, including in the context
of our cooperation with the member States of the
Commonwealth of Independent States on issues relating
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

