Ms. Johnson: I welcome this timely opportunity
to provide members of the Council with an update
on developments in South Sudan as the country
turns two years old tomorrow. Many of us witnessed
the outpouring of euphoria that greeted the dawn of
independence of South Sudan. The mood of that day
now seems like a fading memory. We have since seen
many setbacks and problems.

It is still important to acknowledge the progress
that has been made. Since its independence, with the
support ofthe United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS), South Sudan has made strides
towards becoming a more stable and democratically
accountable country. Progress has been made in key
areas. In the area of consolidation of peace, on 25 April
the Government renewed its offer of amnesty to six
armed group leaders and their forces through the
issuance ofa presidential decree. The amnesty has been
accepted by the South Sudan Liberation Army, the so-
called South Sudan Democratic Army and the South
Sudan Defence Forces. Talks with the Government
have resulted in thousands of militia coming forward
for reintegration. That is a very positive development
for stability in the country, and in particular for Unity
and Upper Nile states.

Progress has also been made in the reform of the
South Sudan National Police Service (SSNPS) towards
a more professional and effective police service. The
Government and the SSNPS, with the support of
UNMISS, have completed the registration of now over
47,000 police officers, which is higher than the figure
reflected in the Secretary-General's report (8/2013/366)
and the benchmarks. Ghost officers will be weeded
out, establishing new standards of professionalism and
openness. At the same time, United Nations police are
providing training at all levels, improving the conduct
and capacity of the SSNPS and helping reform the whole
police service. Tangible results are being achieved.

Another area where progress is being achieved
is the rule of law and security sector reform. The
Government, with the support of UNMISS and other
United Nations partners, has addressed more than 1,000
cases of prolonged and arbitrary detention. Also, with
the support of UNMISS and its international partners,
consultations for the development of a draft national
security policy have taken place in all 10 states,
and the drafting committee is now preparing for the
next level of consultations at the national level. The
legislative framework for the national security agencies
has been adopted in the Cabinet and will be submitted
for parliamentary approval. That is critical to ensure
democratic control.

The implementation of the Peacebuilding Support
Plan continues with preliminary but encouraging
results. Some important highlights include a joint
road map on integrated United Nations support to the
2015 elections and preparation for the national census,
the successful organization of peace conferences in
different states, technical assistance to the national
reconciliation process, and progress towards a compact
under the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.
Also, concrete dividends ofpeace are being delivered in
several areas with the help of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes.

Despite such achievements since independence,
progress in South Sudan has been hampered in other
areas. Although most parts of the country remain
stable, the security situation in Jonglei, particularly in
the south-east of the state, has dominated developments
since January. Fighting between the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the David Yau Yau armed
group, and threats from both, have resulted in the
displacement of thousands of civilians. The population
centres in Pibor county, where between 35,000 and
40,000 people used to live, including Boma, Manyabol
and Pibor, are largely emptied of civilians, while
the conditions of the remaining Murle population in
inaccessible rural areas remain largely unknown. That
is of deep concern.

Clashes in Boma in May also resulted in considerable
looting and damage to property, including that of
humanitarian organizations, reportedly perpetrated
by both armed groups and state security forces. The
same happened in Pibor town. Restrictions have been
reported on the movement of hundreds of civilians who
remain in Pibor town and the harassment of civilians
reportedly continues.

The violence in south-east Jonglei also had
tragic consequences for UNMISS, when, on 9 April,
a military convoy was ambushed approximately 12
kilometres outside Gumuruk, resulting in the death of
five peacekeepers, two national civilian staff members
and five private contractors. Accountability must be
ensured, both in relation to this incident, as well as in
relation to the shoot-down of the UNMISS helicopter
in 2012.

The deterioration in the security situation in parts
of South Sudan has been accompanied by human rights
violations by armed groups and national security
institutions. At the same time, we are concerned
that violations of the status-of-forces agreement
are continuing, and constraints in the operating
environment for the Mission and humanitarian agencies
remain a challenge.

National and state authorities are struggling to
translate their commitments to improving respect for
human rights into action. Cases of arbitrary arrest,
detention, abuse and incidences of killings by security
forces, as well as the inability of the authorities to hold
those responsible to account on a timely basis, are cause
for deep concern.

To strengthen awareness and accountability,
UNMISS will increase its public reporting, issuing
thematic reports and incident-related reports on human
rights, while the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights will brief the Council directly on the
human rights situation in South Sudan.

In an encouraging sign of growing Government
concern for accountability, on 17 May President Salva
Kiir Mayardit issued a statement condemning the
violence by armed groups in Jonglei, as well as the
abuses perpetrated by ill-disciplined elements of the
Government security forces, and committed to bringing
those responsible to justice. SPLA investigations have
been conducted into incidents in Pibor and Manyabol
of reported abuses against civilians involving members
of the security forces. Much more needs to be done,
however, to enforce discipline and command and
control in order to build trust among the communities
and ensure respect for international humanitarian and
human rights law within the security forces.

The Government has also attempted to pursue
dialogue with David Yau Yau. While amnesty was
previously spurned by the armed group, the President
of South Sudan renewed his call to David Yau Yau to
take up the offer of amnesty in a statement on 28 June,
and he reiterated the Government's commitment to
coming to an understanding with the armed group. In
the same statement, the President referred to the SPLA
investigations into the violations perpetrated against
civilians and he committed to bringing the perpetrators
to justice.

For its part, in response to the crisis in Jonglei,
UNMISS increased its military presence to a height
of nine infantry companies in late March, distributed
equally between the areas inhabited by all three of
the main communities of the state. In recent months,
UNMISS has conducted hundreds of patrols, of both
long and short duration, to reach out to and protect
all communities, and has provided protection at its
Pibor and Gumuruk bases to civilians seeking refuge.
However, severe operational and logistical constraints
in the rainy season are now making it extremely difficult
to sustain more than five companies in Jonglei.

Beyond the escalation of violence in Jonglei,
inter-communal violence continues in the tri-state
area of Warrap, Lakes and Unity. In the face of
such violence, it is apparent more than ever that the
provision of physical protection alone will not bring
long-term peace and stability to South Sudan. The
Government needs to establish effective long-term
strategies through a political framework to address
the underlying causes of violence. The establishment
of the National Reconciliation Committee is one such
welcome indication ofthe political will needed to foster
necessary inclusive national dialogue.

UNMISS continues to support the Government's
efforts to seek political solutions to inter-communal
conflict and peace initiatives aimed at bringing durable
solutions to disputes over scarce natural resources. The
Mission is encouraging local authorities, community
leaders and national figures to reinforce their efforts to
foster reconciliation. It is also essential that national and
state authorities, and the communities themselves, take
the lead and assume full ownership of such processes.

Burdened by the austerity climate, preoccupied
with efforts to address the security situation, and
challenged by divergences that have emerged within
the top echelons of the ruling Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM), the Government has also faced
difficulties in implementing political reforms and
strengthening public institutions. Bodies crucial to
a successful political transition, such as the National
Constitutional Review Commission and the National
Elections Commission, require adequate budgetary
support from the Government to advance their work
according to the schedule laid out in South Sudan's
Transitional Constitution, while the Political Parties
Council has yet to be sworn in.

The key determinant for developments in South
Sudan continues to be its relations with the Sudan.
While the visit to Juba on 12 April of President Omer
Al-Bashir - the first such visit since South Sudan's
independence - was promising, counter-accusations
by both sides of military support to rebel groups in
each other's territories, and the threat by the Sudan to
shut down the oil pipeline, were a new setback. With
the recent visit by South Sudan's Vice-President, Riek
Machar Teny Dhurgon, and a ministerial delegation
to Khartoum, as well as the expected arrival of First
Vice-President Ali Osman Taha in Juba today, it is
hoped that progress can be made. It is incumbent on
both parties, with the support of the international
community, to strengthen their cooperative efforts for
peaceful coexistence.

Since UNMISS was established, and through
its decentralized presence and continued expansion
through the county support bases, it has achieved
concrete results in a number of areas. In implementing
its mandate, however, it is facing enormous operational
challenges, both with regard to engineering assets and
mobility. Critical resource and capability gaps have
resulted in a mobility crisis, which particularly affects
our operations in high-risk areas such as Jonglei. That is
having an especially detrimental effect on the Mission's
ability to protect civilians, by which its success will
ultimately be judged. Effective protection is only
possible through a presence in those communities most
at risk.

The ability of UNMISS to deploy its troops in
insecure areas is seriously constrained by aviation safety
procedures and a lack of military aviation capabilities.
Since one of its civilian helicopters was shot down on
21 December 2012, the Mission has had to introduce
new flight risk-assessment procedures, which does
slow down its responsiveness. The total of only three
military helicopters available to supply troops in J onglei
is woefully inadequate and has had a major impact on
early warning and response capacity. Force multipliers
are therefore urgently required to rectify the problem.
Based on the recently completed military capability
study, options outlined by the Secretary-General in his
report include aerial surveillance capability, deterrence
and supplementary heavy-lift and riverine capabilities.
I urge the Council to take urgent action to support the
Mission in filling those critical resource and capability

gaps.

UNMISS is also developing options for
reconfiguring its military component and assets so that
they are more effectively located to address emerging
threats, security concerns and military deterrence
needs within the country. The focus will be on the
most unstable areas and where civilians are facing
the greatest threats of physical violence. For such a
deployment to be effective, however, force multipliers
will be essential.

As outlined in the Secretary-General's report
before the Council, I, along with the rest of the Mission,
remain committed to helping the Government make
progress in pursuing further political reforms, creating
a Constitution, improving the human rights situation
and conducting a population census and democratic
elections. Those goals will help to ensure that South
Sudan remains on the path to stability and prosperity.

