Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I have learned from a
fantastic woman in Northern Ireland, Nobel Peace
Prize laureate Betty Williams, that peace is action,
not words. That is what she said, and that is how she
worked. Hungary supports the concept of the year of
peace and is ready to act for peace.

I wish to thank Sweden for convening this important
open debate, and I thank the Secretary-General for his
inspiring introductory remarks.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union (EU).
Speaking in my national capacity, I would now like to
add a few thoughts,

For a long time now, we have been arguing that
there is a need for a sharper focus on prevention across
all stages of conflict. In that connection, last year
Hungary offered a voluntary contribution to support
the work of the Department of Political Affairs in
preventive diplomacy and mediation. Given that
United Nations police can contribute across the entire
spectrum of peace and security, we decided to deploy
police experts to two African missions, and we seek
further opportunities to boost our police presence in
other United Nations peace operations.

We believe that women's participation in United
Nations peace and security efforts, including post-
conflict governance and peacekeeping, is very
important. Hungary has intensified its efforts to
identify, nominate and deploy female military experts
and police officers to United Nations peacekeeping and
EU Common Security and Defence Policy missions.
In the coming months, female Hungarian officers
will be deployed to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and they will serve as
good examples for their compatriots.

Hungary has shown firm and long-standing
dedication to contributing to the elaboration and
realization of the universal and ambitious road map
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our
ultimate goal should be to ensure everyone peaceful and
secure living conditions in their homelands, but that can
be achieved only by tackling the root causes. As part of
our prevention efforts we must deal with transnational
risks such as violent extremism, climate change, water
scarcity and modern slavery. In that context, Hungary
just increased its voluntary contribution to the UN-
Women project that focuses on violent extremism. We
recently hosted the Budapest Water Summit 2016 to give
momentum to the implementation of the water-related
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and we will
continue to work towards achieving the various SDG
targets aimed at eradicating modern slavery, human
trafficking and forced and child labour. We encourage
the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations
response by adopting specific measures to improve
international coordination in that area.

As a new member of the Human Rights Council
for the term 2017-2019, one of our priorities will be
to work towards the prevention of atrocity crimes
and to promote already existing tools available to the
international community that can contribute to an
effective and timely response.
We believe that the prevention role of the United
Nations should be strengthened. We would like to invite
all Member States tojoin the code of conduct developed
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group and already signed by 112 Member States, and,
by doing so, to pledge to support timely and decisive
action by the Council aimed at preventing or ending the
commission of atrocity crimes.

Hungary will support the leadership efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at creating a strong, efficient,
responsible and credible United Nations that is able
to tackle the challenges of the twenty-first century.
We are ready to contribute to the work of this noble
Organization with our best efforts.

The full version of my statement will be circulated.
