Mr. Quinlan (Australia): In adopting resolution
2139 (2014) this morning unanimously, all members
of the Security Council have recognized that the
humanitarian situation in Syria is desperate.

The country has disintegrated, and neighbouring
countries are threatened by the effects. Almost half of
Syria's population needs urgent assistance. A third of
the housing has been destroyed and over 60 per cent of
the hospitals destroyed or damaged. Almost a third of
the people are internally displaced. Three million have
fled; two and a half million are refugees; 2.3 million
are now out of school; and one in five schools are either
occupied or destroyed. Medical workers and hospitals
have been directly targeted, and a majority of Syria's
health workers have fled. At least a quarter ofa million
people scratch to survive in besieged cities and towns
with no food or medical relief for over a year.

Dag Hammarskjold famously said that the United
Nations was not created to take humanity to heaven but
to save it from hell. But by any measure, the Syrian
people long ago descended into hell. It should not have
taken the Council so long to take today's action, indeed,
as the Secretary-General has just said, it should not
have been necessary.

The Council has demanded that this resolution be
implemented in full. Ifit is, it will make a difference to
the lives of millions of Syrians.

The Council's core demand is that the Syrian parties
to the conflict, and, above all, the Syrian authorities,
reverse course now and start to put the interests of their
own citizens first. The Syrian military must cease its
systematic and indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The
devastating aerial bombing campaign in Aleppo, which
has seen a further 500,000 people displaced, must
end. The use of barrel bombs - a weapon designed
to create civilian terror and cause maximum injury
to civilians - must cease immediately. Aid must be
allowed to reach all those who need it by the most direct
means possible, including across battle lines and across
borders. It must be allowed to those people living under
siege, and people in such areas who want to leave must
be allowed to do so.

Armed opposition groups must also comply with
the calls made in the resolution to end abuses of human
rights, abide by international humanitarian law and
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance in
the areas they control. The Council has said plainly that
Al-Qaida and associated groups have no place in Syria
and that all foreign fighters should leave the country.

We have acknowledged again that the only
sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict is a political
transition. The challenges are self-evident, but we must
continue efforts to achieve this. And, as the Council has
recognized in this resolution, there must be no impunity
for violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights. Australia also
reiterates its call for the Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.

The Council's unanimity today has been necessary,
but it is not enough. The resolution can benefit the
Syrian people only if it is implemented in full. The
primary responsibility, as I have said, lies with the
Syrian authorities. Others on the ground, including
opposition groups, must also comply. The resolution
is also binding on all of us. Council members and the
wider United Nations membership must themselves do
what they can to pressure the Syrian authorities and the
opposition groups to implement it.

The resolution has made very clear the Council's
expectations that its demands will be met and that there
will be consequences for non-compliance. We will
remain determined in this.

Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke 
in Arabic): Jordan welcomes the unanimous adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 2139 (2014). Jordan
is proud to have been one of its authors, along with
Australia and Luxembourg, in implementation of an
Arab Ministerial mandate. We negotiated the text of
the resolution with the other members of the Security
Council and made every effort to achieve the broadest
possible consensus.

In that respect, we would like to thank all members
of the Council, both permanent and non-permanent, for
the good faith they showed during the consultations.
We commend the Council's unified position.

The resolution just adopted deals with the various
dimensions of the humanitarian tragedy in Syria, which
is now untenable at the internal level. It does not only
entail attacks against civilians by all kinds ofprohibited
and non-prohibited weapons, but it went even further
by imposing a suffocating blockade on many regions of
the country, which has led to starvation and widespread
violations of international humanitarian law throughout
Syria, some of which amounted to crimes against
humanity.

According to the statistics, nearly 9.3 million
Syrians need humanitarian assistance, of whom
6.5 million are internally displaced persons. In additon,
250,000 Syrians are trapped in besieged areas and almost
2 million Syrians require humanitarian aid in regions
that are difficult to reach. The negative consequences
of this internal humanitarian tragedy has gone beyond
Syria's borders into neighbouring countries, thereby
creating an international problem of humanitarian
refugees. That has affected all aspects of economic and
social life in, and the security of, those neighbouring
countries. The number of refugees who have been
forced to leave Syria has reached 2.9 million people,
with 2.4 million having found refuge in neighbouring
countries. In Jordan, we have welcomed 1,300,000
refugees from Syria - 600,000 since the beginning of
the crisis, almost three years ago. The cost of hosting
those refugees amounted to $1.7 billion in 2013. That is
expected to rise to $2.8 billion in 2014.

Such negative consequences for the neighbouring
countries will have a long-term impact, which will
require an effective approach by the Council and the
international community towards the Syrian refugee
crisis. The continuing humanitarian situation of such
a dimension threatens the security and stability of
the Middle East. How the Council approaches the
humanitarian situation should therefore not depend
upon politics. We reaffirm that this resolution should
not negatively affect the political aspect but should
strengthen and reaffirm that element, as reaffirmed in
paragraph 15 and the eleventh preambular paragraph of
the resolution.

We underscore the importance of the parties
to the conflict in Syria now immediately and fully
implementing all the provisions of the resolution. All
parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, must allow
humanitarian relief operations through borders and
through lines of fire. The parties must immediately
begin to dismantle the blockades imposed on certain
towns and regions and must put an end to all attacks
against civilians, in particular in residential areas,
including aerial bombardments and the use of barrel
bombs.

The Council will closely monitor the commitment
of the parties to the conflict in fully implementing this
resolution.

