Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of your duties as President
of the Security Council for month of October. I assure
you of my delegation's support and cooperation.

As has already been reported by the representative
of Ethiopia, this past weekend the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) visited Juba, where, from all
accounts, they held successful consultation meetings
with various stakeholders to the peace agreement in
South Sudan.

I would like to reiterate that my delegation
acknowledges the support and time that the Council
puts into the search for sustainable peace and security
in my country, as well as the crucial roles ofthe African
Union and IGAD, respectively.

By and large, the Transitional Government of
National Unity again recommitted itself to the high-
level revitalization forum during the visit of the IGAD
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, and the Transitional
Government of National Unity is determined to carry
out the full implementation of the peace agreement.
Therefore, it is the same approach with which they
accepted the revitalization process to be undertaken,
as proposed by IGAD. However, the Transitional
Government of National Unity proposed, and we
understand that IGAD accepted, that the Transitional
Government of National Unity would participate in the
forum as one entity.

One of the objectives of the high-level revitalization
forum is to silence the guns and accommodate any
estranged groups that might be holding out from the
peace agreement. We are happy to report that the
Transitional Government of National Unity has declared
itself open to being involved in the implementation of
the peace agreement among the groups that are expected
to denounce Violence.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
proposes that the basis for the revitalization forum be
the status of the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The process ought to be preceded by update
reports from the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and the Transitional Government of
National Unity on the status of its implementation,
in order for the IGAD leadership and the participants
in the high-level revitalization forum to appreciate
the provisions of the agreements that have been
implemented, those in the process of implementation
and the ones that have not been implemented and why.

Establishing peace and security in the country is
paramount to unity among the South Sudanese. That
is why the Transitional Government of National Unity
continues to welcome the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and its equipment. That is also the
main reason that the Transitional Government of
National Unity looks forward to the convening of the
high-level revitalization forum.

