Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Madam President, I should like at the outset to thank
you for having convened this meeting at a time when
the Middle East is witnessing numerous challenges and
crises that are having a serious impact not only on the
region but also on the entire world.

For ajust and lasting peace to prevail in the region,
the Palestinian people must recover their inalienable
rights, including the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. There must be an end to the
Israeli occupation throughout the Palestinian territory.
In this context, resolution 2334 (2016) was a historic
turning point, as it calls on Israel to put an end to the
settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territories.
This was indeed a victory for the Palestinian people,
as well as evidence of international consensus, even
unanimity, on this issue. The only way to achieve peace
is to implement the resolution.

The international community must shoulder its
responsibilities and oblige Israel to uphold international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. This
is the only way to ensure a peaceful future of tolerance
for the entire Middle East and the world as a whole, as
this is a threat to all.

In addition, the Syrian crisis continues unabated,
and the tragedy of the Syrian people is ever-growing.
A crime was recently perpetrated that runs counter to
international law: the chemical-weapons attack in Khan
Shaykun. The attack caused the deaths of hundreds
of people and many injuries. This should push the
international community to find a peaceful solution to
the conflict in Syria so that the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people can be addressed and terrorism,
which is a problem in various parts of Syria, combated.
Today crimes are being perpetrated, indirectly or
directly, all of which prevents the Syrian people from
fulfilling their aspirations.

Here we would like to underscore the need to
ensure compliance with the ceasefire throughout the
country and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population in Syria so as to
alleviate their suffering.

I turn now to Yemen, our neighbour, which is
experiencing serious interference today from certain
foreign forces. That is why progress must be made in
the framework of the Arab coalition that is working
in the country today, of which Bahrain is a part. Let
us enable the legitimate Government, led by President
Mansour, the opportunity to exercise all of its functions.
In addition, all political stakeholders and parties must
work together in a concerted manner so as to achieve
the legitimate aspirations of the Yemeni people and
achieve a lasting peace. Full support must be provided
to the Special Envoy, Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.

We call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to comply
with the principles of good-neighbourliness, uphold
the sovereignty of the States of the region and halt its
interference in neighbouring States.

Finally, the conflicts under way today in the region
and the backsliding in the peace process show that the
current situation is untenable. That is why the Kingdom
ofBahrain continues to work alongside the international
community to tackle the challenges facing the Middle
East region and to combat all of the threats looming on
the horizon. We wish to see a future of peace, stability
and prosperity.

