Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would
also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his briefing.

l 1-49644

We highly appreciate his work and continue to support
him. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union Somalia, Mr. Boubacar Gaoussou
Diarra, and the Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government of the Somali Republic (TFG),
Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, for their presence and
their statements.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later on.

Germany welcomes the results of the Mogadishu
consultative meeting held on 6 September. We hope
that the agreed road map will guide Somali politics for
the months to the come and will be implemented with
determination and a strong sense of responsibility. As
the road map does not yet provide strict benchmarks,
we wish to stress the imperative necessity for making
progress measurable.

Continued international support will be depended
on such progress. The Somali actors have to deliver
now, since the transitional period cannot be prolonged
indefinitely. We encourage the Transition Federal
Institutions to continue to demonstrate their political
will, which is indispensable to successfully cope with
the manifold tasks that still lie ahead.
We call on the Somali institutions to make the
best possible use of the additional year of transition
and to finalize the transition process at last. We
continue to support every honest and serious effort
aimed at achieving sustainable peace and stability in
Somalia.

The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab forces from the
capital and other parts of the country is a unique
opportunity for the Somali Government to assume its
responsibilities and provide stability and a safe life for
Somalis. This opportunity must be seized. The TFG
must reinforce its efforts to enhance its political base
and to reach out and win over as many political forces
as possible, particularly in Somalia's regions -
something that does not seem to have happened on a
sufficient scale in previous months.

We would like once more to commend the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Ugandan and Burundian peacekeepers for the role that
the Mission plays in Somalia, and especially for the
success achieved over the past month. We also pay our

respects and tribute in connection with the casualties
that the African Union force has had to suffer. We
remain grateful to the African Union for the decisive
action that it has taken in an extremely challenging and
dangerous environment. AMISOM. is living proof of
the willingness and capacity of the African Union to
take responsibility for peace and security on the
African continent.

My country actively contributes to the European
Union training mission for Somali security forces,
which takes place in close cooperation with AMISOM
and Uganda. It aims at providing capable and
professional security forces for the Somali Government
that could form the nucleus of a respected State
authority that effectively controls the whole country.

Joint and effective actions by Somali authorities
are all the more important now that the region is facing
a tremendous humanitarian catastrophe. Not only the
continuous drought but, first and foremost, the
repercussions of many years of civil war, as well as the
absence of effective State institutions, have led to the
current catastrophe in Somalia, of which, once again,
the weakest are suffering the most. With almost half of
the entire Somali population affected and more than
12 million in urgent need of help in the whole region,
fast and effective humanitarian assistance is crucial.
My country provides over $200 million for emergency
relief, food assistance and food security.

Finally, I would like to stress that Germany and
the international community continue to support the
Somali institutions in their efforts to establish a viable
and stable Somali State. The Transitional Federal
Institutions can count on this support that has gone on
for decades. In return, my country and the international
community expect Somali institutions to act swiftly,
responsibly and credibly in order end the Somali crisis.

