Ms. Adamson: We commend you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely open debate.

The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

Promoting international peace and security is part
of the European Union's (EU) raison d'etre, and is at the
core of our international engagement. The Treaty of the
EU guides the EU structures to "preserve peace, prevent
conflicts and strengthen international security".

While the EU has a long history in promoting and
exercising peace, the EU Global Strategy recently set
conflict prevention as our top priority, thereby further
enhancing our engagement for a more integrated
approach to preventing and resolving conflicts. In
the 2009 Concept on Strengthening EU Capacities,
our member States have given a strong mandate to
promote, leverage, support and fund mediation and
dialogue efforts.

The EU is today engaged in some 40 mediation
or dialogue processes worldwide. Sometimes, the EU
is in a leading and visible role, such as facilitating
the Belgrade and Pristina dialogue, and sometimes
discretely, such as in reaching the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action with Iran. The EU is ready to do more.
We are currently further strengthening our capacities
and structures for mediation and dialogue support.
We look forward to increasing joint initiatives with
our partners, including enhancing dialogues with the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).

In this Chamber, the Secretary-General stated that
prevention is not a priority, but the priority. He also
launched several initiatives and introduced innovations
in the field of mediation. We strongly agree with his
vision and commend his commitment. The High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation is, for example, an
important addition to the United Nations toolbox.
Over the past years, there has been important
progress in professionalizing mediation support. That is
in part thanks to the Groups of Friends, led by Finland
and Turkey. At their initiative, the Secretary-General
issued his Guidance for Effective Mediation, which
provides principles for managing peace processes.
That is a concrete achievement that sets a standard for
mediation engagements.

The United Nations has been at the forefront
of those efforts. I would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Secretariat and the establishment of
the Mediation Support Unit 10 years ago, providing
discreet yet crucial policy and operational support.
The EU is a proud supporter of the Mediation Support
Unit. We command its work and we hope it will be
further strengthened. Our Service for Foreign Policy
Instruments has provided approximately €15 million
for United Nations mediation projects worldwide over
the past few years.

With the number ofconflicts on the rise, their nature
changing and tensions in our societies increasing, it is
necessary to redouble our commitment to mediation
and conflict prevention. As we look at the Council's
agenda and beyond, we should collectively do more,
better and earlier. The recent joint report between the
United Nations and the World Bank, Pathways for
Peace, made a convincing business case for conflict
prevention. Scaling up preventive action could save up
to $70 billion a year.

We need to take the next step in conflict prevention
and mediation. Early warning needs to be matched
with early action. The earlier we make use of mediation
and mediation support, as the Secretary-General has
encouraged in his report (A/72/115) to the General
Assembly, the better. The Council can be a powerful
force to resort to mediation early on, and should place
preventive mediation at its heart.

From the highest levels to the local actors, peace
processes are more than reaching an agreement with
those who hold apparent power or guns. To sustain an
agreement, we have to involve elites and local levels
alike. Together with the United Nations, we have
worked on insider mediators supporting local-level
initiatives. Also, the inclusion of women and youth
is not an option, but an imperative. We cannot reach
sustainable agreements when only half the population
is involved. The EU has worked to make a difference on
the ground, such as in Syria, for example.

The inclusion of youth is another precondition for
achieving sustainable results in peace processes. EU
High Representative Mogherini has identified creating
open spaces for young people and promoting funding
for youth work at all levels as important steps in order
to harness the positive potential of youth-led peace
initiatives, while also reaching out to marginalized
young people.

Together with the United Nations, EU will be soon
organizing a retreat on mediation structures in regional
and international organizations to further improve our
engagement. Working together has practical benefits.
In the Central African Republic, we supported a
capacity-building and strategy retreat of the African
Initiative Panel involving not only the Government
of the Central African Republic, but also the AU, the
United Nations, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and countries of the region, as well
as non-governmental agencies, such as the Community
of Sant'Egidio, the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue
and the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution
of Disputes. By bringing those actors together, we made
progress towards achieving a common vision for the
peace process. Such coordinated support is essential for
bringing about peace in the Central African Republic,
and we invite all actors to join those efforts.

Today, we have the technical means to better
support mediation. The missing ingredient, which we
now need, is political support. That is where the Council
can play a crucial role. It is our collective responsibility.
The EU is ready to play its part. When the EU engages
in a peace process, it is a sustainable, long-term, and
comprehensive commitment that stands together
with and respects United Nations values. The EU can
mobilize a number of tools, from peace operations to
development assistance. Yet political purpose and the
building of effective and lasting peace should always
remain the main objective.

Lastly, it is also a way to respect the legacy of those
who have dedicated their lives to defending peace and
human rights. Among them, Kofi Annan was a prime
figure, whose legacy should inspire us all. As he once
stated, we have the means and the capacity to deal with
our problems, if only we can find the political will. The
Council's mandate is to maintain peace and security.
Enhancing our action in conflict prevention and
mediation is not an option for peace, it is a necessity.

