Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
On World Humanitarian Day, I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this debate and for its
concept note (S/2014/57l, annex). We also acknowledge
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and
Mr. Karokhail and thank them for their participation.
I would also like to honour all the humanitarian
workers of the United Nations, of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and of the many other
organizations that render service in areas of conflict
in order to assist the victims. 1 would like especially
to pay homage, with respect and admiration, to Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and with him to all the humanitarian
personnel who have lost their lives in this service.

For years, in his reports on this issue, the Secretary-
General has noted that the status of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict remains deplorable. At the
same time, deliberate attacks against humanitarian
personnel have become commonplace. Beginning with
the Baghdad attack in 2003, attacks on humanitarian
workers have continued in alarming numbers. Over
the past decades, there has been a troubling increase
in the number of abductions. Violations of the special
protection that humanitarian workers enjoy under
international humanitarian law have also become
commonplace, from South Sudan to Iraq, Afghanistan,
Syria and other situations that have come before the
Council.

International humanitarian law protects civilians
from the effects of armed conflicts through basic
institutions. One of those is the principle of distinction,
which is the basic norm of the obligation of combatants.
That principle also protects civilian installations such
as schools.

Another basic institution is the special protection
conferred on those who provide assistance to civilians
and the wounded. Therefore, the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their 1977 Protocols and customary
international humanitarian law include humanitarian
personnel among specially protected subjects.
International humanitarian law also protects the means
by which such assistance is provided, given that for the
protection of victims there must be adequate personnel
and means, including medical and other facilities and
means of transportation. All those are fundamental
to the survival of civilians, including the wounded.
Humanitarian personnel are also indirectly protected
as an integral part of the civilian population, which is
protected by virtue of the basic principle of distinction
between civilians and combatants.

Despite that protection, just as civilians in
situations of armed conflict are increasingly exposed
to deliberate armed attacks and other forms of
violence - such as violence against women, sexual
and gender-based violence, intimidation, kidnapping,
harassment and illegal detention - the participants
in humanitarian operations are also exposed to such
attacks. Acts of aggression against humanitarian
convoys and the destruction and looting of the goods
they are transporting have become common.

In the light of that, the United Nations, including
the Security Council, must continue its commitment to
the protection of civilians in areas of armed conflict and
to the protection of humanitarian personnel. With that
in mind, Argentina believes that a series of measures
deserves consideration.

First, there must be greater effort to promote
full respect for international law, particularly for
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
That was one of the issues emphasized during the open
debate organized by Argentina in August 2013 (see S/PV.7019), and it continues to be a basic challenge of
protection.

Secondly, the Secretary-General should be
requested, pursuant to the spirit of resolution 1502
(2003), to inform Member States and the Security
Council of attacks against United Nations personnel and
to propose measures to improve their safety. He should
also be asked to invite the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other humanitarian organizations to
contribute information on such attacks.

Thirdly, the Council needs to continue to strengthen
its commitment to the investigation of facts and its
tireless fight against impunity for grave violations
of international humanitarian law, including against
humanitarian personnel, which constitute crimes under
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

To conclude, I would also like to stress that the
parties to a conflict should make all the necessary
efforts to guarantee effective and timely access
to humanitarian action, including shipments and
equipment. In some regions of the world, the only way
to assure humanitarian access is by includinig mandates
to protect civilians in peacekeeping operations. 1
want to stress the basic norm that failure on the part
of one side to comply with the obligations imposed
by international humanitarian law does not justify
violations by the other. We need to learn to embody
and to reinvent that which is most human in the name
of a more just and less violent world. That which is a
self-evident responsibility for us is, for the victims, a
necessity.

Finally, on World Humanitarian Day, I would like
once again to express our solidarity with the victims of
armed conflict and to pay tribute to the humanitarian
personnel who daily express and embody the words of
the philosopher of modernity who said that good works
more effectively in the shadows than in broad daylight.

