Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway, members of
the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union strongly supports the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) in promoting and
monitoring the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) and welcomes the recent
progress in their work. We look forward to further
close and active cooperation with CTED and its
Executive Director, Ambassador Mike Smith, as well
as with the new Chairman of the CTC, Ambassador
Neven Jurica, Permanent Representative of Croatia.

Terrorism is a global threat that requires a global
and comprehensive response. In that regard, the United
Nations is the only truly global forum, and the Security
Council has a pivotal role in international action
against terrorism. The EU reiterates once again that
terrorism constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that any acts of
terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of
their motivation, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed. The EU is convinced that any
measure taken to fight this scourge must be in
accordance with obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.
The EU recalls the extension of CTED's mandate
on 10 December 2007 by Security Council resolution
1787 (2007) and supports further extension of CTED's
mandate. The EU is convinced that that is a wise
decision that will contribute substantially to the
effectiveness of the global fight against terrorism.

The EU supports the effective continuation of
CTED's work of facilitating capacity-building and

advising the CTC on issues of international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law, in order to enhance the CTC's ability
to monitor the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). We recognize the crucial role
of CTED in supporting the CTC in the fulfilment of its
mandate. CTED has developed a constant dialogue and
cooperation with Member States by visiting selected
States, facilitating technical assistance and work to
identify and help ensure that the priority needs of
Member States can be met, and developing and
drafting the Preliminary Implementation Assessments.

The EU welcomes and fully supports the
organizational plan for CTED, prepared by its
Executive Director, Mike Smith, and approved by the
CTC. The EU believes that the revised organizational
plan provides an excellent basis for CTED's future
work. Proposals regarding enhanced monitoring,
cooperation and coordination, strengthened facilitation
of technical assistance and the need to ensure the
consistency of activities and the improved exchange of
information are measures that will, without any doubt,
contribute to the efficiency and transparency of
CTED's work.

The EU therefore fully agrees that CTED should
continue to advise the CTC and should, in accordance
with its mandate, even strengthen its role in facilitating
technical assistance for the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and in enhancing Member
States' capacity to identify and implement effective
measures to fulfil their obligations, facilitating the
provision of assistance to develop their capacity to
protect their critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. The EU therefore considers it important to
maintain a tailored dialogue among CTED, the CTC
and Member States to allow for regular exchange of
information among the relevant entities.

We have always supported increased coordination
and cooperation among the three Security Council
Committees and their experts. In that regard, we
support the decision to improve engagement with
donors, to enhance the understanding of the role of
CTED and to strengthen cooperation between CTED
and the experts of the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1540 (2004) and other relevant institutions such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The
proposed modifications to CTED's working methods
and the revised operational structure will further
enhance CTED's active role in combating terrorism.

The EU strongly supports United Nations
counter-terrorism cooperation and technical assistance
projects with regional organizations. Relevant United
Nations bodies, including the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and members of
CTED are regularly invited to attend meetings of the
EU Council Working Group on Counter-Terrorism.

The EU believes it is important that all the parts
of the United Nations system play their full roles in a
coordinated manner to tackle terrorism. In that regard,
among the priorities set out in the revised
organizational plan are active CTED participation in
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
maintaining close, collaborative and cooperative
relations with the other members of the Task Force.
The EU considers that the expert bodies of the three
Security Council Committees, including CTED, play
an important role in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Furthermore, the EU is convinced that CTED will
continue to substantially build upon and complement
other global counter-terrorism activities.

