Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me begin by welcoming the initiative of Russia, in
its capacity as President of the Security Council this
month, to convene a ministerial briefing on the issue
of peace and security in Africa. I listened closely to
the briefings by the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission. I applaud their efforts
to safeguard peace and security in Africa.

Peace and security in Africa concern not only the
well-being of the African people, but also peace and
stability in the wider world. China supports African
countries in their efforts to solve African issues in their
own way and has full confidence in Africa's ability
in that regard. Helping Africa to achieve peace and
security is also the duty of the international community,
in particular the Security Council. We should value
Africa and prioritize its peace and security. We should
trust Africa and give full play to the role of African
countries in resolving their own issues. We should
support Africa and help enhance its ability to safeguard
peace and security.

Africa is home to one-fifth of the world's
population and the largest number of developing
countries. Two-thirds of the issues on the Security
Council's agenda involve African affairs. Wars and
conflicts have displaced more than 20 million people
on the continent. Silencing the guns in Africa is the
aspiration of all Africans. Moreover, it should be a
goal that the members of the international community
work together to achieve. At the start of the twenty-
first century, African countries have taken new steps to
enhance strength through unity and made headway in
building peace and security.

While independently addressing their own issues,
African countries are strengthening regional and
subregional cooperation, which has considerably
advanced the political settlement of African issues.
African countries know Africa best. The Security
Council should pay increased attention to African
voices, respect African views and leverage the role of
Africa. In recent years, there have been deeper dialogue
and cooperation between the Council and the African
Union (AU). That momentum should be sustained
and strengthened.

African countries have shown a strong political will
to protect their own peace and security; yet, they also
face difficulties and challenges. The most acute problem
is the lack of capacity and funding. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, must
shoulder its responsibility. We must help Africa to
enhance its capacity for maintaining peace and stability
and combating terrorism, including by accelerating the
development of the African Standby Force, the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises and the
Continental Early Warning System. African countries
look to the United Nations for sufficient, stable and
sustainable funding support for African Union-led
peace actions. That demand is legitimate and justified,
and China fully supports it. We call on the members of
the Council to reach consensus on that subject as soon
as possible and take more concrete actions for peace
and stability in Africa.

We welcome the establishment of a transitional
coalition Government in the Sudan and are ready to work
with the international community to play a constructive
role for the Sudan's peace and stability. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has
achieved success and should therefore withdraw by
June next year, as scheduled. That should ensure that
valuable peacekeeping resources can be channelled to
places where there are more urgently needed.

Thanks to the mediation efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other actors, all parties in South Sudan have signed
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We
hope that the parties will earnestly implement the
Agreement in order to genuinely usher in a new phase
of national reconstruction.

Conflicts in Libya, which have lasted more than
eight years, have brought its people untold suffering.
The international community should take genuine
action to help Libya end the conflict and resume
political dialogue. It is important to pursue a Libyan-
led and Libyan-owned political process, support the
work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame', and leverage the comparative advantages and
role of regional organizations, such as the African
Union and the League of Arab States, in order to form
synergies with the United Nations.

China supports the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) in its efforts to achieve regional peace and
security. We call on the international community to
provide the necessary support for its Joint Force and
encourages regional and subregional organizations in
Africa to play a leading role.

Africa's peace and security hinge on the peace and
stability of the Great Lakes region - the heartland of
the continent. The United Nations and the international
community should continue to support the efforts of
the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, promote
cooperation among the countries of the region and
advance regional, political and peace processes. China
supports the notion proposed by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Huang Xia, for better development through
cooperation and greater peace through development.

China has closely followed developments with
regard to the Ebola epidemic in Africa. We have
decided to provide emergency humanitarian aid to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
countries. We are working with the World Health
Organization and the AU to prevent and control the
epidemic, as part of our concrete actions to stand with
our African brothers in times of need. China calls on
the international community to take more solid steps to
help the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
countries achieve Victory over the epidemic as soon
as possible.

China and Africa are good friends, good brothers
and good partners. The principle of sincerity will result
in the amity, good faith efforts and the pursuit of the
greater good and shared interests outlined by President
Xi Jinping as the fundamental guide to China's Africa
policy. In the framework of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, we work with African countries to build
a China-Africa community with a shared future that
features joint responsibility, win-win cooperation,
happiness for all, common cultural prosperity, common
security and a harmonious coexistence.

With regard to helping Africa safeguard peace and
security, China has never been absent. As we speak,
more than 2,000 Chinese peacekeepers are defending
peace in five United Nations missions in Africa. For
more than a decade, the Chinese navy has undertaken
escort missions in the Gulf of Aden and in waters off
the coast of Somalia. It has completed more than 1,200
missions to safeguard in excess of 6,700 ships from
various countries. We support Africa in strengthening
its capacity for peace and security. The first delivery of
defence assistance worth ¥200 million has arrived in
Africa in support of the African Standby Force and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. In
addition, China has provided ¥300 million to counter-
terrorism efforts in the Sahel and to the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel.

The China-United Nations Peace and Development
Fund, announced by President Xi Jinping in September
2015, prioritizes peacekeeping, counter-terrorism and
sustainable development in Africa. Having sponsored
34 African-related programmes, the Fund has become a
new platform for China-Africa-United Nations trilateral
cooperation. Let me reiterate that on the path to Africa's
peace and development, China will, as always, stand
firm and forge ahead with Africa every step of the way.

