Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): At the outset, let me
join other delegations in congratulating Jordan on its
presidency of the Council in January and in thanking it
for organizing this open debate.

While my delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union, I
would also like to offer the following remarks.

It is very common to say that the nature of conflicts
has changed since the end of the Cold War, but let us
forget for a moment strategic and political analyses
and be very clear about one thing - war, regardless
of the reasons for which it is conducted, always brings
death, suffering, fear and the doubt that people will
ever actually get rid of evil. This is the perspective of
civilians and the main lesson from war - one that we as
diplomats and those who influence the decision-making
process in our countries should never forget.

The twentieth century was not kind to my country.
Poland suffered under Oworld wars and two totalitarian
regimes - nazism and communism. The results of the
Second World War were indeed very tragic and bitter.
We lost millions of citizens and our freedom. The
following generations of Poles experienced poverty and
recession and were deprived of their human rights and
civil liberties.

It took us almost half a century to finally become
a free and democratic country. Twenty-five years
ago, Central and Eastern Europe's transition from
communism to democracy began in my country. The
round-table talks between the ruling party and the
opposition led to elections that made it possible to
form the first democratic Government. That triggered
changes in the entire region, including the collapse of
the Berlin Wall. Poland proved that such dramatic and
enormous changes can be made through non-violent
political means.

The democratic developments of 1989 also
boosted the process of reconciliation with some of our
neighbours. We believe that former foes can become
friends and that divisions can be overcome. It took a
lot of courage and compassion, and many generations
have come and gone, but we succeeded. Poland and
Germany, through small steps and intensive dialogue,
have managed to build trust and security over the past
decades. We are also engaged in a historical dialogue
with Russia. We have established centres for dialogue
and understanding and the Polish-Russian Group for
Difficult Matters.

Despite its hard lessons, Poland has never lost its
European identity. Our future and opportunities for
development have clearly been linked to European
integration. Finally, rapprochement between nations,
open borders and economic integration allowed us to
build a permanent peace in our part of the continent.

Now, after 25 years of successful democratic
changes and 10 years of presence in the European
Union structures, Poland is sharing its experience
with other nations - not only in our region, but also
in North Africa, the Middle East and South-East Asia.
We have learned that only democracy and freedom
make it possible to overcome the tragic legacy of
war, but we also know well that democratic values
cannot be imported or imposed. National ownership
is indispensable to igniting the engine of change. We
stand ready to assist democratic transitions in a spirit
of solidarity and partnership.

Looking at the situations in Syria, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, we ask ourselves
the question - if peace and reconciliation are possible
between neighbours, why are they not always possible
at home? We are all witness to these wars and conflicts.
Every day we read reports of atrocities, see shocking
images and hear the stories of the victims.

If those conflicts continue, what will the Middle
East and Africa look like in the coming decades? What
will future generations think of us? For those who have
experienced war, it is not that hard to paint the picture.
Our battle for dignity, freedom and human rights,
including in the Council, is a continuous struggle. We
should turn our words into action and find the courage
to say "no" to war and seek the right methods to
establish permanent peace.

