Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Today's
debate, which follows logically on from yesterday's
debate on civil aviation security, once again illustrates
the special importance that the Security Council
attaches to the fight against the scourge of terrorism.
Indeed, the multiplication and sophistication of terrorist
attacks throughout the world continually remind us of
the severity of that pernicious threat to international
peace and security. I therefore thank the Ethiopian
presidency and the Russian delegation for facilitating
this particularly timely meeting.

My thanks and welcome also go to Under-Secretary-
General Vladimir Voronkov, head of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ambassador Amr
Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee;
and Mr. David Scharia of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. The quality of their
briefings on the multifaceted action of the United
Nations in its fight against terrorism helped to enrich
our discussions.

When the Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001),
establishing the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we could
not have imagined that, 16 years later, international
terrorism would have reached its current appalling
proportions. Rather than giving in to discouragement at
its apparent failure in finding adequate responses, in the
light of the scourge the international community must
adopt a coercive, inclusive and united long-term approach.

To that end, the revision and streamlining of the
legal and institutional framework for the fight against
terrorism are imperative. That is why the Senegalese
delegation welcomed the establishment of the new
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the position of Under-
Secretary-General at its head, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 71/291 of 15 June 2017. We
encourage the Office to strive for better coordination
among the various bodies, programmes and agencies
involved in counter-terrorism.

Terrorist movements increasingly use the Internet
and social media in their vile business of inciting
violence, recruiting foreign terrorist fighters, and
funding and planning terrorists acts. Those movements
take advantage of the flaws in financial systems and
national and international legal frameworks to raise
funds, including by trafficking in and selling oil,
kidnapping for ransoms, trafficking in persons, arms,
drugs and cultural goods, and other forms of extortion.

To prevent terrorists from pursuing their criminal
actions, States must now energetically implement the
relevant provisions of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005), 2133 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2195 (2014) and 2253
(2015) by strengthening their cooperation in the field
of intelligence-sharing and better collaborating with
private providers to improve regulatory systems. I
pay tribute here to the outstanding work accomplished
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate in monitoring Member States'
implementation of the aforementioned resolutions.
Indeed, given the evolving and multifaceted nature
of terrorism, the ongoing increase in the number
of resolutions adopted by the Security Council
considerably broadens the scope of intervention of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, whereas human and financial resources
do not always keep up with such developments, which
could ultimately affect the effectiveness of that body.

By way of illustration, the country visits of
the Executive Directorate to assess the progress
of, challenges to and technical assistance required
by Member States could be better monitored and
evaluated on a regular basis, in consultation with the
countries concerned. Similarly, national, subregional
and regional specificities and constraints must be taken
into account in the context of building the capacities of
States to fulfil their obligations under Security Council
resolutions. In that context, it is important for Member
States, while maintaining their sovereignty, to adopt
national strategies and action plans that are based on
local realities and better adapted to socioeconomic and
security contexts.

In its efforts to implement measures to eliminate
international terrorism and violent extremism, Senegal
has adopted an approach that is based on prevention,
cooperation and rapid response. My country also
actively cooperates in the fields of international
counter-terrorism criminal justice; surveillance of
land, maritime and airport borders; and mutual legal
assistance in combating money-laundering and terrorist
financing. In addition, two laws were passed in 2007
that apply harsher penalties to terrorist perpetrators,
while a draft national strategy against terrorism and
violent extremism is under development.

Moreover, the promotion of dialogue and conflict
prevention, the involvement of populations through
the mobilization of young people, the empowerment
of women, education, capacity-building, the use
of religious leaders to deconstruct rhetoric and the
ideology of terrorist groups, and the facilitation of
access to employment are all essential components for
the prevention of violent extremism and can prevent the
radicalization of young people and their recruitment by
extremist organizations.

In conclusion, I solemnly reiterate my country's
support for the Counter-Terrorism Committee, its
Executive Directorate and the Office of Counter-
Terrorism, while advocating for the strengthening of
their human and financial resources.

