Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As your presidency of the
Council comes to a close, Sir, I would like to commend
you for the manner in which you have led the Council
this month. We further thank you for having organized
this important debate and for the moment of silence at
the beginning of this debate devoted to the victims of
terrorism and the recent terror attacks. I would also
like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive and
detailed briefings.

Since the previous open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.8449), the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
been dealt new and more devastating announcements.
The two-State solution is drifting further and further
away as it faces new hurdles. For that reason, I believe
that it is important to first highlight the positive
developments that have occurred since I last spoke
before the Council.

Namibia welcomes the formation of a new
Palestinian Government, with Prime Minister
Mohammad Shtayyeh at its head. We hope that the
formation of that Government will encourage the
advancement of intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We
further welcome the positive developments in the
assistance and delivery of humanitarian aid to the Gaza
Strip. The creation of 4,200 jobs, with another 15,000
expected soon, through the implementation of the cash-
for-work programme, is encouraging for Gaza and its
economic development, which remains restricted due
to the imposed Israeli blockade.

Those most recent developments unfortunately
represent the only few beneficial steps taken in the
past three months. While demonstrations along
the perimeter fence in Gaza have continued, on
28 February the independent international commission
of inquiry on the protests in the occupied Palestinian
territory released its report and presented its findings
to the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/40/74). The
commission investigated all 189 fatalities and tracked
more than 300 injuries caused by the Israeli security
forces along the border fence between 30 March
2018 and 31 December 2018, and found reasonable
grounds to believe that in all but two cases, "the use
of live ammunition by Israeli security forces against
demonstrators was unlawful" (A/HRC/40/74, para. 94).
We call on all parties to implement the recommendations
made by the commission, especially with regard to
the need for Israel to refrain from using lethal force
against civilians.

Settler-related violence also increased during the
reporting period. As a result of the decision taken by
the Israeli Government not to renew the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH),
thereby removing an essential element of protection
for the local population, a greater number of violent
incidents transpired in the H2 area of Hebron. We echo
the words of the Secretary-General in our hope that an
agreement can be found by all parties to preserve the
long-standing and valuable contribution of TIPH to
conflict prevention and the protection of Palestinians
in Hebron.

As outlined in the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/20l9/251) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), Israel continues to expand its settlement activity
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. The
demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned structures
also continue unabated. On 7 April, Prime Minister
Netanyahu vowed to annex settlements in the occupied
West Bank. If undertaken, this would represent not
only the greatest but the gravest threat to the two-
State solution.

Following President Trump's decision in December
2017 to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,
a month ago he signed an order recognizing Israeli
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. Namibia
wishes to recall that this measure goes against
resolutions 242 (1967) and 497 (1981), which declared
that the Israeli Golan Heights Law is null and void and
without international legal effect, and further called
on Israel to rescind its action. We urge the Security
Council to condemn this decision.

The Council meets on a monthly basis to discuss and
receive updates from the Special Coordinator regarding
the situation on the ground. Non-Council members are
able to take the floor on this matter on a quarterly basis.
I have been in my position as Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Namibia for a little over two years
now. In my time here, as many other Ambassadors have
done, I repeat the same words before the Council - that
settlement expansion is illegal under international law
and represents a threat to the two-State solution; that
the two-State solution remains the only viable and
realistic solution to this conflict; and that there is an

urgent need for the parties to return to the negotiating
table. I reiterate all these words before the Council
again today.

But words are simply not enough. Strong political
will and desire are urgently required from all parties.
The Security Council must also play its vital role and
the international community at large must redouble
its collective efforts to work more diligently and
with greater determination to bring the conflict to an
end and to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace between Israelis and Palestinians, with the
establishment of two States, ensuring the right to the
self-determination, freedom and independence of
Palestinians in their sovereign and independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
