Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish to join
others in welcoming you to the Council once again,
Mr. President, as well as to thank you for personally
chairing today's meeting. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for his briefing on the situation in Iraq and the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). I congratulate him on his leadership of the
Mission during a very challenging period in UNAMI's
operations. We wish him every success in his new
position. I also thank Ambassador Al Bayati of Iraq for
his contribution to our discussions today.

For the past six months, we have seen a
consistent positive trend in the overall political and
security situation in Iraq. Serious efforts have been
made to form provincial councils in 14 governorates
and to strengthen local governance institutions
following the successful provincial elections earlier
this year. A new Speaker of Parliament has been
elected, putting an end to a four-month hiatus and
opening up prospects for progress on pending
legislation needed for the country's recovery. The
strengthened ability of the Iraqi Security Forces to
assume greater security responsibilities serves to
prepare the ground for further security improvements
under Iraq's sovereignty. The fact that returns of
internally displaced persons are continuing at a steady
rate, despite the rise in violence, reflects the restored
confidence of the population.

High-level visits to and from Iraq have enhanced
the country's international relations, above all with
neighbouring partners. We are, however, mindful of the
multiple challenges that Iraq is facing. Those include,
inter alia, the recent surge of indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, alongside regular attacks against the
Iraqi Security Forces and the multinational force in
many parts of the country; the delicate reconciliation
process, further complicated by the difficult economic
situation, with a budget deficit projected at 27 per cent
this year; the worrisome rates of poverty and
unemployment and the outbreaks of disease and food
insecurity, all of which are making the livelihood of
fragile groups of the population, such as women,
children, internally displaced persons and refugees,
even more vulnerable.

In that context, it is crucial for the Government of
Iraq and its citizens to strengthen the progress recorded
so far, move ahead on the course of national
reconciliation, reconstruction and reintegration, resolve
the status of Kirkuk and other disputed internal
administrative boundaries, push forward the constitutional
review process, reach an accord on income-sharing
arrangements, and prepare for the elections in Kirkuk,
possible referendums, district and sub-district elections,
the national parliamentary elections this year and other
key electoral events next year.

All these issues cannot be dealt with in isolation
and will require the goodwill and firm commitment of
all concerned stakeholders. We call upon all parties in
Iraq to rise above their partisan interests and to work
with one another in the spirit of reconciliation, good
faith and cooperation with a view to reaching
compromise solutions that would allow the country to
march ahead under a common Vision and along the
track of peace.

Given the fact that the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq will come to a
close by the end of this year, the International Compact
for Iraq is approaching its third year of
implementation, and international financing for
reconstruction and development is diminishing, we
endorse the imperative need expressed in the Paris
Declaration to ensure ownership, accountability and
transparency of aid. We believe that international and
regional assistance should be better coordinated to help
Iraq address its national socio-economic priorities, and
that this should be done through every related
mechanism, be it the International Compact for Iraq,
the United Nations Development Group Iraq Trust
Fund, the Paris Declaration principles, the expanded
ministerial meetings, or the regional working groups
on energy, refugees and security.

We commend the courageous work of UNAMI in
Iraq as mandated by Security Council resolutions 1770
(2007) and 1830 (2008). We welcome the decision by
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to
start with a full United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for Iraq from 2011 to 2014, in
line with Iraq's National Development Strategy. We
also welcome the Secretary-General's announcement
that he will soon present to the Security Council a
report on the review of all Security Council resolutions
pertaining specifically to Iraq, in accordance with
resolution 1859 (2008).

As Iraq is in the midst of a critical transition
period, we reiterate Viet Nam's commitment to
contributing practically to the reconstruction of Iraq.

Finally, we thank the delegation of Turkey for
proposing the draft presidential statement, which we
are ready to support.

