Ms. Wronecka (Poland): 1 would like to thank our
briefers today, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General David Shearer and Ms. Angelina Nyajima
Simon Jial, for the information they shared with us in
their briefings.

The signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
represented a significant milestone towards achieving
peace in South Sudan. Although we welcome the steps
taken towards the implementation of the agreement
in recent months, we remain concerned that several
fundamental provisions of its, such as establishing
transitional security arrangements and concluding the
work of the Independent Boundaries Commission, have
yet to be implemented, while the timelines set by the
agreement are not being adhered to. At the same time,
we take it as a good sign that the permanent ceasefire
has been largely respected throughout South Sudan
and that the parties to the agreement have continued
confidence-building measures. We strongly call on all
non-signatory actors to join the peace process.

While we welcome the overall improvement in the
security situation, we remain deeply concerned about
the increased levels of intercommunal Violence and
the persisting tensions. The primary issue of grave
concern is sexual Violence against women and girls in
South Sudan. We are appalled by the heinous attacks
in and around Bentiu and condemn in the strongest
terms the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war by
the parties to the conflict in South Sudan. We are also
deeply troubled by the latest report of the Commission
on Human Rights in South Sudan (A/HRC/40/69) and
its findings that continuing violence and human rights
violations in the country, including rape and sexual
violence, may amount to war crimes.

Allow me to repeat emphatically - violence
against women and girls in South Sudan must end.
There must be accountability for gross violations of
human rights and serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We join the Secretary-General in his
call on the Government to spare no effort in bringing
the perpetrators to justice and fulfilling its obligations
with regard to the protection of civilians.

We are convinced that there will be no durable
peace without inclusiveness. We call on South
Sudanese political actors to put into practice the
provisions of the peace agreement regarding women's
representation in the pre-transitional, transitional and
other decision-making bodies and institutions. We
believe that the participation of women in the political
process in South Sudan is indispensable. We also see
a need for the genuine inclusion of young people and
South Sudanese civil society in the peace process. It
is our strong belief that it is only by ensuring inclusive
implementation that the peace agreement will stand a
chance of being sustainable.

Regional engagement is another important factor
that is crucial to the sustainability of peace in South
Sudan. We have commended the involvement of
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
its member States in brokering the peace agreement,
and we continue to believe that the region's role in
ensuring the implementation of the agreement cannot
be overestimated. However, there is still a long road
ahead for South Sudan. In order to maintain the positive
momentum it is vital to ensure sustained regional
engagement in the monitoring progress and to hold the
parties to the agreement accountable.

The dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan
requires our full attention. The scale of the famine in
South Sudan is enormous as a result of the destruction
of plants and seeds in previous years. If humanitarian
aid is not delivered, many children and other vulnerable
people will face the threat of starvation. That matter
should be treated with the utmost importance, not only
by the international community but also by all parties
to the agreement - above all by the Government of
South Sudan.

On the eve of the renewal of the mandate of United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), allow me
to briefly agree with the Secretary-General that the
current mandate of the Mission remains valid and that
it should be amended to allow UNMISS to support the
peace process in a flexible manner.

I would like to conclude by thanking UNMISS for
its tireless efforts in ensuring the protection of civilians
and a conducive environment for humanitarian actors
to deliver assistance, as well as by thanking the Special
Representative once again.

