At the outset, I would like to thank the representative of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for her briefing and the update on the current situation in Afghanistan, which was extremely helpful. I would now like to comment on a few aspects of the briefing. First of all, with regard to the recent violence, we find it extremely regrettable that the violence has not subsided. We condemn every one of the recent attacks. The continued Taliban attacks against security forces are very worrisome and violate the spirit of the 29 February agreement reached with the United States of America. As they do not make for an environment conducive to building the confidence necessary for a peace process, these attacks must stop. In our view, now is the time for unity and cooperation and reconciliation and not for continued violence. With respect to the onslaught of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, which has also spread to Afghanistan, we cannot estimate the true extent of the crisis there yet, but as a result of the pandemic, an end to the violence is even more urgent. The Secretary-General's call for a humanitarian ceasefire, which was timely and vital, was echoed by German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas, who said that the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic must become our top priority. Medical services and humanitarian aid must not be hampered by conflict. Accordingly, one aspect that we are particularly concerned about and must keep an eye on in the light of the current coronavirus crisis is the return of refugees. Afghan refugees are already leaving Iran for western Afghanistan even though the medical facilities necessary for treating them should they become ill are not in place. The same is likely to happen with Afghan refugees from Pakistan, which is bound to exacerbate the health crisis. With regard to the peace process, we reiterate the importance of a sustainable peace. Such a peace can be achieved only through a negotiated and inclusive political settlement that is owned and led the people of Afghanistan. It will require a lot of work and time as well as flexibility on all sides. We welcome the agreement on the joint negotiation team comprising representatives of various political factions, as well as the fact that 25 per cent of the team will be composed of women, which is a vital step towards the start of the peace process. At the same time, we continue to be concerned about the domestic standoff in the country. We hope that the agreement on the negotiations team will help to overcome the political impasse in Kabul, which remains a great concern for us. Parallel Government structures lead to dysfunctionality. An inclusive political solution has to be found as soon as possible in order to prevent the persistence of a dysfunctional Government, not to mention a possible further escalation of tensions, which might even lead to fractures among the security forces. We urge all sides involved to display maximum flexibility. In times such as these, international consensus must be maintained. The Security Council must therefore remain united and unwavering in its support. The Council demonstrated this unity when it unanimously adopted resolution 2513 (2020) on 10 March, endorsing the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America and the Taliban (S/2020/184, annex). As the second-largest donor and troop contributor, Germany remains firmly committed to Afghanistan. We will do our utmost to contribute to the facilitation of intra-Afghan talks and work closely with all sides involved. Even if the current COVID-19 crisis makes in-person meetings impossible, we now have to lay the institutional groundwork for talks to happen soon. Any dialogue, talks or negotiations must ensure that there is no rollback of what has already been achieved, and the meaningful inclusion of women must also be ensured. Moreover, women must be able to fully and effectively participate in all spheres of Afghan society, including the political sphere. The remarkable progress that has been achieved in the last two decades in this regard must be secured and built upon. We commend the Government of Afghanistan for its commitment to that end, and we will continue to provide our support. I would like add a few words about UNAMA. We commend the important role that UNAMA is playing in monitoring the situation on the ground. The Council should continue to provide its support for this vital Mission. Germany firmly supports the UNAMA mandate, which was adopted by consensus. Let me also say, now that Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto's turn at the helm of UNAMA has ended, that we thank him for his years of very distinguished service. We welcome as vital at this crucial moment the appointment of his successor, Ms. Deborah Lyons, as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMA, and we wish her all the best, offering our full support for the Mission and for the future of the country. As the security situation remains volatile, Germany urges all parties to the conflict to refrain from using violence against civilians, in particular women and children. The conflict has caused immeasurable pain to these individuals, the most vulnerable members of society. Over the last 10 years, more than 100,000 people have fallen victim to the conflict. We reiterate that all parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and take immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. Other important topics to keep on our agenda for Afghanistan are climate and security and the fight against corruption, particularly in the light of the fact that the 2017 Afghan anti-corruption strategy expired on 31 December 2019. We now urge the Afghan Government to pass a successor strategy with all due speed. Before concluding, I would like to say, with regard to the economic and social aspects of the situation in Afghanistan, economic development and job creation remains essential and has taken on even greater importance since the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic. Afghanistan needs continued and reliable international assistance to tackle the related economic challenges and reverse the current troubling trend of dramatically increasing levels of poverty. The 2020 Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, co-hosted by Afghanistan and Finland at the United Nations in Geneva, will be crucial for maintaining continued support for Afghanistan. The international community must remain engaged and continue to support Afghanistan in accordance with its commitment to the ongoing transformation decade of 2015-2024. Continued funding is vital if we do not want to imperil the progress made in Afghanistan, all the more so when we take into consideration how the economic aftermath of COVID-19 will strain national budgets. Such a commitment will be based on the joint understanding that Afghanistan will continue on its path of reform. Finally, let me also refer to the elements of a draft press release that the co- penholders - Indonesia and Germany - have circulated. We very much hope that the Security Council can express itself on this important topic today.
