Mr. Heumann (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Polish delegation for convening this
important debate. I also wish to thank the briefers we
heard this morning.

Recent events in Syria have reminded us of the
value and necessity of international law. Last month,
the Syrian regime again deployed chemical weapons
against its own people, brutally killing innocent men,
women and children. Iran has also recently moved into
Syria and used its base there to conduct attacks against
Israel, another Member State. Those outrageous acts
show what States are capable of doing when they ignore
international law. Israel has already made it abundantly
clear that it holds the Government of Iran, together with
the Syrian regime, directly responsible for those latest
unlawful acts.

Much of international law is rooted in the
assumption that armies battle armies and countries
face off against countries, but today that is often
no longer the case. The world is facing a changing
paradigm in international warfare as more countries
face asymmetric fighting, confronting not States but
terrorist organizations. Terrorist organizations do not
abide by rules, norms or laws. Although international
law is intended to be a constructive tool to minimize
the loss of human lives, terrorists increasingly use
and abuse it as a tool to maximize casualties. In many
instances, we are confronting an enemy with no red
lines. Nothing is off limits.

Those non-State actors do not merely attack
civilians intentionally and systematically, they also
embed their fighters and store weapons in their own
densely populated urban areas, including United
Nations facilities and hospitals. Their calculation is as
simple as it is cynical: either civilian lives will be the
fighters' defence or civilian deaths will be their rallying
cry. That cowardly strategy is a breach of international

law and an abuse of the very system created to protect
civilian populations.

Unfortunately, the challenges that Israel faces from
non- State actors are not hypothetical situations posed in
a law-school textbook. Deliberations on issues relating
to proportionality or distinction are not confined to
academic debate; rather, they are dealt with on a daily
basis by all our relevant authorities.

To our south, Hamas, the internationally recognized
terrorist organization, is a pioneer in the use of human
shields. It has set up headquarters in hospital basements
and used ambulances to transport terrorists. It has
stored rockets in mosques and hospitals, as well as in
schools and shelters run by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), and fired them from those sites.

But it does not stop there. In recent years, Hamas
has built a sophisticated underground tunnel system
beneath the Gaza Strip. Those attack tunnels originate
from the backyards, or even the living rooms, of family
homes, snaking under civilian neighbourhoods and
penetrating Israeli territory. In 2017 Israel discovered
two terror tunnels that Hamas had dug under UNRWA
facilities. Since October we have destroyed nine
additional tunnels - tunnels intended for Hamas
militants to infiltrate Israel.

Let me remind the Council that Hamas used those
tunnels to kidnap two soldiers, Hadar Goldin and Oron
Shaul, whose bodies remain in the hands of those
terrorists, together with two Israeli civilians. Hamas
refuses to provide any information on the status of
those civilians and fallen soldiers, allow international
organizations to access them or return the soldiers'
bodies. That refusal is in and of itself a breach of
international law.

Over the past few weeks, we have encountered
a new variation on Hamas's old strategies. Hamas is
now encouraging Palestinians to bring women and
small children to the so-called peaceful protests it
has instigated at Israel's security fence. Peaceful?
Far from it. They are violent riots that are incited by
Hamas, which they use as a cover to carry out attacks
on the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and try to reach
Israeli communities just over the fence. The terrorist
group even goes as far as to circulate on social media
instructions to bring weapons to the demonstrations,
hide them under their clothes and use them to capture
soldiers or residents of Israel. The rioters are also
requested to hand over anyone captured to the Hamas
terrorists to be used as bargaining chips against Israel.

More than 40,000 Palestinians, civilians and
militants alike, took part in the violence on Monday,
14 May, at 13 locations spread along the 30-mile
security fence. Many of the rioters were seen hurling
firebombs and flaming materials, detonating explosive
devices and throwing rocks at Israeli soldiers. Armed
attacks were also carried out under the cover of the
riots, including an incident where the IDF thwarted
attacks by eight Hamas gunmen who opened fire on
IDF members.

Those are therefore not the acts of a peaceful
protest. The events of recent days are part of a Hamas-
led military operation intended to carry out attacks on
Israeli soldiers and civilians. Indeed, just yesterday, a
senior Hamas representative acknowledged that of the
deceased, no fewer than 50 were Hamas members.

Just to our north, in Lebanon, and now also in Syria,
we face the Iranian proxy Hizbullah. Its tactics and
strategies are no different: locating missiles, launchers
and command posts next to and inside Lebanese homes,
schools and hospitals. We have warned the Council time
and again that Hizbullah has an estimated arsenal of
more than 100,000 missiles. That build-up is not only a
blatant and flagrant violation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004), but it is also a deliberate attempt to
exploit the international law that is meant to protect the
civilian population.

Despite the constant threats that we face on almost
all fronts, our legal system ensures that our reaction
and responses comply fully with international law. As
a retired President of Israel's Supreme Court, Justice
Aharon Barak, once said,

"Although a democracy must often fight with one
hand tied behind its back, it nonetheless has the
upper hand."

Justice Barak's words reflect the fact that Israel remains
steadfastly committed to the law and our democratic
values when acting to ensure our national security.
Accordingly, checks and balances of international
law are built into every stage of Israel's policy and
decision-making processes. For example, military
personnel receive instructions on the law of armed
conflict, soldiers prepare for encounters with civilians
through dedicated training drills and skilled attorneys
advise the forces to ensure compliance with international
law. Israel also maintains independent investigative
bodies to examine credible allegations and reasonable
suspicions of misconduct by its armed forces.

In conclusion, we must acknowledge that the very
rules that were created to protect civilians have become
one of the main tools used by terrorist organizations to
put them in harm's way. The Council, the international
community and everybody in this Chamber must ensure
that international law is no longer exploited by terrorists
for violent purposes. Those protections exist to shield
civilians; they must not turn civilians into shields.

