Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would first like to
thank all the briefers. I hope that David Shearer and
Andrew Gilmour will forgive me ifI single out Lydia
Minagano first in my remarks. This is the second time
since March that we have had a very impressive woman
from civil society in South Sudan briefing the Council.

While we heard from Mr. Shearer and Mr. Gilmour
about the improvements with regard to the security
situation and the overall human rights situation, there
is still a lot of sexual and gender-based violence, which
remains at a worrisome level and is unacceptable.
Women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected by the conflict. We heard the heartbreaking
story about women and children who are displaced in
camps. We have to continue to focus on that. We also
fully support what many have said about the need to
have women participate in the political pre-transitional
and transitional processes. The quota must be reached
and it must be an inclusive process.

Also, impunity must end. We still have not made
progress on the hybrid court. We need to see that
those who have committed the atrocities are actually
brought before the court. With regard to the sanctions
that we have imposed on South Sudan, those who are
committing these crimes have also been inscribed on
that list. Therefore, I also request that David Shearer,
among his many tasks, continue to work very hard with
civil society and look in particular at what is happening
and not happening with regard to sexual violence,
women's participation and impunity.

I would also like to thank Mr. Shearer for his
engagement and that of all the peacekeepers. They are
doing a fantastic job. He mentioned how much they
have done to protect refugees. He provided figures
with regard to their return to their places of origin.
It is very important that he continue to support that.
As he himself highlighted, those returns must be safe,
informed, voluntary and dignified.

Unfortunately, the fact remains that the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is
still obstructed. It still does not have full freedom of
movement. In that regard, I also urge the Government
and all actors to guarantee that UNMISS can do
its work.

I agree that the postponement to November of
the deadline with regard to the establishment of the
transitional Government must be the final postponement.
As Mr. Shearer said, and based on our own analysis,
there is no task that the pre-transitional Government
authorities can accomplish that cannot be fulfilled by
a transitional one. I appreciate what Mr. Shearer said
about his activities relating to local reconciliation,
but while it is very important that the communities
get along, we have to go to the national level. It is
absolutely essential that Mr. Kiir and Mr. Machar meet
and do theirjob. That is what the people on the ground
ask and expect of their leaders.

With regard to the political process, we are
watching the important close cooperation between the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union and the United Nations. I would
also like to highlight IGAD's outreach activities with
non-signatories and the Holy See's plan for a spiritual
retreat. Ifit helps, it will be very good to continue to do
that and make some progress on reconciliation.

Lastly, coming back to human rights, I would like to
underline the importance of guaranteeing fundamental
freedoms in South Sudan. The two vital aspects are
that human rights defenders must be able to do their
job and freedom of expression must be guaranteed.
We are appalled by the conviction of Peter Biar Ajak,
a journalist who criticized the Government. This is
about life in the international community. If all the
journalists who criticized Governments were put in jail,
there would not be enough jails. Freedom of expression
is fundamental, including in South Sudan.

