Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is said that the Greek philosopher Diogenes
used to walk around the city carrying a lantern in
daytime. His followers asked him why he carried a
lantern in broad daylight. His response always was: "I
carry a lantern in daylight because it is very difficult to
see the truth in daytime."

That quotation from Diogenes reminds me of some
of our colleagues in the Chamber. It is as though they
are carrying a microscope and trying to find a speck
of dust anywhere, while disregarding the elephant that
should be the focus of this and other previous meetings
The elephant, of course, is the aggression initiated by
permanent members of the Council against my country,
the occupation of a third of my country's territory
by the three countries that launched the attack, and
another occupation that I will mention later. We truly
need Diogenes in the Chamber.

My colleague the Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States boasted that her country's forces
were able to destroy 3,000 mines in Raqqa. Her
country's forces, which continue to occupy Raqqa,
helped 4,000 Da'esh terrorists relocate from Raqqa
first to Deir Al-Zour and then to Al-Shaddadah in the
north. I believe that it would have been better for the
forces of her country to call on Da'esh to surrender
its maps, revelaing the location of tens of thousands
of mines, instead of boasting that they had eliminated
3,000 mines from the city after expelling Da'esh from
it a year and a half ago. They said they had been able to
destroy 3,000 mines.

Allow me to address the fact that my colleague
the Deputy Ambassador of Sweden referred to the
Syrian Government 16 times in his statement. He
called on the Syrian Government 16 times to various
ends. However, not once did he call for an end to the
American occupation of part of our territories. I will
hold that against him. Not once did he call for an end
to the Turkish and Israeli occupation of our territories.
That is also something that I will hold against him.
Not once did he call for condemnation of this week's
aggression directed against my country. That is also
something that I will hold against him. Not once did he
mention anything concerning the terrorism prevalent in
Syria, sponsored by the countries that I just mentioned,
and the oil-producing countries of our region. And that
is another point that I will hold against him.

As for my French colleague, he referred to a great
deal of information that seems to have received from
Doctors Without Borders, an organization similar to
the White Helmets, which was invented by British
intelligence service. Doctors Without Borders is also
a French invention. Apparently, that organization is
present in Raqqa. It is there without the approval of the
Syrian Government. Just like Da'esh, it entered Syria
without the Government's approval. Doctors Without
Borders can be compared to smugglers without borders,
criminals without borders, opposition without borders,
foreign agents without borders, aggressors without
borders and terrorists without borders. It would please
our French and other colleague for the intervention in the
internal affairs of Syria to be without borders forever.

I have listened to the false allegations, lies and
deceitful statements propagated by certain delegations
regarding the visit to Douma of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. I will share with
the Council the following information. Of course, I am
providing that information to please my colleague the
British Ambassador because she requested a briefing
within 24 hours. I shall now voluntarily provide such
a briefing for her so that she will not have to wait
24 hours.

I have informed the Council before that the Syrian
Government has taken all measures necessary to
facilitate the arrival of the Fact-finding Mission to
Syria. Today, the United Nations security team entered
Douma at 3 pm. Damascus time - 8 am. New York
time - in order to assess the security situation on the
ground. If the United Nations security team decides that
the situation is safe in Douma, then the Fact-finding
Mission will begin its work in Douma tomorrow. The
decision to send the Fact-finding Mission to Douma was
solely that of the United Nations and the OPCW. The
Syrian Government has done all it could to facilitate
the work of the Mission.

Furthermore, the Mission began its work upon its
arrival in Damascus. Yesterday, its members listened to
statements from witnesses about the alleged incident.
As the Mission began its work, all these lies and
rumours surfaced. They are false conclusions to distort
the Fact-finding Mission's outcome and ensure that
people forget about the aggression.

Today's meeting is being held on my country's
Independence Day commemorating our expulsion of the
French colonial Power from Syria on this date in 1946.
Unfortunately, some countries, including France and
those that launched the cowardly attack on my country
on 14 March, have failed to understand that the people's
desire for liberty and independence is a reality, and that
the days of hegemony are long past. Attempts to return
to that time will not succeed regardless of the size of
military fleets or the number of aeroplanes and the nice
and new smart bombs. Despite the threat of force and
the ongoing support for terrorism and armed groups
under any pretext, the world's peoples have grown tired
of the fact that influential countries continue to ignore
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
They have grown tired of the fact that those countries
completely disregard the principles of international law
with impunity.

My delegation thanks the Russian Federation
delegation for requesting this meeting to discuss the
situation in Raqqa - that martyred city that was
completely destroyed by United States forces and
their alleged coalition under the pretext of combating
terrorism. I will not discuss the Syrian Arab Republic's
assessment of the catastrophic conditions in the city.
I will only share with the Council the outcome of the
United Nations assessment mission to Raqqa, submitted
to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates in
Damascus and contained in an official note from the
United Nations Resident Coordinator on 4 April:

"Raqqa is facing a dire situation that requires
a complete rebuilding and restructuring of public
services and administration from the ground up."

That is a quotation from the United Nations,
and not from Doctors Without Borders - or Clowns
Without Borders.

Allow me to mention some of the conclusions of
the mission.

First:

"The mission witnessed the extensive destruction
of the city. Every building was either partially or
completely destroyed."

It does not say 70 per cent or 80 per cent. The city is
completely destroyed.

Secondly:

"The city, whose residents were estimated at about
300,000 people before the crisis, is now home to
around 7,000 people at the end of the offensive by
the coalition."

They managed to help 4,000 Da'esh terrorists leave the
city, but that also led to an exodus of 300,000 of the
city's population.

Thirdly:

"There is a complete lack of public services: no
water, no electricity, no cell phone coverage and no
basic services.

Fourthly:

"Hospitals and clinics were destroyed. Currently
there is no hospital in the city, except for Doctors
Without Borders."

What happened in the city of Raqqa is one example
of the crimes of the so-called coalition led by the
United States against Da'esh. The coalition never
meant to combat terrorism, but rather to undermine the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of my country
and to weaken the Syrian Arab Army and its allies in
the fight against terrorist groups. The coalition's real
achievement was to kill thousands of innocent civilians
with the worst and most destructive weapons, including
incendiary weapons. They have destroyed Syrian
infrastructure, including dams, bridges, hospitals,
schools, development facilities and institutions of the
Syrian people, as well as their economic resources
necessary for reconstruction, notably oil and gas wells,
facilities and workers.

I would also like to remind the Council, for
example, ofthe massacres against civilians in the towns
of Al-Mayadin and Al-Bukamal in mid-May 2017; in
Al-Sour, Al-Dablan, Al-Mayadin city, and Thibyan
village in rural deir ez-Zor, towards the end of June
2017; in Tel Al-Shayer on 19 June 2017; in Al-Zayanat
village on 4 July 2017; in Al-Kashkash village on
12 July 2017; in southern rural Al-Sahaka; in Al-Shaf'a
village and Thahrat Alouni on 25 February 2018; and in
Al-Bahra village on 20 February 2018.

The illegitimate coalition never meant to combat
terrorism, but to place obstacles in the way ofthe Syrian
Arab Army and its allies as they sought to combat
Da'esh, the terrorist organization - for instance, the
air strikes launched by coalition war planes against the

Syrian Arab Army in the Al-Tharda Mountain in deir
ez-Zor on 17 September 2016. Members will recall what
happened back then, as follows.

The coalition - United States - war planes were
trying to provide safe passage to Da'esh terrorists
between Syria and Iraq. Furthermore, on 8 February
2018, United States war planes targeted Popular Forces
on the eastern bank ofthe Euphrates River. Those forces
were fighting against armed Da'esh terrorists. The war
planes killed dozens of these reserve Popular Forces.

The coalition has not only launched an aggression
against the Syrian Arab Army, but it also gave support
and protection to residuals of Da'esh forces by providing
safe passage to its elements from Raqqa and deir ez-
Zor, most of them foreign terrorist fighters. They gave
them instructions to attack the forces of the Syrian
Arab Army and their allies in deir ez-Zor. That is how
the United States forces saved the remaining Da'esh
terrorists from certain death at the hands of the Syrian
Arab Army so that they could wreak havoc along the
border between Syria and Iraq.

The United States, France and Britain culminated
their support to armed terrorist fighters through the
tripartite aggression on 14 April, with the participation
of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Israel, as an act of revenge
against the Syrian Arab Army following the defeat
of the terrorist proxies of those Governments in
eastern Ghoutta.

When we talk about the catastrophic humanitarian
situation caused by this illegitimate coalition in the
city of Raqqa, we must talk about the situation in
the Al-Rukban camp. I underscore that the Syrian
Government approved the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the camp in cooperation with International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent. However, the United States forces present in
the camp prevented the delivery of that assistance and
put impossible conditions for its delivery. The United
States is responsible for the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the camp. We stress that the main reason
for this American position is that they are using the
camp to train Da'esh terrorist and other terrorist groups
so that they can be used in other battles against Syria,
Iraq, Libya, Yemen and other countries in the region
and the world.

In conclusion, I am talking here about the elephant
that I mentioned at the beginning of my statement. The
political situation in Syria is clear and does not need
draft resolutions, mechanisms or semi-daily meetings
under different agenda items. The situation needs the
Security Council to carry out its mandate under the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations by
standing against the American, Turkish and Israeli
occupation of parts of my country, Syria, and standing
against countries supporting terrorists groups. The
Security Council also must stand against countries
imposing coercive measures against the Syrian people,
so that millions of Syrian people are not made refugees
and internally displaced persons, as some colleagues
have said. The Council must not bend to the will of the
Governments of the United States, Britain and France.
This is a United Nations Organization. Do not turn
it into an organization that is not united. They only
unite in order to violate the provisions of the Charter,
invade countries, interfere in their internal affairs,
try to change their Governments by force, launch one
aggression after the other and destroy peoples and
their civilizations.

The meeting rose at 6.40pm.
