Mr. Suan (Myanmar): First of all, allow me
to express my heartfelt congratulations to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting ofthe Security Council. As a fellow member of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Myanmar
takes pride in the very successful and commendable
Indonesian presidency for the month of May.

It is most fitting to hold this open debate marking the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999) and in the context of the seventieth anniversary
of the adoption of the 1949 Geneva Conventions. We

welcome all the steps taken by the Council to address
the challenges pertaining to the protection of civilians.

Armed conflicts have wrought civilian casualties,
suffering and insecurity. Armed conflicts leave lasting
negative impacts on the political stability, peace and
security, rule of law and sustainable economic and
social development of a country. Therefore, focusing
on conflict prevention and resolution and building
sustainable peace are the most fundamental and crucial
steps necessary for ending the suffering of innocent
civilian populations during armed conflicts. We must
promote dialogue and engagement and facilitate the
settlement of conflict through political means in
good faith.

Myanmar is a country born with internal armed
conflicts. We know too well about the cost of armed
conflict and the value of peace and stability. Therefore,
we place peace at the heart of our democratic
nation-building endeavour. Myanmar believes that
sustainable peace is the only way to end the plight of
all societies affected by armed conflicts. Peace is also
essential to sustainable development and the perpetuity
of democracy and human rights.

Therefore, the Government has pushed forward a
peace process with ethnic armed organizations through
the signing of the nationwide ceasefire agreement and
the holding of the Union Peace Conference to end
internal armed conflicts. Building a lasting peace
requires political will, courage and determination. It
cannot be achieved overnight. But peace is the ultimate
solution to conflicts and the collateral damage affecting
civilian populations.

We recognize that taking preventive measures is
the most effective way to protect the most vulnerable
people in armed conflicts, especially women and
children. In that regard, the Government of Myanmar is
actively cooperating with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict. The Government
established an interministerial committee to implement
national action plans to prevent and address conflict-
related violations against women and children.

Training workshops have been held in collaboration
with the respective Special Representative of the
Secretary-General offices and with the United Nations
agencies to impart awareness and knowledge among
security personnel on violations against women and
children. We are encouraged by the ongoing constructive
engagement and cooperation with the two Offices of
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
to prevent and eliminate violations against women and
children in armed conflict.

My delegation believes that domestic, legal
and judicial systems must be the primary recourse
for prosecuting human rights violations. In that
connection, States need to strengthen their own legal
and judicial institutions to establish effective rule of
law and promote a safer environment for their citizens.
Myanmar has undertaken important legal reforms,
particularly revising the child rights law and the law
on preventing and protecting against violence against
women, so as to be in conformity with international
norms and standards. The international community
can play an important role by providing necessary legal
and technical support to States in their institutional
capacity-building efforts.

The Government of Myanmar has adopted a strong
policy of not condoning any human rights abuse. In line
with that commitment, the Government has established
an Independent Commission of Enquiry to investigate
all allegations of human rights violations following
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist attacks in
August 2017 in northern Rakhine. The mandate of the
Commission is to seek accountability and reconciliation.
The Commission is carrying out its mandate with
independence, impartiality and objectivity. Anyone
found guilty of committing atrocities will be punished
according to law. Undue external interference will
only be counterproductive and will be detrimental to
Myanmar's effort to enforce the rule of law, peace and
national reconciliation.

I would like to state in unequivocal terms that
Myanmar will never accept any measure that violates
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country,
such as the creation of a "safe zone" for Muslim
populations inside Myanmar's territory, as proposed
by Bangladesh's Prime Minister and just repeated by
the representative of Bangladesh a few minutes ago
in this Chamber. Bangladesh's incessant attempt to
destroy our bilateral efforts to solve the humanitarian
problem of Rakhine state and its action to demonize
the Government and the people of Myanmar will not
contribute to solving the problem in Rakhine state and
will only create further polarization and prolong the
suffering of the people.

Armed conflicts displace persons, deprive them of
their normal livelihood and their basic human rights.
Even the very essential humanitarian assistance cannot
reach affected populations under circumstances of
active hostilities. It is necessary to build trust and
understanding among all stakeholders, including the
Government, non-State actors and aid providers, to
enable humanitarian access to civilian populations in
need. It is crucial that the provision of humanitarian
assistance be made in accordance with the four
humanitarian principles without politicization.

I would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the relevant United Nations agencies,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
relevant non-governmental organizations, particularly
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
the relevant civil society organizations for providing
humanitarian assistance for the people affected by
armed conflict. The role of civil society organizations
is also crucial to facilitating agreements. Recently, the
Myanmar Government's National Reconciliation and
Peace Centre and the Kachin Humanitarian Concern
Committee successfully discussed the way forward
towards ensuring the return of displaced persons in
Kachin state to their homes safely and with dignity,
while addressing humanitarian needs and closing
internally displaced persons camps centres.

As long as there is armed conflict, there will always
be civilian casualties. Silencing the guns and achieving
durable peace will ultimately end the suffering of
innocent civilians, mainly women and children,
who bear the brunt of those predicaments. Myanmar
is committed to ending the decades-long internal
armed conflict by peaceful means through political
dialogue. We are striving to create an enabling political
environment to establish a fully functioning democracy
by initiating a constitutional amendment process.

The Government and the people of Myanmar have
fixed their eyes on the national mission of building a
peaceful, prosperous and democratic federal union.
Peace and reconciliation will be at the core of that
endeavour. We shall not be led astray from our chosen
path to peace and democracy under any circumstances
or in the face of any form of challenges. We hope that
the international community will be able to contribute
constructively to achieving peace, development and
democracy in Myanmar so that all our people will
be free from conflict and live together in peace and
harmony, enjoying human rights, justice and equality.

