Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his substantive report to the Council on the rule of law
and justice (S/2011/634*). In today's world, the rule of
law sparks great interest, and that is not fortuitous. As
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his report,

12-2096]
the political and structural changes in the Middle East
and North Africa and in other regions of the world are
taking place extremely swiftly. We see a destabilization
of the situation in these regions, and the legal standards
are becoming almost the only way to prevent the
situation from plunging totally into the chaos of armed
conflict and use of force, which violates international
law.

In these circumstances, it is particularly
important that the Security Council take a balanced
approach in the area of the rule of law, focusing on
fundamental principles of international law such as
sovereign equality of States, non-interference of
internal matters of States, the use of force only with
Security Council authorization, in line with the United
Nations Charter, and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We agree with the overall understanding that
the Security Council, as the primary organ for
maintaining international peace and security, is a key
component in the rule of law, conflict resolution and
post-conflict settlement. That is pursuant to the norms
of law and above all the provisions of the Charter.

Here the Council has a vast array of instruments
available, from measures to restore order during
peacekeeping operations, governing territories in crisis
conditions and providing assistance to protect civilians
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, right up to assisting States in
providing investigations of Violations of international
law of all parties, whether or not they were involved in
the conflict. It is important to note that this can be
achieved only if there is strict compliance with the
appropriate Security Council resolutions, excluding
vague interpretations that transform their meaning.

In Libya, the arbitrary interpretation of resolution
1973 (2011) by the coalition forces led to numerous
violations of international law. The rule of law in that
situation can be restored only by holding an impartial
investigation of the actions of all parties to the conflict.
Here, we should talk about not only prosecution of
those responsible for crimes but also possible liability
or responsibility of the relevant international
organizations and individual States.

We consider that the primary role in ensuring the
rule of law belongs to States. Activities in this area
carried out at the international level should
complement national efforts, not replace them. We
support the broad use of the capacity of the

12-2096]

International Court in the area of resolving
international disputes and the Court's carrying out a
consultative function to resolve complex legal
questions. It provides justice standards for all other
international legal organs.

The Russian Federation is concerned with the
situation of piracy off the coast of Somalia, which is
getting worse. It is not possible to fully eradicate this
problem without getting rid of impunity for pirates and
those who sponsor them. We fully endorse the idea of a
specialized regional anti-piracy court with an
international component. It is important to practically
implement that initiative as soon as possible.

