I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU). The European Union is united in its commitment to achieving a two-State solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all permanent-status issues in order to end the conflict. It strongly opposes all actions that undermine the viability of the two-State solution and urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild trust and create a path back to meaningful negotiations. To that end, the EU will continue to closely monitor developments on the ground and their broader implications and will consider further action in order to protect the viability of the two-State solution, which is constantly being eroded by new facts on the ground. The EU recalls that a lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, including that of land for peace, the road map, the agreements previously reached by the parties and of the Arab Peace Initiative, with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace and security and mutual recognition. Recalling that settlements are illegal under international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a two-State solution impossible, the EU reiterates its strong opposition to Israel's settlement policy and actions taken in this context, such as building the separation barrier beyond the 1967 line, demolitions and confiscation - including of EU-funded projects - evictions; forced transfers, including of Bedouins; illegal outposts; and restrictions on movement and access. It urges Israel to end all settlement activity and to dismantle the outposts erected since March 2001, in line with prior obligations. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem seriously jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both States. The EU calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce a fundamental change to the political, security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points, while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns. Rocket fire by militant groups is unacceptable and underlines again the danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit to non- violence and peace. The EU urges all Palestinian factions to find common ground, based on non-violence and reconciliation, and to work together to address the needs of the Palestinian population. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is an important element for reaching the two-State solution. In that regard, the EU calls on the Palestinian factions to make reconciliation and the return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza a top priority. The EU reaffirms its readiness to work towards the resumption of meaningful negotiations to resolve all permanent-status issues and to achieve a just and lasting peace. It urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to the two-State solution as the only realistic way to end the conflict. Please allow me to turn to the situation in Syria. In Idlib, the recent and continuing offensive by the Syrian regime and its backers, including Russia, is creating untold human suffering and has provoked the worst humanitarian crisis since the beginning of the Syrian conflict. The EU calls for an urgent de-escalation of the conflict in Syria in order to avert a slide into international military confrontation and prevent further suffering. While acknowledging the increased migratory burden and risks that Turkey is facing on its territory and the substantial efforts it has made in hosting 3.7 million migrants and refugees, the EU reiterates its serious concern over the situation at the Greek-Turkish border and strongly rejects Turkey's use of migratory pressure for political purposes. The EU is liaising with other international partners, including the United Nations, NATO and the United States, so that the clear international consensus in favour of a de-escalation and a lasting ceasefire is strongly reinforced. The EU reiterates in the strongest possible terms its call on all parties to keep in place an immediate and a sustainable ceasefire, to guarantee the protection of civilians on the ground and from the air and to enable the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance by the international community. While the European Union recognizes the presence of United Nations- designated terrorist groups in the region, indiscriminate attacks and the destruction of civilian infrastructure, including health facilities, schools and settlements for displaced persons by the Syrian regime and its allies cannot be justified under any circumstances and must stop. We reiterate the EU position that all the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity should be held accountable. The European Union welcomes the release of the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team to the Executive Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 8 April. We fully support the report's findings and note with great concern its conclusions. The European Union strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Air Force, as concluded by the report. Those identified responsible for the use of chemical weapons must be held accountable for these reprehensible acts. The European Union reiterates its full support to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and underlines the complementarity of its work with that of the United Nations. We have full confidence in the objectivity, impartiality and independence of the Organization's Technical Secretariat and its Investigation and Identification Team. The EU urges the Syrian regime to return to the negotiating table and repeats that any sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine political transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process, and remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian State. The EU will actively promote a renewed, concerted effort on the part of the international community in order to address the Syrian crisis and pave the way for a political solution. The EU is addressing as a matter of priority the humanitarian situation. Deliveries of humanitarian assistance are being made to address the emergency needs for shelter, medical and food support of some | million persons displaced in the past weeks and of all other Syrians in need in the Idlib region. Safe, sustained and immediate access to populations in need must continue to be enabled, in full compliance with international humanitarian law. The EU strongly calls for the extension of resolution 2165 (2014) for cross-border access in order to ensure that 55/99 56/99 humanitarian assistance, including medical and surgical supplies, reaches people in need throughout Syria through the most direct routes. On 17 February, the EU decided to add eight natural persons and two entities to the list of natural and legal persons, entities or bodies subject to restrictive measures. The decision was taken in view of the fact that prominent businesspersons are making large profits through their ties with the Al-Assad regime and are helping to finance that regime in return, including through joint ventures and entities.
