Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate. I take this
opportunity to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Mr. Herve Ladsous and Mr. Gregory Ramm
for their statements and the efforts of their respective
entities. I welcome the presence in the Chamber
of Foreign Minister Asselborn, whose country,
Luxembourg, under the leadership of Ambassador
Sylvie Lucas, is playing a key role in the Council in
improving the situation of children and armed conflict.

For 10 years now, the Security Council has
undertaken many measures to end grave violations
against children in armed conflict. The strategies
defined to date, including the signing of action plans
between various actors and the United Nations, have
led to some progress. We welcome and encourage the
continuation of these strategies. These positive results,
however, should not allow us to forget that the number of
child victims of attacks with explosives, indiscriminate
bombings, and the use of materials and other methods
of warfare prohibited by international humanitarian
law continues to grow.

Moreover, there has been an upsurge in the use
of children to commit suicide attacks or to serve as
human shields. In Afghanistan, it is reported that more
than 500 children died in suicide attacks in 2012. The
Syrian conflict, which may already have claimed more
than 93,000 lives, has not spared children. An entire
generation of children has thus been sacrificed, and it
is reported that more than 6,700 children have already
lost their lives there.

On the African continent, the fate of children in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia and the Sudan is rather dismal.
They are recruited, used as objects, killed, raped or
maimed, and subject to other forms of violence.

My country is just as concerned about another form
of war tactic, which is the targeting of hospitals and
schools. In this regard, it is reported that between 2005
and 2012, national armed forces and armed groups
used schools and universities in at least 24 countries
in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America as
military bases, interrogation and torture centres, and
weapons and ammunition depots, thereby exposing
these schools and universities to attack from the
opposing armed party.

There are several reasons that perhaps lie at the
heart of the ongoing violations against children in
armed conflict, first and foremost a lack of resources
for the implementation of plans of action by those
countries having signed them. It is also difficult to
establish contact with non-State armed groups with
a view to their signing action plans with the United
Nations. Finally - and this is hardly an exhaustive
list - there is the slow pace of the process of the
prosecution of perpetrators, owing to weak national
criminal jurisdictions and the inadequacy, or even
absence, of a cooperation framework between national
and international courts.

That is why Togo supports the recommendation
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/245) and urges the Council to play a greater
role, alongside the Secretary-General, in efforts to,
inter alia, bring those parties to conflict that have
not yet done so to sign plans of action and to ensure
that the necessary resources are earmarked for their
implementation.

In order to induce non-State armed groups, which
generally do not consider themselves bound by the
obligation to protect children, to sign such action plans,
it would be advisable to engage in an open and frank
dialogue with them. The experience of certain countries
that have known conflict and have taken that path
should inspire us to move forward along those lines.
The various initiatives and the numerous efforts
undertaken to put an end to violence against children
will be ineffective if we do not resolutely tackle the
issue of impunity. Indeed, impunity must remain a
concern of the international community, given that
almost all perpetrators of such violations remain at
large, although there was a verdict in early 2012 in the
case of Thomas Lubanga.

Genuine and effective measures must be taken at
the national, regional and international levels to put an
end to impunity. The numerous meetings on the issue
of children in armed conflict will not help to resolve
this issue the perpetrators are not held to account, if
national Governments hesitate to prosecute and try
them or deliver them to the competent jurisdictions,
and iflocal populations do not cooperate in the process
of arresting them.

While continuing the process of reflection on the
decisive action that it could take in the context of this
combat through its peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations should help countries to build the capacities of
their national institutions and modernize their penal
legislation so as to carry out investigations aimed at
prosecuting perpetrators and bringing them to justice.

Moreover, States must, in a regional and subregional
framework, develop and strengthen cooperation and
reciprocal judicial assistance, which could prove
effective.

My country supports the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of this debate and
thanks once again the delegation of Luxembourg for its
determined efforts to finalize it.

