Mr. Wane: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in South Sudan. I will restrict
my remarks to updates on the political and security
situation received since the circulation of the report on
18 July and will provide some additional considerations.

As far as the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and the status-of-forces agreement violations
are concerned, I do not have much more to add to the
report that was recently shared. However, allow me to
emphasize that, while the Regional Protection Force
continues with its process of deployment - we do
expect some progress with the arrival of the Rwandan
and Ethiopian units in the next two months - the peace
process in South Sudan continues to face a number of
challenges. As a matter of priority, we must overcome
such challenges, if we are to make the most of the
opportunity created by the deployment of the RPF
in Juba and put the country back on the path towards
sustainable peace and stability.

First, I would like to say a few words on the security
environment, which remains extremely volatile.
Clearly, South Sudan is in need of an effective and
credible ceasefire. Since the Government announced
the declaration of a unilateral ceasefire in June,
there have been worrisome reports of active military
operations in Greater Equatoria and Upper Nile states.
On 7 July, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) received a credible report that the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA) has moved towards
Mathiang in Upper Nile, after which heavy fighting
was reported. The aim of the offensive seems to be
to capture opposition-held areas all the way to Pagak.
Similarly, clashes have continued between the Sudan
People's Liberation Army in Opposition and SPLA
troops near Torit in Eastern Equatoria, where UNMISS
has recently had to reinforce its presence owing to
heavy fighting in the area. Obviously, the nature of
those operations ran contrary to the unilateral ceasefire
declared by the Government.

Secondly, the Government has publicly expressed
its commitment to creating an environment conducive
to the national dialogue and that is, of course, to be
welcomed and encouraged. At the same time, there have
been recently certain decisions that undermine those
commitments. On 17 July, two republican decrees were
issued, replacing six members of the Sudan People's
Liberation Army in Opposition of the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly, who are linked to Riek
Machar, with members who are aligned with First Vice
President Taban Deng Gai, and that certainly further
excludes a key constituency of the peace process.

On 18 July, the websites of two important
media outlets were blocked after they criticized the
Government and, once again, that raises questions
about the respect for the freedom of expression. On
10 July, the national security services arrested the
Director General of the State-run South Sudan National
Broadcasting Corporation. We understand that he
has now been released, but clearly all those actions
point to the need for the South Sudanese authorities
to make more sustained efforts towards creating an
environment that is conducive to the conduct of a
credible national dialogue.

With respect to the national dialogue, we believe
that every effort should be made to ensure that the
process is inclusive and transparent, takes place in
a free and secure environment, has clear outcomes
that complement the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan, and is supported by a
sufficiently broad political consensus from all of the
political forces in the country. That is critical in order
to ensure that the national dialogue is not displaced or
rejected by the opposition and does not lead to more
disputes, fighting, fragmentation and displacement in
the country.
I stress that President Mogae, the Chairperson of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, will
brief the Council on the implementation status of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan and on the proposed revitalization process led
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and endorsed by the IGAD Summit. The
success of that initiative will definitely depend on the
extent to which the Government and the opposition
embrace it and commit to its full implementation.
That IGAD initiative is an important development that
requires active international support, including from
the Security Council. I would therefore encourage
the Security Council to, once again, express its full
support for the IGAD-led process and to urge all South
Sudanese stakeholders to embrace that process as a
genuine opportunity to restore peace in the country.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the critical
importance ofthe unity ofpurpose ofthe region, as well as
unity between the region and the rest of the international
community, and the need for all concerned members of
the international community to send a strong message
to the South Sudanese stakeholders that the current
status quo is unacceptable and unsustainable. A change
in behaviour is long overdue for the sake of the people
of South Sudan, and the pursuit of political objectives
through violence, which continues, unfortunately, to
exact a heavy toll on the people of South Sudan, should
not be allowed to continue.

