Mr. Liden (Sweden): The situation in Kosovo remains
serious and clearly constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. We are pleased to see the Council today
discharging its duty in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations in an effort to prevent a flare-up of new
armed violence in the Balkans. We will therefore welcome
the adoption of the draft resolution before us, imposing an
arms embargo on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
including Kosovo. For Sweden, peace and stability in the
Balkans are necessary prerequisites for European security.

We condemn the excessive use of force by the
Serbian special police in Kosovo, which has caused
several deaths and injuries to unarmed civilians. We also
condemn all acts of terrorism. Both sides must exercise
restraint and enter into a serious political dialogue on how
to settle their differences through exclusively peaceful
means and on the basis of human rights and the rule of
law.

Sweden fully supports the declarations made by the
Contact Group ministers on 9 and 25 March in response
to the developments in Kosovo. We agree with the
measures recommended in order to persuade the
authorities in Belgrade to take necessary steps towards an
acceptable solution. It is also incumbent upon the Kosovar
Albanian leadership to act responsibly and facilitate the
beginning of a constructive dialogue.

While Belgrade has recently taken some positive
steps, much remains to be done. The concrete steps the
authorities in Belgrade must take are clearly spelt out in
paragraph 16 of the draft resolution. These steps include,
first, initiating a substantive dialogue on Kosovo with the
participation of an outside representative or
representatives; secondly, withdrawal of the special
police; thirdly, allowing access to Kosovo by
humanitarian organizations and others; fourthly, accepting
a mission by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union
representative, Mr. Felipe Gonzalez, as well as the return
of the OSCE long-term missions; and, fifthly, facilitating
a mission to Kosovo by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

Hopefully, Belgrade will listen to the international
community and take these steps, which would enable the
Council to reconsider the sanctions. Together with
progress in resolving human rights issues and in
cooperating with the International Tribunal, this would
also enhance the prospects for the normalization of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's international relations,
which we look forward to. If Belgrade does not comply,
however, additional measures will be considered.

The arms embargo that we are about to impose must
be immediately and strictly implemented by all States. As
a member of the European Union, Sweden has already
decided to implement not only the arms embargo but also
the other sanctions recommended by the Contact Group,

 

including refusal to supply equipment which can be used
for internal repression or for terrorism, denial of visas for
officials responsible for the repression and a moratorium on
Government-financed export credits.

Finally, let me say that Sweden concurs with the
statement that the United Kingdom is going to make on
behalf of the European Union.

