Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs O'Brien
and Ms. Hoff for their briefings.

Unfortunately, we have to accommodate the inability
of the Security Council and the international community
to make progress regarding Syria. The ongoing situation
in the city of Aleppo is most distressing. Last month we
witnessed a dramatic deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in that historic city, leaving the vast majority
ofthe population without access to basic necessities and
life-saving assistance. The horrific fighting has caused
innumerous deaths and injuries among the civilian
population. The destruction of essential infrastructure,
such as hospitals, clinics and ambulances, and the
lack of medical staff have exponentially increased the
number of casualties, wounded and displaced persons,

absolutely overwhelming the ability of the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies to carry out
their duties.

Meanwhile, the Security Council remains unable
to reach any semblance of unity to express a common
position on the issue, while witnessing, on a daily
basis, the current violations of the most basic tenets of
international human rights and humanitarian law. The
latest escalation of fighting in Eastern Aleppo is most
regrettable. It is urgent that we consider ways to set aside
political differences and reset our focus on a new round
of political talks. While we understand the geopolitical
implications for the major stakeholders in the region
and beyond, we cannot accept the continuous suffering
of innocent civilians. We therefore support the draft
resolution submitted by Egypt, New Zealand and Spain
calling on all the parties to cease fighting for at least
10 days in order to allow and facilitate immediate, safe,
sustained and unhindered humanitarian access to all
of Aleppo by the United Nations and its implementing
partners. In our view, that would constitute an important
first step towards a resumption of negotiations, which in
the long term represents the most appropriate solution
to the conflict.

We would like to once again call on the members
of the Security Council to set aside their political
differences and rivalries and act in the interests of
international peace and security. The Middle East has
been affected by conflict and humanitarian crises for
too long, and the repercussions of our inability to help
solve the problems there are being felt all over the
world. The real influence of certain regional Powers,
as well as that which some members of the Council
are able to exert on the parties concerned, should be
used to advance a political solution to the conflict
instead of supplying weapons and lethal equipment to
the sides in the conflict in the search for an impossible
military outcome.

