Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the French presidency of the
Council for organizing this debate. I also welcome
the presence among us today of Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the representatives of UNICEF and civil society.

(spoke in English)

Atrocities committed against children are an
affront to our common humanity. They deprive
children of a future, and they can have catastrophic
long-term consequences for both the victims and their
communities. Recent conflicts have seen unimaginable
outrages committed against children. We are appalled
by the mass abductions of children by non-State actors.
Of particular note are the abductions by Boko Haram of
276 schoolgirls in Nigeria in April 2014; the abduction
of 153 Kurdish boys from Ain al-Arab in Syria in May
2014 by the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS); the
attack by the Taliban on a school in Peshawar during
which 132 children were killed in December 2014; and
the abduction of hundreds of Yezidi children by ISIS in
western Iraq in July 2014.

We call for the immediate release of all of those
abducted children without delay. We call once again on
the Security Council to make the abduction of children
a criteria for being listed in the annexex to all the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General.

(spoke in French)

The protection of children from violence in all
forms and in all settings is crucial. Schools should be
a safe place where children can learn. Education is an
effective tool for reducing their vulnerability. We are
increasingly seeing schools used as shields and hiding
places for combatants, and thus children are forced into
the line of fire. Canada strongly condemns the unlawful
targeting of education facilities. We call on all parties to
armed conflict to refrain from using schools as bases,
barracks, weapons caches or detention centres.

We are also especially concerned with the safety
of girls in situations of armed conflict, where they
face particular risks and abuses. All too often they
become the victims of rape, sexual violence and sexual
exploitation. They are used as slaves, including sex
slaves, and face abuses such as child, early and forced
marriage. We therefore call for special and dedicated
attention to the protection of girls.

(spoke in English)

In seeking justice for abuses against children, we

must not lose sight of the victims themselves. Effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for children are absolutely crucial. Recent
reports of the indoctrination of children by non-State
actors are particularly troubling, and it is essential
that community-based programmes receive timely,
sustained and adequate resources and funding. The
international community must work together to ensure
the successful reintegration of these children.

Similarly, more must also be done to help girls
who have survived violence, including sexual violence.
We must help them recover and reintegrate into their
communities, so that their trauma is not compounded by
social stigma. In doing so, we must not unwittingly trap
survivors in the role of victims. Rather, we must help
them to play out their lives as active and empowered
members of their communities.

(spoke in French)
When children suffer these unspeakable abuses, it
tears apart their families and communities. In addition
to the social stigma that can arise in cases of sexual
violence, children may also be forced to take part in
violence against their family members and neighbours.
This brings a new and horrifying level of complexity to
reintegration. If it takes a village to raise a child, it also
takes a village to recover from atrocity.

(spoke in English)

We are increasingly seeing a trend of armed
non-State actors seeking to recruit children across
borders. Recalling resolution 2178 (2014), we call
upon Member States to cooperate to prevent the
radicalization, recruitment, equipping and cross-border
transit of children to join such groups.

We call on those armed non-State actors listed in
the annex to the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on children in armed conflict (S/2014/339)
to adopt and implement action plans committing
themselves to end grave violations against children.
We commend the efforts undertaken by the office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to negotiate and help implement action plans with 12
armed non-State groups in recent years.

(spoke in French)

There is also a role for every State Member of the
United Nations to play. We encourage all Member States
to employ what influence is at their disposal, including
through dialogue, law enforcement and economic
means, to pressure non-State actors to immediately
cease grave violations against children in situations of
armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

Canada is committed to ensuring that the rights of
children are protected. I can assure the Council that we
will continue to fight against the unspeakable atrocities
that threaten the safety, dignity and lives of girls and
boys in situations of armed conflict in places such as
Iraq, Syria and many others in corners of our world.

