Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic): May I first congratulate you, Sit, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for this month,
May I also pay tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for his work as President of the
Council last month.

I would like to express our deep concern at the
persistence with which Israel, as an occupying Power, is
continuing to pursue illegal policies and measures in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, as
well as in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan. In particular,
Israel persists in establishing settlements in violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, the Hague Rules
of 1907, the 24 resolutions of the Security Council
regarding settlements and the resolutions of the General
Assembly on this matter. Such acts also seriously
endanger the peace process in general.

After the Madrid Peace Conference in 1991 laid the
foundation of the peace process, we had hoped to see a
new dawn in our region in which a just and lasting peace
could take root. The Arabs participated sincerely in this
process, but Israel's persistent policy of establishing
settlements, expanding and confiscating lands have dashed
those hopes. Thenew Israeli Government has now dealt
a virtually fatal blow to those hopes by declaring
Security Council 3745th meeting
Flay-second year 5 March 1997

explicitly its retreat from its obligations under the peace
process.

This Government makes settlement an integral part of
its policy priorities and no longer wishes to resume the
peaceful negotiations that had been taking place despite the
obstacles. This Government has taken serious new steps to
annex East Jerusalem. For the third time in seven months,
the Security Council is compelled to focus on Israel's
illegal measures that have been adopted in regard to
occupied East Jerusalem that seek'to enshrine policies
aimed at changing the legal status of that city and its
demographic composition.

A few days ago, the Israeli authorities announced their
decision to create a new settlement with 6,500 housing
units in the southern part of East Jerusalem, particularly in
Jabal Abu Ghneim. This is in the context of a series of
similar Israeli measures, including the declaration of intent
regarding the establishment of another settlement at Ras
al-Amud, within the original municipal borders of East
Jerusalem. The Israeli authorities have also demolished the
building belonging to the Burj al-Laqlaq association within
the Old City, thus opening the way to the creation of new
settlements in that building's place.

All of this is a prelude to a gradual, progressive
campaign of expelling Palestinian Arabs from Jerusalem.
We have always warned that such Israeli policies and
illegal expansionist measures in Jerusalem, are of an
extremely serious nature. Jerusalem is a city of vital
importance to the Arab, Muslim and Christian worlds, as
well as to the international community and the three
revealed religions.

Similarly, the Israeli authorities continue to keep the
tunnel under Haram al-Sharif open, despite Security
Council resolution 1073 (1996).

We would therefore reaffirm the following. First, we
are in full solidarity with the Palestinian people, who refuse
to bend to occupation, under any occupying Power
whatsoever. Secondly, the current problem has not come
unannounced; it is the natural result of the current Israeli
Govemment's ideology and policies. Consequently, in order
to address this problem, it is necessary for the international
community, as represented by this Council, to adopt a clear
position. This position must make it clear to the Israeli
Government that the international community rejects its
attempts to annex occupied Arab territories, including East
Jerusalem, as well as its settlement operations and activities
in those territories.
In calling for such a position, we wish it to be in the
service of peace in the region. The indulgence hitherto
shown the Israeli leaders has led to destruction and
violence for the Arab and Israeli peoples alike. Our stance
here is in keeping with all previous Security Council
resolutions and with international law. It is also in
keeping with the most noble concepts of international law,
which still constitutes the basic pillar of today's civilized
world.

We believe that it is the duty of this Council to
place on equal footing all the decisions that it has adopted
to date and that it will adopt regarding the Middle East
and other regions of the world. We will never forget
Council resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969),
298 (l971)_and 476 (1975), according to which all
Israel's legislative and administrative measures and
activities in Jerusalem are null and void as well as illegal.

Today, we call for a resolution clearly expressing the
international community's rejection of and opposition to
Israel's policies and measures aimed at annexing
Jerusalem and expanding settlements, In this resolution,
we must insist on specific measures that would lead Israel
to respect international law. We also call for a clear-cut
position that reflects the international community's
commitment to seeking peace in conformity with the
Madrid principles, particularly that of land for peace. We
are called upon here to shoulder our historic
responsibilities, because time is no longer on the side of
peace. Events in the region threaten to cause everything
to explode, both there and elsewhere.

Thirdly, the argument continually used by the
Israelis in order to justify their expansionist and
settlement measures and upon which the various Israeli
Governments have based their actions no longer holds.
These measures have led to violence and increased
tension between Arabs and Israelis. How, indeed, can one
establish peace under continued occupation? A fair
accompli peace, imposed by force, is not viable and is
destined to fail. True peace is within our reach, provided
that it is founded on bases agreed upon by all.

We established these bases and foundations in
Madrid. The most important among them are those that
call for land for peace and full implementation of the
resolutions of international law demanding Israel's
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem and the Golan, to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
keeping with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), as well as from Lebanon to the
Security Council 37451h meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

internationally recognized Lebanese borders, in keeping
with resolution 425 (1978). The half-measures adopted in
the context of the peace process do not exempt Israel from
its responsibility or from the pressure of international public
opinion and the views of the international community as a
whole. The latter should not allow Israel to move forward
with its vast occupation plans.

Last, we would call on the two States sponsoring the
peace process in the Middle East to play a key role by
convincing Israel to postpone and cancel its decision to
build settlements at Jabal Abu Ghneim, to reverse and
definitively abandon these projects, to adopt measures to
accelerate the peace process as a whole and to return to the
point at which this process stopped, basing itself on the
Madrid principles and on the principle of exchanging land
for peace in keeping with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978)

Today, it is imperative that the two sponsors of the
peace process act to ensure that peace is relaunched, in
keeping with the principles agreed upon in Madrid, with the
goal of achieving a just and lasting global peace in the
region. We would also, through this Council, call on all
those who are actively involved to work seriously and take
decisive and prompt measures to convince Israel to return
to the agreements of Madrid as a frame of reference.

