Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I should like to express
my delegation's appreciation to you, Sir, and the
delegation of Jamaica for convening this open meeting
of the Council to revisit this enormously important
subject of the prevention of armed conflict, which the
Council deliberated on in November last year. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his very
important statement, which provides a useful setting
for our discussion this morning.

Much has been said today on the subject and my
statement this morning will be relatively brief, since I
addressed the issue in a substantive fashion on that
previous occasion. My delegation agrees with many of
the points that have been made, both in terms of the
substance and of the approach to be taken in pursuing
this important subject. We agree that there is a need for
the United Nations to embark on preventive diplomacy
and preventive action as a more cost-effective approach
than mounting a peacekeeping operation after a conflict
has erupted. The Secretary-General put the subject in
its proper context today and last November, and hit the
nail squarely on the head when he said in that earlier
debate that

"the case for prevention of conflict hardly needs
restating. Quite simply, it is cost-effective, in
financial as well as human terms". (S/PV.4072, p. 2)

We also agree on the need for greater
coordination and cooperation on the part of the entire
United Nations system in the area of conflict
prevention, including addressing the root causes of
conflicts, which, as the Secretary-General has put it,
are often deep-rooted and involve socio-economic
factors such as, inter alia, poverty and
underdevelopment, repression and discrimination.
These must be seriously addressed by the Governments
concerned, with the support and understanding of the
international community. These Governments must be
assisted and encouraged to move in the direction of
good governance, which is an essential underpinning of
domestic peace and stability. We would also underscore
the importance of increased coordination and support
within the United Nations system, particularly in
respect of the mobilization of resources for conflict-
prevention activities.

The presidential statement adopted in November
last year and the draft presidential statement which the
Council will adopt at the end of this meeting, while not
exhaustive, contain virtually all of the elements that, if
acted upon by the Council and the international
community, will go a long way towards making
preventive diplomacy and preventive action an integral
part of the work of the United Nations, thereby making
prevention one of the main tasks of this Organization,
to cite the words of the Secretary-General himself.

In our View, the concept of preventive diplomacy
or preventive action should also include conflict
situations in which there is neither peace nor war, such
as the situation prevailing in Somalia. We should not
wait for war to break out again in that country before
we act.

I would like the remainder of my statement to
take up a point made by the Secretary-General in
November last year. During that previous debate, the
Secretary-General suggested that the Council-
indeed, challenged it to - examine how it could make
prevention a tangible part of its day-to-day work. To
meet this challenge, the Council would have to reorient
itself from its usually reactive approach to the
management of conflict to one of pre-empting or
preventing conflicts. This would require a deliberate
and conscious effort on the part of the Council to set
aside a part of its monthly work programme for an in-
depth analysis of potential conflict situations and to
formulate appropriate strategies and approaches on
how best to handle these potential crises.

For this purpose, the Council would benefit
tremendously from timely and in-depth briefings by the
Secretariat on potential conflict situations that would
be brought to the attention of the Council by the
Secretary-General by virtue of Article 99 of the
Charter, which should be invoked more frequently than
it has been in the past. The Secretary-General is been
entrusted, indeed empowered, to do so by the Charter
and should be encouraged to invoke this prerogative to
give substance to the concept of conflict preventive.

Of course, because of the political sensitivities
involved, it may well be necessary for such discussions
to be conducted in a more informal and restricted
setting than is provided for under present
arrangements. Indeed, given the working methods and
procedures of the Council, which constrain innovative
actions, it is perhaps more appropriate for the
Secretary-General to take the initiative on discussions
of preventive diplomacy by convening such informal
exchanges of views. Whatever the format, an
appropriate time can be set aside by the Council for
such exchange of views. In the interest of preventive
diplomacy, the larger membership of the Organization
will, in our view, not begrudge a certain lack of
transparency on the part of the Council on matters
where discretion is required.

It goes without saying that there is a need for the
Secretariat to enhance its early-warning capability to
be better able to serve the Secretary-General and the
Council in this area of conflict prevention. The
Department of Political Affairs will have to be further
strengthened and resources made available to enable it
to make a real contribution to this aspect of the work of
the Council. To a certain extent, Member States with
the capability to do so can assist the Secretariat through
regular sharing of vital information pertaining to
threats to peace and security, but this can, at best, be
supplementary in nature and cannot replace its own
independent means of information-gathering and
analysis.

Such activities can be further augmented by more
frequent use of fact-finding missions, either by the
Secretary-General or by the Council itself- an idea
which has been suggested by the Secretary-General and
which was in fact successfully put to use when the
Council despatched its mission to Jakarta and Dili last
year. That mission, however- like the missions to
Kosovo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Ethiopia and Eritrea - was not entirely preventive in
nature, as conflict had already erupted before the
Council acted.

A truly preventive action or preventive diplomacy
would involve the despatch of a mission to a potential
area of conflict that has not erupted and which results
in averting the conflict. Such missions, of course, lie
more appropriately in the realm of preventive
diplomacy, as opposed to preventive action, and might
perhaps be best handled by the Secretary-General or
his emissary in the context of his good offices or by
individual Member States that are prepared to
undertake such quiet and sensitive diplomacy. In my
view, such discreet diplomacy, without the threat of the
use of force, may well fall within the concept of
intervention that the Secretary-General has been
talking about for some time now and about which he
may well have been greatly misunderstood.

In this context, I am inclined to agree with the
opinion expressed by Ambassador Dejammet, the
former Permanent Representative of France, when he
said during the previous debate on this same issue that

"one must not confuse debate with having
recourse to force, which comes under other
provisions that are precise and limiting. The
Council can take up an issue and take preventive
measures without necessarily envisaging the use
of force." (Ibid., p. 10)

In considering these possibilities, it is important, of
course, for the Council to be guided by the principles
of respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States, enshrined in the Charter.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
draft presidential statement to be adopted at the end of
this meeting. What is needed now is for the Council to
act on these important ideas and proposals, lest it be
accused of continued inaction on this enormously
important subject. As a member of the Council, in the
remaining five months of its membership, Malaysia
will play its part in encouraging the Council to meet
the Secretary-General's challenge that it make
prevention a tangible part of its work, if not on a day-
to-day basis, at least initially under a regular, perhaps
monthly basis.

