Mr. Mladenov: On the night of 8 February, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and its affiliates in
the Sinai launched a series of rockets towards the Israeli
coastal resort of Eilat. Thankfully, no one was injured
or killed. I begin today's briefing by unequivocally
condemning this act, as well as those who inspired,
implemented and celebrated it. I recall this incident
because it is a chilling reminder of the need for States
to work together and stand firm against terror.

The Middle East continues to be plagued by
extremism, bloodshed and displacement, which feed
intolerance, violence and religious radicalism far
beyond the region. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
sadly, is not immune to these sweeping regional threats.
Although leaders on both sides agree on the need to
continue Israeli-Palestinian security coordination,
there is increasing anger in the street, and radical views
are hijacking the discourse as moderate voices are
increasingly vilified and cast aside.

It is critical that we all understand that we must
never allow the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to drift into
the abyss of the extremism and radicalism sweeping
the region. Palestinians, Israelis and the international
community have a duty to act responsibly, avoid
escalating tensions, refrain from unilateral actions
and work together to uphold peace. Today, however,
unilateral actions are returning the parties to a high-
stakes collision course.

On 6 February, the Israeli Parliament adopted the
so-called Regularization Law, which enables the use of
privately owned Palestinian land for Israeli settlements
in the occupied West Bank without the owners'
consent. The law has the potential to retroactively
"regularize" -under Israeli law-thousands ofexisting
settlement units built on land owned by Palestinian
individuals living under occupation, as well as dozens
ofillegal outposts. Its passage marks a significant shift
in Israel's position concerning the legal status of the
West Bank and the applicability of Israeli law therein.
It contravenes international law and, according to the
Israeli Attorney General, it is also unconstitutional. It
is expected that the Supreme Court of Israel will rule
on its constitutionality soon. If the law stays in place,
it will have far-reaching consequences for Israel, while
seriously undermining prospects for the two-State
solution and for Arab-Israeli peace.

This period also saw Government statements
announcing significant settlement expansion, which
were quickly followed by action. Within a three-week
period, the Israeli authorities promoted some 4,000
housing units in Area C, including tenders for around
800 units, the advancement of around 3,000 units and
the approval of plans for an additional 230 units. These
numbers are all the more worrying if compared to the
whole of 2016, when 42 units were tendered and some
3,000 were advanced in Area C. Settlements were
also advanced in East Jerusalem during the reporting
period, with the issuance of building permits for over
900 units.

Settlement activities are illegal under international
law and, as stated by the Middle East Quartet, they
are one of the main obstacles to peace. All core issues
should be resolved between the parties through direct
negotiations on the basis of relevant Security Council
resolutions and mutual agreements.

I continue to be concerned by the daily violence.
So-called lone wolf attacks against Israeli civilians,
though greatly reduced as compared to 2016, continue.
On 9 February, in the market of Petah Tikva in central
Israel, an 18-year-old Palestinian from Nablus shot and
stabbed six Israelis, who were injured in the attack. In
the West Bank, three Palestinians were shot and killed
by Israeli security forces in recent weeks, two allegedly
attempting attacks on Israeli soldiers, while a teenager
was killed during clashes with Israeli security forces. I
once again call for the calibrated use of force and stress
that live fire should be used only as a last resort, in

situations of imminent threat of death or serious injury,
and that any resulting death or injury should be properly
investigated by the authorities.
The trend of demolishing Palestinian-owned
structures continues. Some 57 structures have been torn
down, displacing 108 people. Last year saw over 1,000
demolitions, the largest annual number of demolitions
on record and nearly double the figure for 2015. I once
again urge Israel to cease this destructive practice.

I welcome the Palestinian decision to hold the
postponed local elections on 13 May. However, I
also take note with regret of Hamas' rejection of that
decision. Let me urge all factions to work together in
good faith to uphold democracy and to overcome the
internal divisions that are undermining Palestinian
national institutions and the legitimate aspiration to
statehood. Local elections, if held simultaneously
in both Gaza and the West Bank, and conducted in
line with international standards, could contribute to
advancing reconciliation. Gaza and the West Bank
should be reunited under a single, legitimate and
democratic Palestinian Authority on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization principles and the
rule of law, in accordance with existing agreements.

In Gaza, we have consistently warned that the
situation is not sustainable and that another escalation
is likely unless the pressing needs of the population are
more systematically addressed. I also note that Hamas
in Gaza has elected a new leadership. It is for that
leadership to ensure that Gaza remains calm and avoid
the risk ofspiraling into another conflict. Rocket attacks,
tunnel construction and smuggling only heighten that
risk. After over three months of relative calm, the
launching of a rocket from Gaza towards Israel on
5 February - which landed without injury - reminded
us all of the risk of further destabilizing an already
combustible environment. In that environment, all
sides should exercise maximum restraint.

The volatile situation in Gaza continues to be
exacerbated by the persistence of a major humanitarian
and development crisis, related in large part to the
crippling closures of the Strip and the continuing
political divide. This winter has borne witness to
a serious electricity crisis, which in December left
Palestinians in Gaza with only two hours of electricity
per day. Tens of thousands of people came out in the
streets in mass protests; many, including journalists,
were detained. The crisis was temporarily resolved
with a generous contribution of $12 million from the
State of Qatar. As we speak, the United Nations is
working actively with the Palestinian Authority, all
stakeholders and key donors on a road map to ensure
that Gaza's massive electricity problems are addressed
in a sustainable manner.

Turning briefly to Lebanon, I note that the
reactivation of State institutions has continued. The
President and Prime Minister have expressed their
confidence that an electoral law will be agreed with
the aim of holding timely elections. On 11 February,
in an interview, President Aoun stated "the need to
maintain Hizbullah's weapons". The United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon is in discussion with
authorities on their continued commitment to relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004), which clearly call for
the disbanding and disarmament of all non-State
armed groups.

Relative calm continued in the the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations
and along the Blue Line, with the exception of some
ground and air violations. On 19 January, UNIFIL
deployed on both sides of the Blue Line to mitigate
tensions, including weapons pointing-between the
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and the Lebanese Armed
Forces in the context of the placement of a soil barrier
near El Adeisse by Lebanese municipal workers, in
violation of the Blue Line.

Meanwhile, in the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) area of operations, the
ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic
is holding, albeit in a volatile security environment on
the Bravo side. On 8 February, the IDF carried out a
strike on the Syrian side of the Golan in response to
a spillover fire incident involving a tank shell that
landed in an open area in Israeli-occupied Golan.
Spillover from Syria continues to heighten the risk of
further escalation between the two sides. Both sides,
however, have stated their continued commitment to
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. Conditions
permitting, the full return of UNDOF to the area of
separation remains a priority.

Returning to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, recent
developments should be of concern to all of us. Some
may hold the illusion that the conflict can be managed
indefinitely and that the absence of a clear strategy to
advance peace is a strategy in itself. The Middle East
Quartet report and Security Council resolutions have
clearly outlined what is needed to advance a sustainable
and just peace. The two-State solution remains the
only way to achieve the legitimate national aspirations
of both peoples. Israel can take the necessary steps
to stop settlement expansion and construction in
order to preserve that prospect, while the Palestinian
leadership can demonstrate its commitment to tackling
the challenges of violence and incitement on its side.
That would create an environment that would facilitate
bilateral final status negotiations that the international
community can support.

As Palestinians and Israelis face another period
of uncertainty and concern for what lies ahead. I
urge leaders on both sides to carefully contemplate
the future they envision for their people. Will it be a
future built on perpetual conflict, rising extremism
and occupation? Or will it be a future built on mutual
respect and an appreciation for the unimaginable
wealth of opportunities that would come with peace?
The answer seems obvious but, as history has painfully
demonstrated, the path to peace is riddled with hazards.
The United Nations remains resolute in its commitment
to helping Palestinians and Israelis strive to overcome
these challenges.

