Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): This
meeting of the Council is taking place at a particularly
important and encouraging time in the history of East
Timor. My delegation welcomes in particular the
presence of Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao and Mr.
Mari Alkatiri - President-elect and Chief Minister,
respectively, of East Timor - and thanks them for
their very encouraging statements on the positive
development of the situation in their country.

Mr. Gusmao represents the conscience of a new
East Timor, and that conscience is found in the words
of wisdom that he expressed at the end of 1999:

"I advocate dialogue, reconciliation and,
once justice has been done, pardon. Ten years
from now, we will be able to say: it is the past."

My country, Guinea, awaits with interest and
enthusiasm the accession of East Timor to
independence on 20 May 2002, which will also mark
Mr. Gusmao's inauguration. My delegation is
convinced that he will always remember the words that
I have just cited. We wish him every success in the
noble and delicate mission that awaits him, and we
assure him of our support.

East Timor's independence will be a historic
event and a great victory for the United Nations, whose
contribution was crucial throughout the transition
process. My delegation would like to pay a well-
deserved tribute to all of those who have contributed
enormous efforts to achieve that success. We are
thinking in particular of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello as
well as the entire staff of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
local elected officials and, above all, the people of East
Timor. I should also like to congratulate our friend,
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, for his nomination to
the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. My delegation has no doubt that he will
succeed in his efforts, given his outstanding qualities
and his extensive experience.

The establishment of the Constituent Assembly,
the adoption of the Constitution and the election of Mr.
Gusmao, which mark the culmination of the efforts of
the people of East Timor in their struggle for
independence, represent a decisive stage in the peace
process and in the democratization and reconstruction
of the country.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in
East Timor. However, in the context of the challenges
that will have to be met to ensure a stable and
prosperous East Timor, we should like to stress the
following observations. Cooperation among the leading
bodies should be encouraged. Support should be given
to the actions of the Council of Ministers in the areas
of justice, security, health, education, economic and
social development and defence. Steps should be taken
to avoid duplication between the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and the
Reconciliation and Repatriation Liaison Team within
the framework of refugee management. The various
East Timorese, Indonesian and Australian parties,
together with the United Nations, must continue
dialogue on issues of common interest. We encourage
them to shoulder their responsibilities with a view to
facilitating the development of East Timor and to
promoting security and stability in the region.
With regard to the socio-economic development
of East Timor, my delegation believes that bilateral and
multilateral assistance remains indispensable, with a
particular emphasis on education and health.
Furthermore, the dual objectives set out by the
Planning Commission - encouraging strong economic
growth and reducing poverty - should be supported.

In that regard, we hope that the donors meeting to
be held in Dili on 14 and 15 May 2002 will represent
an opportunity to respond positively to the financing of
the national development plan, the medium-term fiscal
framework and the annual budget for 2002-2003.
Moreover, my delegation is convinced that the
international community will remain committed to East
Timor after independence to consolidate the gains
already made. In that regard, we encourage continued
reflection by the New York and D111 planning teams,
and we support the role of the United Nations as
described in chapter III of the Secretary-General's
report.

My delegation believes that all projects of the
agencies and funds of the United Nations system
should attach high priority to capacity-building, the
development of human resources, the strengthening of
institutions and the elaboration of consistent policies.
However, we think that the development of the
situation and experience in the field will enlighten us
best as to possible additional action to be taken by the
international community.

My delegation notes with interest that the
continuation of United Nations action in East Timor
will be possible only with adequate financial means.
Therefore, we hope that the General Assembly will
attach particular attention to this issue in examining
both the proposal to end UNTAET and the proposed
budget for UNMISET for the period 1 July 2002 to 30
June 2003.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the relevant
observations made by the Secretary-General in his
report. In particular, we endorse the establishment of
the successor mission for an initial period of
12 months.

