Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Article 2, paragraphs 1, 4 and 7, of the Charter
of the United Nations provide for respect for the
principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members
and that all Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. Moreover, no provision of the Charter authorizes
the United Nations to intervene in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State. Likewise, all 29 resolutions on Syria adopted in
the Security Council stress the strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter.

It is our right today, as it is the right of all peoples
of the world who still believe in the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, to wonder
what the Council is doing to ensure respect for those
purposes and principles wisely established by the
founders, with a view to maintaining peace, security
and prosperity following the wars and tragedies that
they experienced. We in Syria know that our country is
not the first victim of violations of Charter provisions
and international law by certain members of the
Council. However, what Syria has been enduring is the
consequence of silence over the course of decades in the
face of such violations. What did the Council do when
certain Member States undermined the provisions of
the Charter and prevented the Palestinian people from
exercising their right to creating an independent State,
with Jerusalem as its capital? What did the Council
do when those Member States themselves violated the
provisions of the Charter by invading Iraq? What did
the Council do when those same States violated the
provisions of the Charter and destroyed Libya? What
did the Council do when the same States violated
Charter provisions by fuelling terrorism worldwide and
called it the jihadi movement? What did the Council
do when the same States violated the provisions of the
Charter and flagrantly interfered in the internal affairs
of Member States and looted their resources, as is the
case with several African States?

The animosity of certain countries towards Syria
derives from the principle of arrogance of power,
rather than the rule of law. It reflects disrespect to the
purposes and principles of the Charter and a total lack
of serious accountability on the part of those who avail
themselves of the law of the jungle.
I would like to explain the unprecedented global
terrorist war that my country has been subjected to over
seven years, amid the silence of some, the complicity
of some, the indifference of some, overlooking of some
and conspiring of others. Certain influential countries
on the Council - I mean the United States, the United
Kingdom and France - have done all they can to
destroy Syria, its people and its political standing, in
order to settle scores with my country by manipulating
the provisions of the Charter and violating its
provisions so as to achieve their special agendas related
to interference at the expense of the blood and the fate
of the Syrian people. They have exploited the media,
and unfortunately some United Nations employees
distort reality about what is happening in Syria and to
lie to international public opinion regarding the human
suffering of Syrian civilians.

With regard to the suffering of Syrian civilians, it
has been inflicted on them by armed terrorist groups
for seven years. Such groups use civilians as human
shields, target hospitals and schools and use them
as military posts, camps and detention centres for
the people they abduct. In the past 20 days, the city
of Damascus has been subjected to 1,000 missile
and mortar attacks. Some Council members have
manipulated the principles of the United Nations
Charter and violated its provisions by giving orders to
their regional partners to invest all they can in media
and materials to support armed terrorist groups, by
issuing Wahabi fatwas for the shedding of Syrian blood,
by opening their borders to facilitate the entry into
Syria of tens of thousands of mercenary terrorists from
more than 100 Member States of this Organization, by
setting up training camps in neighbouring States and
by calling these terrorists moderate Syrian opposition.
Today those mercenary terrorists who come from more
than 100 states are simply called Syrian opposition. It
seems that their DNA has been altered, and now they
are just the Syrian moderate opposition.

It is no secret that this support to the terrorists
has cost those States $137 billion, as confirmed by the
former Prime Minister of Qatar. It is also no secret
that the former United States Ambassador to Syria
confirmed that his country had spent $12 billion over
the four years from 2014 to 2017 in order to change the
regime in Syria, as officials in Washington, DC, want
to do in Baghdad, Lybia, Syria, Venezuela and Iran.
WikiLeaks documents have revealed the policies of
successive American Administrations and shown that
the United States Government has been opposed to my
country since the American and British invasion ofIraq.
Those countries have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and violated its provisions by giving armed
terrorist groups toxic chemicals to use against innocent
civilians, subsequently manipulating the locales of such
incidents and providing the investigation mechanism
with concocting false information and fake testimony
to accuse the Syrian Government in order to find an
excuse to attack it.

There are 136 letters in the dossier I hold here,
sent to the Member States by the Syrian Government
and containing very important information on the
acquisition of chemical substances outside Syria by
terrorists for their use in Syria. Those chemicals were
indeed used in Syria and, as Ijust said, 136 letters were
written about them. The Council has the letters, but only
a few of its members were interested in reading them.

One of the most important political magazines,
the American Newsweek, published an article on
8 February written by Ian Wilkie entitled "Now Mattis
Admits There Was No Evidence Assad Used Poison
Gas on His People". The United States Secretary of
Defence admits in that article that there is no proof of
the use of toxic gas by the Syrian Government against it
people, neither in Khan Shaykhun nor in Al-Ghouta in
2013. The French Minister of Defence, Florence Parly,
also said yesterday, like her American counterpart, that
there is no documented proof of the use of chlorine
gas by the Syrian Government. Yet the words of the
French Minister did not prevent her President from
threatening to stage an aggression against my country,
Syria, as the former United States Administration did.
These countries have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and breached its provisions when they tried
to legitimize the recurring attacks perpetrated by the
forces of what is called the International Coalition, led
by the United States, the most recent of which was this
illegitimate coalition's attack on 8 February on north-
eastern Deir ez-Zor, against Syrian popular forces
fighting terrorist Da'esh. This region, which is 30
kilometres wide and 65 kilometres long, and which was
attacked by the Syrian popular forces against Da'esh,
is under United States protection. Da'esh, which we
defeated in Deir ez-Zor and Albuqmal, left these two
cities under American protection and entrenched its
presence in the region along the Syrian-Iraqi borders.
When the Syrian popular forces attacked Da'esh there,
they were shelled by the United States Air Force. This
is clearly yet another example of the Coalition's real
mission and the role played by Washington, DC. in
supporting the terrorist organization Da'esh, as it has
done in the past, when the United States targeted Syrian
Arab Army sites in Jabal Al-Thardah, near Deir ez-Zor,
on 17 September 2016, enabling Da'esh to advance and
occupy areas in Jabal Al-Thardah.

The Coalition has deliberately destroyed 90 per
cent of the Syrian city of Raqqa and has failed to uphold
its commitment to defusing tens of thousands of mines
left behind by Da'esh before abandoning the city and
perpetrating terrorist acts under its two umbrellas - the
United States, east of the Euphrates, and Turkey, north
of Afrin. It is unfortunate that in his statement, to which
I listened carefully, the Special Envoy made no mention
of the occupation of various areas in my country by the
United States and Turkey. He did say that there was a
cross-border dispute in Afrin, but did not mention the
illegitimate Turkish presence in my country and the
attack on the Syrian city of Afrin.

These States have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and violated its provisions when they stayed
silent, along with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, with regard to the repeated attacks by
Israel's occupation forces on areas of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the most recent being their act of aggression
on 10 February, which my United States colleague has
attempted to justify by claiming that it was a response
to an Iranian drone's flight over occupied Palestinian
territory. That is not true; it is false and misleading. It is
not the first time that we have witnessed Israeli acts of
aggression against the sovereignty of my country. Every
member of the Council is aware that Israel continued
to violate my country's sovereignty until one of its
military planes was brought down by a Syrian rocket
over occupied Palestine. Israel has consistently violated
my country's sovereignty - and I would like to remind
the Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of that.

The Council has been prevented from issuing
statements condemning terrorist attacks by military
organizations and their launching of more than
1,000 missiles and mortars, most recently targeting
residential streets and suburbs, diplomatic missions,
infrastructure and churches in Damascus and other
cities. Those acts of aggression have resulted in dozens
of civilian deaths and hundreds wounded, most of them
women and children.

These States have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and violated its provisions when they talk about
what they call besieged areas in eastern Ghouta and the
Damascus countryside. They have forgotten that the
residents of eastern Ghouta have been besieged from
within by armed terrorist groups that are operating from
there, using civilians as human shields and attempting
to divert humanitarian convoys for the benefit of their
supporters or to sell their supplies to desperate people
at exorbitant prices, as happened in eastern Aleppo.

At the time when the United States first decided
unilaterally and illegitimately to intervene militarily
in my country, Washington stated that its goal was
fighting Da'esh. After that, it changed its mind, saying
that it was in Syria to establish permanent military
bases for safeguarding the strategic security of the
United States and its allies. It later changed its mind
once again, saying that the purpose of its presence in
Syria was to establish armed militias in opposition to
the Syrian Government and to enable them to exploit
oil, gas, water and hydrocarbons and other resources
in Syria - in other words, they wanted to establish a
mini-State. Subsequently, it changed its thinking once
more, stating that it would remain in Syria even if
Da'esh was defeated. It said the same thing about Iraq,
in order to justify the presence of their forces there. It
has continued to change its mind, saying that it would
leave Syria only if a political settlement was reached
and the security of its allies was assured. Most recently,
it has stated that it is in Syria to fight Iran, Hizbullah
and Russia. It has shifted its nuclear strategy and is
considering the possibility of using nuclear weapons.
Tomorrow, perhaps, it will tell us that it is in Syria to
fight Martians from the Milky Way.

The Syrian Government commends the Russian
Federation's efforts, and specifically President
Vladimir Putin's initiative in hosting the Syrian
National Dialogue Conference in Sochi, which was yet
another demonstration of the fact that the only way to
achieve the aims of the political process in Syria is with
Syrian oversight and with no foreign interference of any
kind. The conference participants represented every
sector of Syrian society - political, social, cultural,
economic, and more. Two documents were adopted
by an overwhelming majority, a final statement and a
documentcalling forthe establishment ofa constitutional
committee. I very much hope that the results that Sochi
has produced will not be misinterpreted.

The final statement, voted on and amended by
the Syrian participants, was adopted unanimously by
a broad majority through a democratic vote, based
on the procedures established for the conference. It
represents the basic pillar of the political process that
will produce future dialogue and discussion, rooted
in a solution that, assuming no foreign interference,
will be entirely Syrian-led. The final statement
represents a legitimate foundation for any political
process, especially considering that it reflects national
principles that have unanimous support in Syria and
cannot be questioned - respect for Syria's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and the Syrian people's right to
choose their own political and economic system and to
maintain the Syrian Arab Army and armed forces.

Given the principle that the Syrian people
themselves must determine their future and their
Constitution, participants in the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi adopted a resolution to
establish a constitutional committee. Consequently,
the committee should be established according to the
resolution voted on by the Syrians. The resolution
identified the tasks of the committee, and the
participants in the Congress did not grant the Special
Envoy to Syria any tutelage, delegation or authority to
establish the constitutional committee. We in Syria are
committed to the decision taken by the participants of
the Congress. We are not concerned with any committee
set up by foreign stakeholders, and will not deal with
the results of its discussions or with anything related to
it. The constitutional issue is a sovereign one.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
remains committed to any political course that would
end the bloodshed of the Syrian people, preserve
my country's unity and independence, ensure its
sovereignty and uphold the principle of the Syrian
people to determine their own future through Syrian
dialogue. This firm principle has been underscored
by all relevant Security Council resolutions on the
Syrian crisis.

In conclusion, I would like to respond to my
colleague of the United States, who called for peace in
Syria and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015),
which was approved by her country. The resolution
underscores the need to maintain the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of my country,
Syria. Given that the resolution, which was approved
by Washington, DC, underscores the need to maintain
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of my country, Syria, then why does the United States
have forces in parts of my country? Has the United
States of America not violated the very resolution that

its delegation voted in favour ofin the Council, where it
was unanimously adopted?

