Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I should like to express my sincerest thanks
and appreciation to the delegations of Sweden and the
United States of America for their efforts in preparing the
draft resolution before us, which has the support of all
members of the Security Council. We should also like to
commend the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia for its important
work, and to pay tribute to the President of the Tribunal,
Mrs. Gabrielle Kirk McDonald.

The meeting last 12 February between members of
the Security Council and the President of the Tribunal
provided an important opportunity for learning about the
concerns of the Tribunal and the situations with which it
has to deal. In this connection, we hope that the draft
resolution before us has met all of these concerns, and we
hope that it will contribute to moving the work of the
Tribunal forward so that it can fulfil its mandate and its
tasks as soon as possible.

My delegation urges the various parties in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with
the International Tribunal. In this respect, we should like
to express our great satisfaction with regard to the
progress achieved in the past few months and the increase
in the number of people who have surrendered voluntarily
to the Tribunal either individually or through various
bodies and international institutions. The Security
Council's adoption of this draft resolution today will
enable us to have high hopes for the efforts of the
Tribunal, which we expect will greatly improve over the
coming months.

We believe that all those who are responsible for
crimes of ethnic genocide and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law in the former Yugoslavia
should receive just retribution for their crimes. My
delegation supports this draft resolution and will vote in
favour of it. We hope that its adoption will promote the
work and increase the effectiveness of the International
Tribunal.

