Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes you to the Council,
Mr. President, to preside over this meeting. We also
wish to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Mr.
Solana, Mr. Moussa and Mr. Djinnit for their presence
and for their statements.
In recent years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have proven that the civilian component is
playing a greater role than ever in peace-building.
Strengthening the effectiveness of the civilian
component is of great importance to the success of
peacekeeping operations and to endeavours to assist
the parties concerned in making a smooth transition
from conflict to peace-building. The issue deserves
serious attention from the Security Council, therefore.
the convening of this meeting is of urgent necessity
and timeliness.

I would like here to make four observations.
First, in conflict management, the roles of military
action and that of the civilian elements are closely
interrelated and predicated on one another. There can
be no reconstruction without peace and no stability
without reconstruction. Military success guarantees the
presence of a civilian role, which is an essential and
indispensable element in any post-conflict
reconstruction.

Secondly, civilian assistance should be provided
in accordance with specific circumstances and needs.
Conflicts in various parts of the world vary greatly as
do actual needs in the field of reconstruction. When
providing civilian assistance, the international
community should focus its measures and avoid
activities which should be performed by others.

Thirdly, the role of existing United Nations
mechanisms must be brought into full play with
increased efficiency. The various parties of the United
Nations system have accumulated a wealth of
experience in post-conflict reconstruction and have
established specific practices and mechanisms. In
strengthening the role of the civilian element, we must
summarize and draw upon past successes and make full
use of available resources so that existing parties can
each do their part and avoid duplicating their actions.

Fourthly, priority must be given to assisting
regional and subregional organizations to enhance their
capacities. In recent years, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and
others are increasingly active in peacekeeping and
reconstruction. However, due to their limited
capacities, they have yet to tap potentials in civilian
and other areas. Increasing the assistance of relevant
organizations in the civilian sector and enhancing
capacities should be one of the priorities of the next
phase of work of the United Nations.

In recent years, China has played an active role in
the military sector of peacekeeping operations and has,
at the same time, increased its participation in the
civilian sector. This month, China will send a team of
civilian police - for the first time - to Haiti, to help
maintain public order.

China is ready to work with the relevant parties
to carry out exchanges and jointly promote and
strengthen the role of the civilian sector in
reconstruction and sustainable development.

