Mr. Martin: I would like to express appreciation
to the Philippines presidency for deciding to highlight
the role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building,
and to the Council as a whole for taking another
significant step in its openness to hearing directly from
non-governmental organizations.

It is a particular privilege for the International
Center for Transitional Justice to address the Council.
Our Centre, which has offices in New York and Cape
Town, assists countries confronting legacies of mass
atrocity or human rights abuse. We are currently
engaged with more than 20 countries, and we work
closely with United Nations departments and agencies,
especially in countries where the United Nations is
engaged in post-conflict peace-building.

Above all, we work closely with local civil
society partners. Notwithstanding the significant
efforts of civil society organizations working
internationally, the more important sector of civil
society comprises the myriad national and local
organizations that must often confront acute challenges
of resources and security, particularly in post-conflict
societies. Hearing their voices is more important, but
more difficult, than hearing ours. Without purporting to
speak for them, we can reflect something of the
experience of our local partners and see it as the
responsibility of international non-governmental
organizations to create more opportunities for local
voices to be heard.

It is no surprise that the initiative in considering
the role of civil society should have come from the
Philippines, a country renowned for having a vibrant,
energetic and diverse civil society. In this context, we
can certainly look to the Philippines for guidance and
inspiration.

One of the most fundamental challenges of post-
conflict peace-building is to confront the past while
building a just foundation for the future. There is no
one-size-fits-all approach, and in our work the
International Center for Transitional Justice has
learned a crucial lesson: whatever the answers are, they
must emerge from or resonate within civil society.

Strategies to address past abuses generally
include criminal prosecution of perpetrators of serious
crimes; truth commissions; reparations packages,
including, but not limited to, financial compensation;
efforts to honour the memory of victims; rigorous
analysis of institutional culpability; efforts to reform
institutions, including vetting of personnel; and
reintegration and reconciliation initiatives.

These measures should be seen as
complementary, not as alternatives, and a strategy
should be debated and developed in a comprehensive
manner. Alongside that strategy must be a parallel and
related strategy for building the rule of law for the
future, which the Council has recognized as crucial to
peace-building.

Ideally, a democratic Government would set these
strategies after a national debate and the fullest
consultation with civil society, informed by
international standards and best practices. In post-
conflict reality, political leadership may be divided,
fragile and of untested legitimacy, with the United
Nations and the international community heavily
involved in the decision-making, or, in extreme cases,
bearing formal transitional authority. This reality may
make it difficult, but also more vital, to engage civil
society, as premature government or international
decisions will prejudice success.
During the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), the
establishment of the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation was preceded by intense civil
society debate, informed by international experience.
As a result, the Commission not only reflects best
practices from around the world, but incorporates a
particularly successful innovation drawing on East
Timorese tradition: community reconciliation
processes involving the most local civil society,
including traditional leaders.

In Sierra Leone, too, the establishment of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission was preceded by
public workshops and conferences, with strong civil
society engagement, which helped incorporate policies
relating to children, women and the involvement of
traditional leaders in community reconciliation. In both
East Timor and Sierra Leone, the selection of
Commissioners was a transparent process with a
central role for civil society.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
however, the prospects for a successful truth
commission have been prejudiced by inappropriate
political appointments, preceding reflection on the
commission's role, and insufficient consultation with
local civil society. In Liberia, too, the appointment of
truth commission members has preceded any
meaningful civil society engagement or legislative
mandate, hindering the commission's progress.

Civil society engagement is equally essential for
the success of other transitional justice measures. The
ability of reparations to afford some satisfaction to
victims is facilitated by victim and civil society
participation in the design and implementation of
programmes, while the mobilization of significant
resources is likely to require the support of a broad
coalition.

Prosecution of major perpetrators is, of course, a
State responsibility, but it is sometimes only through
the efforts of civil society and victim groups that the
State is persuaded to act against impunity. Each
successful prosecution concerning military
responsibility for atrocities against civilians in
Guatemala succeeded only because civil society carried
out most of the relevant investigations and appeared in
court on behalf of the victims. In Timor-Leste, civil
society organizations are instrumental in ensuring that
the emerging judicial system conforms to international
standards of due process and in encouraging judicial
independence. The Council should listen to civil
society voices in Timor-Leste and Indonesia, and not
only to Government views, regarding the unacceptable
ongoing impunity of the major perpetrators of crimes
against humanity in East Timor in 1999 and earlier.

Where prosecutions are proceeding, their
intended contribution to restoring or establishing trust
in the rule of law requires effective outreach into
victim communities. The Special Court for Sierra
Leone has been hugely assisted by local civil society
organizations in its outreach. In Rwanda, the local
showings and discussions of video recordings of
perpetrator trials by a civil society organization have
increased understanding in communities where victims
and perpetrators now live together.

Efforts to build the rule of law have too often
proceeded as if they are technical exercises to develop
judicial, police and corrections systems according to
external models. A rule-of-law strategy must be rooted
in local conditions and developed with local civil
society. Despite some positive examples, this is as yet
a poorly developed aspect of rule-of-law peace-
building.

The involvement of local and national civil
society is not only helpful in designing more
satisfactory approaches; it is irreplaceable if peace and
justice are the goals. Yet there are challenges in
securing broad, representative civil society
participation. The most obvious partners may be those
organizations with pre-existing capacity, while victim
organizations may be non-existent or disempowered.
Emphasis should be placed on capacity-building, on
reaching out beyond the capital and particularly on the
importance of involving women's organizations in all
elements of peace-building. The direct participation of
women in official institutions must be an explicit
priority, but it is through civil society participation that
women's contribution to peace-building can be more
fully realized.

The direct access of civil society organizations to
the Security Council can be valuable to both, and we
welcome the recommendations of the Panel of Eminent
Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations for
enhancing such access. We strongly support the Panel's
insistence that this should occur not only in New York,
but whenever the Council goes on mission to post-
conflict countries, where its members can be more
accessible to local civil society organizations as well as
to the local representatives of international non-
governmental organizations. The voices of civil society
must be heard when peace settlements are being
negotiated and when missions to implement them are
being planned and post-conflict needs assessed.

But the regular openness to civil society will
depend on the peace-building missions and agencies in
the field. There is a clear need to ensure that best
practice is spread to missions that local civil societies
do not currently perceive as open to their advice and
involvement. The expectations that the Council
conveys to the leaders of the missions it mandates and
the extent to which it remains alert to the involvement
of civil society are crucial to promote the effectiveness
of the alliance between the United Nations and civil
society, and thus the effectiveness of peace-building
itself.

