Mr. Satoh (Japan): At the outset, Sir, I should like to
express my sincere appreciation to you for convening, for
the fourth time this month, an open debate of the Security
Council. I wish also to welcome the Secretary-General's
progress report on Africa which was issued last Saturday,
and to thank the Secretary-General for the statement he
delivered yesterday morning.

Although the purpose of this meeting is to consider the
seemingly intractable problems confronting African
countries, I would like first to note some positive
developments that have taken place in Africa in recent
years. The importance of Africa in the international
community cannot be overstated, and the progress we are
witnessing in Africa in development, democratization and
regional cooperation is indeed reassuring to the entire
international community. In the course of this past year
alone, for example, we have seen the transition to a civilian
regime in Nigeria, the holding for the second time of
democratic elections in South Africa, and the successful
presidential election held in Algeria.
I would also like to note the peace agreement that was
signed in Lome between the Government of Sierra Leone
and the rebel group, the Revolutionary United Front, and
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement between the Government
and rebel groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There are also hopeful signs of progress towards
a settlement of the border dispute between Ethiopia and
Eritrea. And on the economic front, many African
countries have registered annual gross domestic product
growth rates of well over 5 per cent during the course of
this decade.

We also need to recognize the admirable activities
which regional organizations have been undertaking in
order to advance the cause of peace and prosperity in
Africa. The roles that the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern African Development
Community have been playing in maintaining security and
promoting economic development in the western and
southern African regions are crucially important and
highly commendable. It is also encouraging that the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit, held in
Algeria this July under the leadership of President
Bouteflika in his capacity as Chairman of the OAU,
attracted the participation of an unprecedented number of
heads of State or Government. Having attended the
summit as head of Japan's observer mission, I witnessed
and admired a new dynamism that is emerging in Africa.

While we are encouraged by these positive
developments, the fact remains that many countries in
Africa are faced with difficult obstacles as they struggle
to achieve political stability and to pursue economic and
social development. Of the most immediate concern are
grinding poverty and the recurrence of conflicts, which
have resulted in 8 million refugees and displaced persons.
Unless these problems are resolved, prospects for
international stability and prosperity in the new
millennium will not be promising.

As underlined by the report of the Secretary-General
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa, poverty and
conflict are interrelated. Indeed, in many regions of the
continent we are witnessing a vicious circle in which
poverty is exacerbated by frequent conflicts at the same
time that poverty itself is one of the causes of the
occurrence and recurrence of conflict. Hence, poverty is
an issue which should be our primary focus now and in
the twenty-first century, with the United Nations, other
international organizations, States and civil society
coordinating their efforts towards its alleviation.

 
The Tokyo Agenda for Action adopted at the Second
Tokyo International Conference on African Development
(TICAD II), which Japan co-hosted with the United Nations
last October, calls for a combination of efforts and
cooperation to cope with the questions of poverty and
conflict. These include increased efforts by African
countries themselves, cooperation among African countries,
developed countries and international organizations and
cooperation between Asia and Africa. The TICAD process
has already entered the implementation stage. Last month
Japan co-hosted, with the Government of Kenya, the United
Nations Development Programme and the International
Monetary Fund, a seminar on debt management, and Japan
has established, with the cooperation of the Government of
Malaysia, the Asia-Africa Investment and Technology
Promotion Centre in Kuala Lumpur for the purpose of
facilitating flows of investment and trade information with
regard to Africa. Japan is also planning to hold four
subregional review conferences in Africa by the end of the
year 2000 with the aim of further promoting
implementation of the Tokyo Agenda for Action.

Debt is the most serious issue facing many African
countries. Japan, for its part, has been contributing to the
alleviation of debt problems by rescheduling debts and
extending grant aid for debt relief, and will make further
efforts to address this difficult problem by implementing
the commitment it made at the G-7 summit meeting in
Cologne in June. Japan is also determined to continue to
extend effective, efficient and high-quality official
development assistance to African countries, despite its
domestic budgetary difficulties, while at the same time
strengthening its cooperation with the various bodies and
agencies of the United Nations.

In conflict prevention, my Government has long
advocated a comprehensive approach which embraces
conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and
peace-building, post-conflict reconstruction and
development, the establishment of good governance and the
elimination of potential causes of conflict, most particularly
poverty.

With regard to the issues of peacekeeping and
peace-building, we believe that the roles of regional
organizations such as OAU and the Economic Community
of West African States, must be strengthened further. Close
cooperation between those regional organizations and the
United Nations is without a doubt crucial to maximizing
international efforts to bring peace to the troubled countries.
With this in mind, the Japanese Government has been
making financial contributions to the OAU Peace Fund.

On the issue of small arms, to which Japan gives the
highest priority, we strongly hope that the General
Assembly will adopt, during this session, a resolution
endorsing the report of the Secretary-General prepared
with the assistance of the Group of Governmental Experts
on Small Arms (A/54/258). Japan also intends to
contribute to the success of the international conference
on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects, which is to be
held no later than 2001.

We also regard it as a matter of high priority to
extend assistance to landmine Victims, many of whom are
children. In December 1997, Japan announced the Zero
Victims Programme and pledged financial support of
approximately $80 million for mine clearance and victim
assistance during the subsequent five-year period. To date,
Japan's contributions amount to about $45 million.

Post-conflict reconstruction and development is
another important area in which international cooperation
is required. Among many other issues involved, the
reintegration of ex-combatants, particularly children
abused as soldiers, should be given high priority, for the
success of this process is the key to preventing the
recurrence of conflicts.

The Government of Japan, for its part, is prepared to
support all the aspects of post-conflict reconstruction and
development, ranging from the rehabilitation of refugees
and displaced persons to the reintegration of
ex-combatants, to the restoration of damaged lives and to
the reconstruction and development of the economies of
the countries concerned. In this context, I would stress
that field activities to cope with humanitarian
emergencies, which often start before the fighting ends,
should be well coordinated with other activities related to
reconstruction and development.

There is no doubt that African countries, with their
tremendous potential, can become important partners in
the global efforts for peace and prosperity. We sincerely
hope that the Security Council will continue to apply its
experience, expertise and wisdom to the resolution of
Africa's problems.

Japan is advocating that the international community
should place a more distinct focus on human security as
we enter the next millennium. Poverty and conflict are
two major threats to human security in Africa. In other
words, freedom from poverty and conflict is essential in
order to enhance human security in Africa. Recognizing
this, Japan will continue to work for the betterment of

 

conditions in Africa, with implementation of the TICAD
process as the central means towards that end.
