Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, I should like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan for having honoured us with his presence. I
should also like to join my colleagues in welcoming
the Ministers from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, and the
Managing Director of the World Bank. I should also to
thank the Secretary-General for his insightful remarks.

After 15 years and a dozen major operations,
peacebuilding remains a vast, complex and only
partially successful experiment. Important lessons have
been learned along the way, yet there is still much that
we need to learn about building the conditions for a
durable peace in war-torn States.

A commonly agreed upon element of
peacebuilding is the need for a coordinated and
integrated strategy that defines critical peacebuilding
priorities. Such strategies should be forged at the
country level through dialogue with national actors.
The alignment of action and the resources behind it is
critical to successful peacebuilding. Due to the
increased complexity of post-conflict reconstruction
processes, it is fundamental that this strategy be
flexible and subject to timely review according to
evolving peacebuilding priorities and developments on
the ground.

Perhaps the most common criticism of
peacebuilding to date has been that international
agencies are not sufficiently sensitive to the unique
characteristics of each host country. Indeed, a
particular institutional solution or sequence of events is
not necessarily appropriate in one country simply
because it has been used with relative success in
another conflict-affected country. Countries have
unique histories and traditions of social organization,
which create different challenges and opportunities for
conflict resolution. Therefore, it is not possible to
develop a generic blueprint for peacebuilding
engagement. Such engagement should be context-
sensitive and address the underlying causes of the
conflict.

The main objectives of peacebuilding are
establishing security, building confidence in a political
process, expanding core national capacity and
achieving socio-economic development, as we all
know. It is important, however, to identify the activities
which best contribute to achieving these objectives
according to the country-specific situation and its
actual needs. Since these objectives are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing, it is of fundamental
importance that the peacebuilding framework be
clearly articulated and ensure coherence among the
objectives, whether at the level of planning or of
implementation.

Ensuring security and preventing new eruptions
of violence are the foremost goals of any peacebuilding
process. Without the reasonable assurance of physical
security for the bulk of the population, there is little
hope of achieving progress on institution-building,
inter-community reconciliation, reconstruction or
development. Therefore, security sector reform is
essential and should be nationally owned from the
outset. Effective security sector reform requires
effective disarmament; the creation of security forces
that are well trained, disciplined and politically neutral;
and a security sector that is under the civilian oversight
of a democratic Government.

A basic level of political will and commitment on
the part of national actors is a precondition for
peacebuilding. Political issues that remain unaddressed
or only partially addressed by peace agreements may
call, after such an agreement is signed, for sustained
mediation efforts as part of a coherent approach to
peacebuilding. Successful peacebuilding efforts require
the promotion of a participatory process of healing and
reconciliation through inclusive dialogue.

Initiating change in the political culture of a
society is one of the most difficult aspects of any post-
conflict transition. It requires long-term strategies
involving large segments of society and could include
extensive education, sensitivity campaigns and
consensus-building within society. These more
intangible aspects of peacebuilding are frequently
overlooked in favour of more technical rebuilding and
assistance. Nonetheless, they are essential to long-term
change. The people must be at the heart of any search
for solutions to conflict and efforts to consolidate
peace.

A poor governance framework will undermine the
sustainability of peace. Thus, it is essential that the
peacebuilding process advance and support the
establishment of democratic, transparent and
accountable governance and the reconstruction of well-
functioning State institutions. The delivery of early
peace dividends includes the provision of basic
services. Countries in conflict often experience a
serious deterioration in or even the complete
destruction of their systems of governance, service
delivery and economic production. Successful
peacebuilding requires helping societies to reverse
these trends.

Peacebuilding also requires coherent responses to
the needs of vulnerable people through programmes
and services to reintegrate repatriated refugees and
ex-combatants into civil society, to resettle internally
displaced persons and to assist war-affected
populations in general. Women, in particular, are key to
peacebuilding. Their full participation in the
peacebuilding process, both as victims of conflict and
as important drivers of recovery and development, is
essential.

But how do we ensure that peacebuilding efforts
are perceived as legitimate in the eyes of those they are
trying to help? The answer is to maximize local
ownership by involving populations as quickly and
extensively as possible in their own governance.
National actors are the engines and the drivers of the
peacebuilding process. They are able to identify the
most pressing needs of their society and the most
effective means of addressing them. Hence, national
authorities must take primary responsibility for re-
establishing the key institutions of security, governance
and economic recovery, with the support of the United
Nations and international partners.
Since the greatest resources for a durable peace
are always rooted in the local people and their culture,
this peace should be built from the bottom up by
enhancing sustainable citizen-based peacebuilding
initiatives and by opening up public political spaces in
order to allow institutions of civil society to flourish.
To this end, peacebuilding efforts should promote
initiatives that incorporate citizen-based activities,
including community peace projects and other
grassroots initiatives, in order to empower civil society
and to deepen its capacity for non-violent social
change.

Financial resources are, of course, essential
prerequisites without which effective leadership,
common strategies and more predictable support
capacity remain only theoretical paradigms.

Finally, when large-scale violence ends, the
challenges facing the leadership and people of a
country are enormous, and peace is often very fragile.
International support in such complex and rapidly
evolving situations is of fundamental importance and
requires Member States and international organizations
to align their assistance and engagement in support of
an early and prioritized peacebuilding framework in a
flexible and predictable manner.

Civil wars, by definition, are fought primarily
within the boundaries of a single State, but they are
rarely isolated from political and economic dynamics
in the surrounding region. Violence in one country is
often part of a larger, regional constellation of conflict.
Hence, the importance of cooperation with regional
organizations, given the transnational nature of many
peacebuilding challenges. The Peacebuilding
Commission is the main United Nations platform for
international engagement in post-conflict countries; we
look forward to this year's review, which will provide
an opportunity to improve the Commission's
effectiveness in fulfilling its mandate and enhancing its
relationship with the Council.

Lebanon supports the adoption of the draft
presidential statement on peacebuilding.

