Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciations to you, Madam
President, for holding this debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would also like to welcome and thank
the Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement, as
well as Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing.

As the latest report (S/2015/942) of the Secretary-
General suggests, Afghanistan continues to face
major security, economic and political challenges.
Those challenges, as well as such cross-cutting issues
as counter-narcotics, displacement and refugees are
interconnected in nature. The continued support of the
international community is needed to help the National
Unity Government in addressing those challenges, in
the framework of the national ownership and leadership
of the Government of Afghanistan.

The 19 per cent increase in the number of security-
related incidents a compared with the same period
in 2014, and the deterioration of security, especially
in northern and western Afghanistan, is a matter of
concern. The capture of Kunduz and 16 other district
centeres during the reporting period is another alarming
sign that the Taliban and other violent extremist groups
are on the rise and threaten fghanistan and the region.
The report of the Secretary General once again refers to
the emergence of Daesh and its affiliate in Afghanistan,
along with a spectrum of other terrorist and extremist
groups. That is another reason for international and
regional Powers to support and assist the National
Unity Government on all fronts, especially in its fight
against terrorism.

Iran condemns all violent attacks committed on
the part of the Taliban and all other terrorist groups, as
well as any cooperation with them, because we believe
that such cooperation encourages them in their odious
behaviour and is counterproductive to establishing
peace in Afghanistan.

Strengthening regional cooperation is the path
to consolidating peace and economic development in
Afghanistan. We see the expansion of our political
and economic ties with neighbouring Afghanistan as
a priority. We see great potential results to explored in
cooperation with Afghanistan, particularly on security
matters, counter-narcotics efforts, developing projects
and economic cooperation in the fields ofinfrastructure
and agriculture, as well as in finding a durable solution
for Afghan refugees.

During the reporting period, the first expert meeting
on the Islamic Republic of Iran-India-Afghanistan
Agreement on Transit and International Transportation
Cooperation was held in Tehran in order to finalize
the Chahbahar port facilities agreement between the
three countries. Once completed, that port will provide
Afghanistan, a land-locked country, with access to
international waters and will be very beneficial for
Afghanistan's development. The completion of the
two ongoing railroad projects from Iran to the Afghan
cities of Harat and Farah will also boost economic
activity between the two countries and in the region.
The official visits of Afghanistan's Minister of Urban
Development and Minister of Mines and Petroleum to
Iran in October also concentrated on investment and
infrastructure issues.

With regard to counter-narcotics efforts, the
Secretary-General's latest report suggests a 19 per cent
decrease in opium poppy cultivation compared to 2014,
but that is mainly attributed to a drop in the opium yield
per hectare, rather than to the success in national and
international efforts. We are particularly concerned
about opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan. That
phenomenon is due mainly to prevailing insecurity
and poverty. It is a real threat to the region and beyond
and should be addressed by the entire international
community and in a very serious and comprehensive
manner, which unfortunately has not been the case. We
welcome the regional initiatives taken by the countries
of the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran to that end.

The international community should especially
appreciate and support the triangular initiative on
cooperation in countering narcotics among Afghanistan,
Iran and Pakistan. That is a useful initiative that will
benefit Afghanistan, as well as transit and destination
countries, and must be supported by the international
community. The strong support and commitment
of international donors, the Afghan authorities and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are
essential to deter the menace of drug cultivation and
drug trafficking. Narcotics are not only a social and
health challenge, but also, and more importantly, a
major source of income for terrorist an extremist group,
which is now a top priority for the Council and the
international community.

We support the work of Tripartite Commission
in planning the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual
repatriation of Afghan refugees, while continuing
to support the remaining Afghan refugees through
sharing our own community services, such as health
care and education. At the same time, we consider
the decrease in voluntary repatriation as an important
reason to improve living conditions inside Afghanistan
in order to reverse that trend. We support UNAMA
and the United Nations agencies in their efforts to
provide development and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan through robust regional engagement on
issues such as border security, immigration, the return
of refugees and drug control measures.

The role of UNAMA should be further streamlined,
taking into account the priorities of the Government as
the main partner, as well as those of the international
donor communities, in order to be able to effectively
implement its mandate. We firmly believe that
Afghanistan should become the focus of regional and
international cooperation, rather than a subject for
competition. That is the only approach that will help
strengthen peace, security and development in the
region.

In conclusion, Iran once again expresses its
full support for the promotion of security, stability
and comprehensive and sustainable development
in Afghanistan and the efforts of the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan in that regard.

