Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere congratulations to Portugal on its accession to
the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank it
for holding this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I also thank the Secretary-
General, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their respective
briefings.

At the most recent open debate on this item
(S/PV.6531), the Government of Japan welcomed the
effective and timely role played by the Security
Council in response to the situations in Libya and Cote
d'Ivoire in May. However, the difficulties surrounding
the protection of civilians in conflicts have been
further complicated, as we have seen in the recent
unrest in Syria and Yemen, which have witnessed an
increasing number of civilian casualties.

Although the Government of Japan regrets that
the Security Council failed to adopt a resolution on
Syria, it nevertheless welcomes the end of conflict in
Libya and stresses that the verification of actions taken
during that conflict will be crucial to ensuring
accountability. The Government of Japan also hopes
that the Government of Libya will steadily implement a
process to build a democratic State governed by law, in
cooperation with the United Nations. With regard to
Yemen, the Government of Japan welcomes resolution

11-5866]
2014 (2011) requesting that attacks against civilians be
suspended and that human rights and humanitarian law
be respected. My Government looks forward to the
close monitoring of the implementation of that
resolution.

The Security Council is responsible for
international peace and security, and its role in the
protection of civilians is important. Nonetheless, the
Security Council needs to address the issue in a
comprehensive manner, and in this regard collaboration
with a wide range of partners, such as the International
Criminal Court (ICC), the Human Rights Council, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
and other humanitarian agencies and regional
organizations, is truly indispensable. Cote d'Ivoire and
Libya are good examples of such collaboration
between the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council.

Securing the rule of law and ensuring that justice
is done can pave the way for the prevention and
suppression of conflict. It is important for the Security
Council to respond promptly and to continue to fight
against impunity by, for example, referring cases to the
ICC, as appropriate. However, I would like to stress
that in order for referrals to the ICC to be viable, the
genuine cooperation of all Member States, including
parties to the Rome Statute, is indispensable.

In addition, we should note that there exist other
measures to ensure accountability when cooperating
with the countries in question, such as dispatching an
international commission of inquiry through the
Human Rights Council, as well as the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
under the First Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949.

There exist various mechanisms within the
United Nations that contribute to the protection of
civilians. The challenge remains to ensure their
effectiveness. The Government of Japan is resolved to
continue to make genuine efforts to ensure that the
United Nations addresses the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in a comprehensive and
effective manner.

