Mr. Garcia Gonzalez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to express my delegation's
satisfaction with your timely initiative, Madame
President, to convene today's open debate in the
Security Council on the maintenance of peace and
international security and the interdependence between
security and development. This initiative under the
presidency of Brazil in the Security Council and the
leadership of its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, clearly reflects the concern of the
international community to tackle in greater depth the
existing links between security and development and
their relationship with successful peacebuilding
strategies in post-conflict situations.

El Salvador, as a post-conflict country that has
gone through a peacebuilding process with the support
of the international community, recognizes the
importance of considering this issue, primarily because
we see that the root of conflicts can most often be
found in the inability of States and their political
classes to offer a timely and appropriate response to the
basic needs of the population while at the same time
taking into account criteria for inclusion and social
justice.

In this context, I recall the recognition by our
heads of State and Government, at the Millennium
Summit and at the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals, that peace and
security, development and human rights are the pillars
of the United Nations system and the foundations for
collective security and well-being. They also
recognized that development, peace and security and
human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.

El Salvador has taken note of the debates held by
the Security Council in the past with regard to the
interrelations among the maintenance of peace,
peacebuilding and the need to adopt a broad and
comprehensive approach to the issue of peace and
security.

We agree with other delegations that the
convening of today's debate, in particular, can help
further clarify Member States' vision of how better to
provide a climate for cooperation and complementarity
among the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. El Salvador
welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in that regard and centres its hopes on the
concrete contributions of the PBC in its country-
specific configurations showing the potential for
continually strengthening synergies among the various
main bodies of the Organization.

The complexity and depth of the challenges
facing many developing countries - particularly with
regard to the insecurity of citizens, drug-trafficking,
transnational organized crime and gangs - mean that
we need to reflect on the urgent need to promote
strategies that provide effective security for all with
freedom for all and equity among all. The security of
citizens is therefore essential for human development.
As was quite rightly pointed out by the Secretary-
General, Ban Ki-moon, "Without development, we will
not have security, and without security, we will not
achieve development."

The way in which this issue is tackled in the
international sphere primarily involves the
complementary efforts of dialogue and coordination
among the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council on the one hand, and
the active role of Member States themselves, civil
society and international organizations, as strategic
allies, on the other.

Finally, El Salvador trusts that the Security
Council will continue to pay attention to these
considerations, which surely will contribute to the
future success of its work in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

