Mr. Mahiga: I thank you, Sir, for giving me this
opportunity to update the Council on the situation in
Somalia. I welcome the presence of Mr. Bellingham,
who is presiding over today's meeting, as well as the
presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

During the first Somali National Consultative
Constitutional Conference, Principles were adopted on
the reform of Parliament, elections, a Constituent
Assembly, the Independent Electoral Commission, the
new Parliament, and the sequencing of the timelines
for ending the transition in August 2012. The second
Garowe Conference deliberated on operationalizing the
Garowe Principles. Safeguards and oversight procedures
with checks and balances in selecting memberships
have been introduced. The deliberations at the second
Garowe Conference also considered key constitutional
provisions related to federalism, the system of
Government and other important constitutional issues
such as land policy, citizenship and Sharia law, which
have to be included in the draft Constitution.
3
The challenges before us are in implementing the
Garowe process within a very tight time frame. The
drafting of the constitution has to be completed by the
end of this month. The selection process to the 1,000-
member Constituent Assembly from over eight
community-based constituencies, including women,
must be completed in eight weeks for the provisional
adoption of the constitution by the end of April. This is
an enormous exercise in political outreach and
logistical organization.

The failure to consolidate control over the
recovered areas could create a vacuum and allow
warlords to use the instability to their advantage. Local
populations must know that the departure of
Al-Shabaab shall be followed with peace dividends. To
that end, in January, the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) issued a national policy for
reconciliation and stabilization in newly liberated areas
of south-central Somalia. We aim to pursue a
multipronged approach, which will reach out to the
existing local actors and convince them that the only
meaningful way forward is to work with the TFG; and
to identify and implement, jointly with the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the United
Nations country team, quick-impact projects that bring
about immediate dividends for the local population.

Another ongoing challenge is the political
stalemate within the Transitional Federal Parliament.
The continuing efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union to resolve the crisis have yet to bear
fruit. The breakaway group of parliamentarians has
rejected the Garowe process and has passed a motion
bringing forward the presidential elections from July to
30 April this year. The President, the Council of
Ministers and the national security committee declared
that process illegal.

I am concerned that that parliamentary vote and
stalemate could disrupt the painstaking gains that
Somali stakeholders and their partners have achieved.
Parliament has paralysed the peace process. I actively
continue to engage both the TFG leadership and the
two factions in Parliament to find a way out of the
impasse and restore the unity and functionality of the
Parliament. It is critical that we preserve the institution
of Parliament, as it has a central role to play in the
peace process and other matters of governance, but we
should not allow the group to hold hostage the process
to end the transition.
Spoilers continue to benefit from this protracted
conflict, which has prevailed in Somalia during the
past decade. The international community must
identify the internal and external spoilers, both State
and non-State actors, and take decisive action to end
their obstructionist activities. Likewise, if those
spoilers manifest their influence inside TFG
institutions, including Parliament, the Somali political
leadership, in close collaboration with the region,
individual Member States and the rest of the
international community, should stand ready to put in
place the appropriate mechanisms to protect the
implementation of the road map. That will require
collective effort by the international community.

The London conference brought about
unprecedented attention to the Somalia political crisis
in its 21-year history. It reaffirmed the centrality of
Somali ownership of the peace process and the need
for coordinated and scaled up international support.

The London conference received a great boost
from the decision of the Council to increase
AMISOM's strength from 12,000 to a maximum of
17,731. The message to the world was that of
commitment to peace, security and stability for
Somalia by reducing the threat of Al-Shabaab, which
has now declared itself to be an integral part of
Al-Qaida. To the Somalis, the London conference
brought about encouragement. The resolution brought
about hope, as it also recognized the need to expand
the development of the capacity and effectiveness of
the Somali security forces.

I am pleased to report that the African Union
Commission has already moved in earnest to advance
the implementation of resolution 2036 (2012). A
meeting of the Joint Coordination Committee, chaired
by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security and with a membership that includes the
AMISOM. troop-contributing countries and the Force
Commander, is scheduled to give advice on the
implementation of AMISOM's concept of operations.
The United Nations is actively supporting the African
Union and AMISOM. in that endeavour.

Meanwhile, on the eve of the fifth anniversary of
its presence in Mogadishu tomorrow, AMISOM. has
captured the Al-Shabaab stronghold and terrorist base
of Maslah, on the outskirt of Mogadishu. As well, on
the ground, TFG forces, with Ethiopian troops, last
week captured the strategic town of Baidoa, in central
12-25034
Somalia. In the south, TFG forces, with Kenyan armed
forces, are carrying out a steady ground offensive,
supported by Kenyan air and sea assets.

The significance of the London conference lies in
the comprehensiveness of its agenda and communique.
All the salient aspects of the Somali crisis were
considered, including humanitarian issues, piracy and
terrorism, stability and recovery, as well as the way
forward in international cooperation to support the
Somali peace process.

The acute famine conditions reported from June
to December last year are no longer present.
Humanitarian organizations have been able to increase
people's access to food, contain health and disease
outbreaks and assist the hundreds of thousands of
children suffering from acute and severe malnutrition.
New approaches to humanitarian assistance, such as
the development of more cash-based schemes, have
saved many thousands of lives. Despite extremely
challenging conditions, humanitarian organizations
have continued to provide assistance throughout
Somalia.

However, unacceptably high rates of child
mortality, disease and malnutrition persist. More than
320,000 children in Somalia are still acutely
malnourished. Many of the areas that were pulled out
of famine remain on the cusp of falling back into it. In
a village of 5,000 in those areas, a person dies every
day; that victim is usually a child. Consequently, some
2.34 million people in Somalia are still categorized as
being in humanitarian emergency conditions, and will
require immediate life-saving assistance throughout the
yean

Let us remember that humanitarian assistance in
Somalia continues to be provided in the context of
conflict. Somalia's conflict has disproportionately
affected the civilian population through displacement,
difficulties in accessing assistance and the direct
impact of fighting.

My relocation from Nairobi has enabled me to
engage more easily with the leaders of the Transitional
Federal Institutions and other key Somali interlocutors.
It is important for the international community to
deploy to Mogadishu without delay, especially as we
aim to speed up the implementation of the road map. I
hope that my presence in the country will encourage
other international organizations and diplomatic
premises to follow suit.

We do not have the luxury of time. We are faced
with a situation that demands urgent action. The TFG
remains the international community's main Somali
interlocutor. Building its capacity will be critical to
transforming the country into a functioning State.
Somalia today has the greatest opportunity to end the
two decades-long conflict and bring lasting peace and
stability to the whole country. But capitalizing on that
momentum and ending the transition on time will
require more efforts and support from all international
actors in the coming months. We must ensure that all of
us are pulling together in that regard.

I am developing a plan that will include support
for the establishment of a functioning constituent
assembly composed of 1,000 people and a new
bicameral parliament, as well as for outreach to Somali
civil society and the diaspora for the implementation of
the second Garowe Conference. I also plan to ensure
that the Mogadishu Stabilization and Recovery Plan
and "low-hanging fruit" activities are implemented,
both in Mogadishu and in newly recovered areas. For
all that to happen, we need strong political and
financial support from the Council.

