Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): My delegation can
subscribe to the full text of the troika statement as read
out by Ambassador Lavrov. Obviously, we also endorse
the European Union statement. Both those statements
reaffirm that UNITA, under the leadership of Mr. Jonas
Savimbi, bears the primary responsibility for the
protracted conflict in Angola, owing to its refusal to
comply with its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.

Against that background, we cannot but welcome the
recent extension of State administration as a result of a
military operation which was forced upon the Government
by UNITA. At the same time, we commend the
Government for not getting carried away by its good
fortune on the battlefield and for continuing to realize that
only a political solution can restore peace to Angola. The
Government has displayed wisdom in making it plain that,
in its view, the Lusaka Protocol remains a valid basis for
the Angolan peace process, and in granting to all Savimbi
supporters who surrender to Government forces the right
to conduct political activities.

It may, however, be necessary to ask an even higher
degree of wisdom of the Angolan Government, for it is
not just a matter of allowing individual defectors to play
a role in politics. What is needed is a recognition that,
despite Mr. Savimbi's lamentable role, UNITA as such
continues to be a factor in Angolan society, and that this
fact has to be taken into account, entirely in accordance
with the original intention of the Lusaka Protocol. If the
Government affirms that the Lusaka Protocol remains a
valid basis for the peace process, that is what it must
mean. All parties should now work for an all-inclusive
solution through dialogue.

We were pleased to learn from the Vice-Minister of
External Relations of Angola, Mr. Chicoti, that the
Status-of-Mission Agreement for the United Nations
Office in Angola is being ratified today.

We agree with the representative of Ukraine that the
Council must never leave the impression that it favours
military solutions over political solutions, and my
delegation does not often in this Council welcome
military successes. But our ability to do so now in the
case of Angola is greatly facilitated by the Government's
willingness to accept the continuing presence of a human
rights division in what is now to be called the United
Nations Office in Angola. The most convincing argument
for giving that division a broad mandate and for not
limiting its tasks to the area of humanitarian assistance
and capacity-building is that human rights monitoring is

 

an essential ingredient of, in the words of the Secretary-
General,

"the normalization of life in the country and the
pursuit of an effective national reconciliation process".
(S/2000/23, para. 30)

