Mr. Broucher (United Kingdom): Allow me, at
the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to have this important debate. Let me also
thank Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala for
introducing the Secretary-General's report and the
delegation of Colombia for its thought-provoking
paper. In making this national statement now, the
United Kingdom also wishes to associate itself with the
statement that Denmark will make on behalf of the
European Union.
The serious threat to security caused by the
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons is all too well known. There is an urgent need
for the international community to continue to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action, to
reduce the estimated 639 million small arms and light
weapons in circulation and to reduce the estimated
500,000 deaths caused by them each year.

The 2001 United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons and the
adoption of the Programme of Action demonstrate the
resolve and commitment of the international
community to tackle the problems caused by small
arms and light weapons. The Programme of Action also
highlights the role that can be played by the Security
Council in implementing the campaign against small
arms proliferation and misuse. The Security Council
has an important part to play in helping to mainstream
small arms and light weapons issues. We therefore
welcome the publication of the Secretary-General's
report and support its recommendations.

Turning to some of the specific points in the
report, the Security Council should continue to
encourage all Member States to implement the United
Nations Programme of Action at a national, regional
and global level and to allocate sufficient and
appropriate resources to that task.

We would find it useful to have clarification on
the funding, remit and relationship with national points
of contact of any small arms advisory service that may
be established by the Department for Disarmament
Affairs under recommendation 3.

The United Kingdom supports recommendation 5.
We also support the proposal at recommendation 8 to
strengthen the financing of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes by the
expansion of measures covered under peacekeeping
operations, although we are mindful of the implications
such a step could have on available resources.

In our view, there is still valuable work to be
done under recommendation 6.

When looking at end-user certificates in
recommendation 9, more needs to be done to ensure the
authenticity of the certificate and to protect against
goods being diverted from their intended destination.
Exporting countries need to assess the genuine needs of
the end user before despatch. The United Kingdom,
working through its diplomatic posts abroad, has a
mechanism in place to confirm the accuracy of
information contained in end-user certificates. We
would be prepared to consider exchanging information
on a more systematic, case-by-case, bilateral basis with
others.

The United Kingdom is sympathetic to the call
for some standardization of end-user certificates. The
European Union and Wassenaar Arrangement have
already undertaken some useful work in this area. We
agree that the certificate should include the name and
address of the signing authority, but to add contact
details for brokers would not work.

Concluding my remarks on the recommendations,
the United Kingdom fully supports the reporting
requirements in recommendation 12.

More generally, we would also encourage the
Security Council to consult more widely with relevant
organizations such as the G-8, Roma-Lyon and the
New Partnership for Africa's Development when it is
considering specific country or regional situations.
Informal meetings between the Secretary-General and
regional organizations could be used as opportunities,
or have an element within them, to specifically focus
on small arms issues, the outcome of which could then
be reported back to this forum.

I would also like to make a couple of points about
the recommendations contained in the Colombian
paper. We will maintain a register of all arms brokers,
but for us it is not the bureaucratic act of registration
that counts so much as the ability to scrutinize and to
approve or refuse licenses. Regulation of deals made
by brokers is the key. The United Kingdom would also
welcome further clarity as to whether any international
standards that might be formulated on transfer of
ownership of arms consignments apply to domestic or
international transfers, or to both. The United Kingdom
applies the criteria set out in the European Union Code
of Conduct on Arms Exports to assess whether an
international transfer of arms is permissible. We
recommend the development of rigorous export criteria
controls on similar lines. We also maintain a database
of export licence applicants, but it is not exclusive to
arms transfers.

We consider that it is important to strengthen the
ability of the Security Council and the Sanctions
Committee to monitor implementation and enforcement
of sanctions. Ad hoc United Nations expert units and
monitoring mechanisms have played a valuable role in
naming and shaming sanctions busters and in focusing
on how sanctions could be improved. But their ad hoc
nature means the Council does not have an institutional
memory, and important recommendations such as those
contained in the Colombian paper are not followed up.
Jointly with France, we have proposed establishing a
permanent monitoring mechanism under the authority
of the Security Council to achieve this. The mechanism
would build on the work of ad hoc United Nations
expert panels and monitoring mechanisms by giving
the United Nations a permanent capacity to monitor the
enforcement of sanctions. We hope that Security
Council members can support that important initiative.

We like the recommendation to introduce
legislation to regulate the leasing of aircraft used in
transporting small arms. United Kingdom legislation
already makes it an offence to use any United Kingdom
registered aircraft without a licence, or for United
Kingdom persons to charter an aircraft for the carriage
of arms to a destination subject to a United Nations
arms embargo. That also applies to shipping. We do not
believe it necessary to adopt such regulations for
destinations not subject to arms embargoes.

In the West African region, we consider it
appropriate to strengthen and support the efforts
against small arms of the Economic Community of
West African States. We support Security Council
measures to clamp down on those producer countries
seeking to flood the region with weapons.

In closing, I would like to thank the President of
the Security Council for distributing his draft
document. We will, of course, give it our full
consideration and give our views in due course.

It is right that the prevention, combating and
elimination of the spread of small arms and light
weapons is a priority for the Security Council. It is
ours, too. To this end, we have committed £195
million to a number of programmes and projects over
the next three years. On 6 May this year, we signed the
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms. The Secretary-General could
also encourage other countries to do the same. The
United Kingdom will actively participate in assessing
developments and results of the United Nations
Programme of Action at the forthcoming biennial
meetings and at the Review Conference in 2006.

We look forward to working with the Security
Council and others to operationalize the
recommendations in the report and, by so doing, to
move another significant and substantive step forward
in the fight against illicit small arms and light weapons.

