Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Norway, for his most able leadership.

The Council meets today at a critical moment for
the peoples of the Middle East. In the past seven days
there have been seven Palestinian suicide bombings in
Israel, killing over 40 people and wounding well over
100. On our northern border, Hezbullah is attacking
Israeli positions for the second day, following several
weeks of escalating tensions in the area. Yesterday we
met here in this Chamber and had a constructive
discussion on how to address the current situation and
on how we might best move forward. I appreciate the
willingness of Council members to engage in a frank
and open exchange of views in the spirit of dialogue.

We discussed resolution 1397 (2002), which

Israel has fully accepted both in the vision it articulates
and in the concrete steps it details. We have shown
ourselves to be willing to fully implement this
resolution, including the call for a genuine cessation of
hostilities, terrorism and incitement and full
implementation of the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
report, and we had begun to take concrete steps in this
direction prior to the Passover massacre last week,
which led to the current deterioration. Indeed, every
Israeli concession has been met with terrorism.

We also discussed resolution 1402 (2002), which
Israel has not rejected. We recognize the positive
elements of that resolution, namely, the call for a
complete and meaningful ceasefire, which we firmly
believe would lead to the withdrawal of Israeli troops.
No one should doubt that when the violence and the
terrorism have ended, so will the need for further
Israeli military action. Indeed, the key elements of
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) are
themselves the elements of the Tenet and Mitchell
plans, which Israel has accepted and continually shown
itself willing to implement. We still await a reciprocal
Palestinian response.

It is widely said that the obstacle to a ceasefire,
from the Palestinian perspective, is the lack of a
political horizon. But one need only look at the lengthy
list of agreements that have been reached in the past
decade, the Security Council resolutions that have been
adopted and the broad international consensus -
including among the Israeli people - that the
Palestinians are entitled to establish their own
independent State. The Mitchell report, permanent
status negotiations on the basis of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the vision of two States
expressed in resolution 1397 (2002) - this is the
political horizon. But let us be very clear: even when
there was the clearest and brightest political horizon,
the Palestinians did nothing to curb violence and terror.
After Israel extended a far- reaching peace proposal at
Camp David in July 2000, the Palestinian leadership
launched a campaign of violence against us. And even
as the sides met and considered further enhancements
to Mr. Barak's peace offer, namely, in the discussions
conducted at Taba, Palestinian violence and terrorism
still threatened the lives of Israelis.

The international community must recognize that

the Palestinians have made a strategic choice to engage
in terrorism for the achievement of political objectives.
While they speak of a strategic choice for peace, their
true strategic place itself is out on television every day,
and to gruesome effect. In such an atmosphere, Israel
has no choice but to exercise its right and duty under
international law to defend ourselves. This is a right
that any State would exercise under the conditions that
we have been facing, and in fact, several States have
already done so. No State would tolerate continued
daily assaults - suicidal terrorism - on the streets of
its cities. Israel will continue to do what it deems
necessary to protect ourselves against the threat. We
will act not to occupy, but to uproot the terrorist
infrastructure, even as Palestinian gunmen use Holy
Sites - including Bethlehem's Church of the
Nativity - as a bunker, firing at Israeli soldiers from
its windows and seeking refuge in its sanctuary, in
violation of the most basic norms.

But make no mistake, our hand remains extended
in peace. Our immediate objective remains the
achievement of a ceasefire. And our ultimate goal is
the conclusion of a comprehensive and final settlement
of the conflict. If you do not believe this, I invite the
Palestinians, with the Security Council as a witness, to
put us to the test. Let us call for an immediate ceasefire
and begin implementing Tenet and Mitchell. Let us
discover what underlies Prime Minister Sharon's
proposal as to painful compromises. Put us to the test
of peace. It is that simple. Do not look for any
ambiguous political horizon.

The Security Council has an opportunity to
facilitate this process by adopting the draft resolution
that will probably be submitted and which calls for an
immediate implementation of resolution 1402 (2002).
If the Council is to act in a spirit of responsibility and
balance, it must include, beside the demand of an
immediate implementation of resolution 1402 (2002), a
call for the Palestinian side to cease immediately the
suicide bombings in Israel. We believe that this not
only would be a more fair and balanced position but
could be the impetus needed to achieve a genuine
ceasefire, begin the withdrawal of Israeli troops and
ultimately put both parties back on the path towards the
process of dialogue, negotiations and, hopefully, final
status achievement in peaceful coexistence.

