Mr. Lewis (United Nations Children's Fund): Thank
you immensely, Mr. President, for giving the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) this opportunity.

The combination of the Secretary-General's excellent
report that informs today's debate, the strong and thoughtful
statement of the Deputy Secretary-General that introduced
it, the previous debate in May 1997, and the presidential
statement following that debate last June specifically
devoted to "Children and armed conflict" serve to give
focus to the inseparable twin themes of protection for
humanitarian assistance on the one hand and protection of
children in war on the other. UNICEF appreciates the
significance that this represents when seen in the context
of the influence of the Security Council on the affairs of
nation States.

It is not our intention to reconnoitre every subject.
We participated in those previous debates, or we helped
to inform their content. The speeches and views are on
record. We have listened carefully today and find
ourselves again in agreement with the great part of what
has been said. In particular, we strongly associate
ourselves with the visceral horror that everyone feels at
the pattern of targeting and slaughtering civilian
populations at will - populations, as the Deputy
Secretary-General noted, made up overwhelmingly of
children and women. There is no question about it - we
live in an age of madness, where flesh-and-blood human
beings in many conflicts are given no more value than
inanimate objects that are trampled and dismembered.

Against this background, we note the desperate
vulnerability - compounded time and time again - of
refugee populations and the internally displaced. We
reiterate again that children must be a distinct and priority
concern in all actions to promote peace, implement peace
agreements and resolve conflicts; that every peace
agreement must include specific reference to the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers; that
children's rights and special needs, of every kind, must be
specifically and systematically included in the mandates
authorizing such actions; that we must dramatically
reduce the availability of small arms and light weapons
which serve to transform children into junior militarists;
and that we must train all personnel - civilian, military
and peacekeeping - on their legal responsibilities to
children, particularly to protect them from egregious
violations of their rights - and, in that way, incidentally,
contribute to the development of national capacity. Above
all, we must challenge the obscenity of impunity through
the use of the International Criminal Court.

We have said all that before, and more, especially in
the context of the Graca Machel study. Today there are
three matters that we would particularly like to emphasize
before the Council, all of them flowing from comments
within the Secretary-General's report and, of course,
within the particular mandate of UNICEF.

 

First, there is the matter of child soldiers. UNICEF
could not help but note that in the presidential statement of
29 June last, as in the report before us, there is no specific
reference to the age of recruitment. There is a strong
denunciation of the recruitment and use of children in
hostilities in violation of international law, but no reference
to age. UNICEF understands the sensitivities within the
Council, and it is not our intention to aggravate them. But
we feel morally obliged to say that until the age of 18 is
universally embraced as the minimum age of recruitment,
whether by way of adoption of the optional protocol or the
amendment of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
there will continue to be, in one sordid conflict after
another, the reckless abuse of children as child soldiers.

We recoil with horror at the idea of lO-, 11- and 12-
year-olds employed as fighters, porters, cooks, messengers
and sex slaves in regular and irregular armies. But we put
it to the Council that in terms of the effective damage -
some would say destruction - of a child's present and
future life, 15-, 16- and l7-year-olds are equally vulnerable.
We see the toll that is taken and try to deal with it on the
ground, every day, whether in Sierra Leone or, more
recently, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Children engaged in hostilities as soldiers are deprived of
every single right granted under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. UNICEF would argue that only when
we have an international agreement on the age of 18 will
we be able to say that we have put the protection of the
lives and psyches and futures of children ahead of other
considerations. When the international community
equivocates over the age of recruitment, it sends a sadly
ambiguous message to the military predators who haunt the
zones of conflict looking for children to abduct, to seduce
or to conscript.

Secondly, there is the matter of the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel. Many individuals and agencies
and nation States have spoken feelingly and eloquently of
the dangers to humanitarian personnel working in the field.
The Secretary-General's report provides statistics. Please
allow me to put information specifically from UNICEF on
the record.

In the past four years, 14 of our staff members have
died in conflict situations, and in the past two years alone,
25 others have been seriously injured, mostly by gunshot.
We have also dealt with the nightmare of rape. Indeed,
following the rape of a staff member in Goma on 12 May
1997, UNICEF made sure that every single office would
have access to post-exposure treatment for the HIV/AIDS
virus within 24 hours. If taken immediately after exposure,
this cocktail of medication significantly reduces the risk
of transmission. This approach is now being pursued
system-wide throughout the United Nations.

May I add that we are also pioneering the
development of an incident-tracking system that will be
made available to Member States and our colleagues
throughout the United Nations, and we have now
distributed Security Awareness Training programmes to
over 200 duty stations. I suspect that most of the United
Nations system is aware of our preoccupation with
security imperatives and our equivalent preoccupation
with the need for resources to address them. That is why
the Secretary-General's plea for resources is no idle
addendum: it speaks to the heart of the matter.

Thirdly and finally, there is the matter of respect for
international human rights and humanitarian law. This is
obviously the crux of this debate. Whether we are dealing
with refugee populations or the internally displaced;
whether we are dealing with peacekeepers or
humanitarian workers; whether we are dealing with bona
fide Governments or opposition groups or rogue
militias - everything hinges on the sanctity and
observance of international human rights and
humanitarian law.

Having said that, I would like to engage in a piece
of UNICEF dialectic. When the Convention on the Rights
of the Child was drafted, one of its most celebrated
aspects was the principle of indivisibility - that is, all
rights are equal: political, civil, economic, social and
cultural. Equal. It was a triumph of consensus. It then
became a manifestation of consensus when 191 countries
ratified the Convention and embraced its contents as
binding international law.

However, what is not always recognized about the
Convention on the Rights of the Child is another variant
of the principle of indivisibility: the Convention on the
Rights of the Child is the only international human rights
instrument which explicitly incorporates international
humanitarian law. The two are as one within the articles
of the Convention. What that means, of course, is that
instead of for ever trying to find a way of meshing human
rights law and humanitarian law, we have an existing
international covenant which does it for us, and were that
to be recognized and employed for children in conflict
situations, we would have the concrete expression of a
goal which the Security Council espouses.

 

Do we exaggerate? I think not. Let me take a moment
to remind the Council of article 38, paragraph 1, of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child:

"States Parties undertake to respect and to
ensure respect for rules of international
humanitarian law applicable to them in armed
conflicts which are relevant to the child."

This is further underscored by paragraph 4, which
invokes international humanitarian law to ensure the
protection and care of children who are affected by armed
conflict.

Could it be more clear? Here we have a human rights
Convention giving the imprimatur of primacy - and
legitimacy - to international humanitarian law in conflict
situations. It represents the very core of this whole debate.

I am not going to be a chauvinist for the Convention.
It stands on its own. But it must not be depreciated simply
because it deals with children. There is always the tendency
to marginalize children in international debate. In this
instance, that would be folly because the Convention gives
exact expression to everything the Security Council wants
to achieve.

As I close, I must emphasize again how
extraordinarily valuable it is to have the Security Council
initiate these deliberations and permit our participation.
Every debate takes us another step forward. UNICEF is on
the ground before conflict, during conflict and after
conflict. Like our colleagues in the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, we wrestle with
these issues every hour of the day. We are inescapably
involved, whether with child refugees or internally
displaced children or any children made vulnerable by war.
As it happens, as we speak, Carol Bellamy, our Executive
Director, is on her way to Sierra Leone. It never ends. But
along the way, all of these pressing and critical issues arise,
and they must be dealt with.

