Mr. Eitel (Germany): The Agreement of Dayton is a
major achievement and an important step forward. We are
grateful to all those who have made it possible. Imperfect
as it may be, it represents the best chance in a long time for
a durable peace in the region. All sides have had to make
painful concessions. Nobody is entirely satisfied with the
outcome. That is a sign that the Agreement as a whole has
a realistic basis. We therefore urge the parties to be
steadfast in their acceptance and pursuit of a peace as
outlined in the Agreement and in its implementation.

When we say this, we think of all the victims of the
war in former Yugoslavia. We think of innocent men,
women and children who were killed senselessly. Our
thoughts go to the missing men and boys of, in particular,
Srebrenica, Zepa and the Banja Luka region. We honour
the Blue Helmets who gave their lives for peace. Their
sacrifice and suffering bestow an enormous responsibility
upon all those who have to implement the Dayton
Agreement in good faith. The signatories and other parties
to the Agreement must fully use the present opportunity,
which offers the best of all the possible conditions for
peace.

We warn, however, against too much optimism.
Much difficulty still lies ahead. The decision to make
peace will be put to many trials. At the same time, we
share the feeling of others that the current intensity of the
mediation and negotiation effort - almost an
overstretch - cannot continue indefinitely. The parties
must realize in word and deed: it is essentially
themselves, and not the international community, who
must build a durable peace, who must fill the Peace
Agreement with life and make it a success.

The draft resolutions on, respectively, the lifting of
the arms embargo and the suspension of sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia mark the first step of
the implementation of the Peace Agreement reached in
Dayton. By our decision today, the arms embargo will be
lifted in three phases. It covered attacker and defender,
aggressor and aggressed simultaneously. It was, therefore,
not always easy to reconcile it with Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter.

As did the arms embargo, the economic sanctions as
well proved to be important in the peace process. We
share the view of Ambassador Cardenas, the Chairman of
the Sanctions Committee on the former Yugoslavia, that
our common experience confirms that the sanctions
regime has essentially been effective.

Neighbouring States and the international community
have contributed to the implementation of the sanctions.
That is why we pay a special tribute to those
neighbouring States which have been affected by them.
We are aware that they had to sever important
commercial and transport links. At the same time, they
had to cope with preserving economic stability and
continuing economic market- reform programmes.

We acknowledge also the contribution of all those
who were involved in the sanctions implementation
apparatus: the European Union/Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (EU/OSCE) Sanctions
Coordinator; the Sanctions Liaison Office, SAMCOMM,

 

at the European Union Commission Headquarters in
Brussels; the International Sanctions Assistance Missions
stationed in the neighbouring countries; the International
Conference on the former Yugoslavia (ICFY) mission; the
Western European Union (WEU) operation on the Danube;
and the "Sharp-Guard" North Atlantic Treaty
Organization/Western European Union (NATONV EU)
operation in the Adriatic Sea. We share the view that until
the complete termination of the sanctions regime these
instruments must be kept intact. We also hope that the
experience gathered will make similar operations - should
they ever become necessary - more effective in future.
The defreezing of funds and assets which can be
allocated to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will,
hopefully, enable it to re-establish trade links and
commerce with other countries right from the start once the
sanctions are suspended. At the same time, the draft
resolution requests that assets and funds that are subject to
third-party claims - mainly claims from the other
successor States of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia - remain frozen or impounded. We will take
all measures with respect to those assets and funds to
ensure that they remain impounded in accordance with the
applicable law, and thus protect the interests of the other
successor States. With regard to conflicting claims of the
successor States, we urge them to seek an agreement on the
distribution of disputed funds and assets and the allocation
of liabilities in general as soon as possible. This would
make it possible to use released funds and assets for a
positive development of the economy in the countries
concerned and the region as a whole.

We appeal to the international community to continue
to do all it can to further the successful completion of the
peace process. Let us remember that the military
implementation of the agreement - that is, the separation
of forces, the cease-fire and the agreement on arms-control
measures - is one important aspect. The civilian
reconstruction effort led by the new High Representative is
another. The economic benefits of peace will be decisive in
showing what there is to gain by proceeding on the path to
peace and what there is to lose by choosing war.

Germany will do its part. We have, in the past, been
intensively involved in the negotiation efforts of the
international Contact Group. We have contributed to the
talks in Dayton in a number of ways. We place special
emphasis on the human rights aspects of the Agreement, on
the responsibility of States to cooperate with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and on the
possibility for refugees to return to their original homes.
We identify closely with the provisions of the Federation
Treaty, which we helped elaborate.

Germany particularly stresses the importance of
substantial arms control agreements as outlined in
Annex 1 B of the Peace Agreement to offset the danger
of the lifting of the arms embargo triggering a new arms
race in the region. The military balance in the region
should be established at the lowest possible level.

Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel has, therefore, asked
me to inform the Council about his intention to invite all
parties concerned to a first meeting on arms control in
Bonn, at the earliest possible date. We want to give an
initial momentum to these crucial negotiations under the
auspices of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe as envisaged by the "Agreement on Regional
Stabilization" as contained in Annex 1 B of the Peace
Agreement.

A last, but important, point: In reaffirming our
support and sympathy to our French allies, we will
continue to follow closely the fate of the two missing
French pilots.

Germany will vote in favour of the two draft
resolutions.

