Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on taking on the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to
congratulate Ambassador Kolby of Norway, your
predecessor, for his very efficient guidance during the
month of March, which made it possible to achieve
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002).

The Argentine Republic is extremely preoccupied
about the worsening situation in the Middle East. This
issue is not foreign to my country, because historically
Argentina has close links with the countries of the
region. In our country, there are Arab and Jewish
communities that live together in peace.

As a result of the worsening of the crisis in the
Middle East over the past few days, the Argentine
Government published a communique on 30 March
supporting resolution 1402 (2002), which had been
adopted that very day by the Security Council. Four
days later, when the situation worsened even more,
Argentina restated its support and appealed to the
parties to urgently take the necessary steps to put an
end to violence and terrorism and to embark on the
only possible path towards a resolution of this
horrifying conflict, to which there can be no military
solution. The only possible solution will be found
through dialogue and a return to the negotiating table,
which are tools to achieve an effective peace. For that
to be possible, it is necessary to disarm the inflamed
spirits of both peoples, which are now dominated by
rancour, revenge and mutual distrust. It is vital that
Israel make a clear commitment to accept the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to a viable
and democratic Palestinian State. On the Palestinian
side, what is necessary is a genuine and unambiguous
commitment to reject terrorism and to recognize
Israel's inalienable right to live in peace within secure
borders that are by the international community, in
particular by the other States of the region.

At this difficult juncture, the Argentine
Government joins the rest of the international
community in calling upon the Government of Israel
and the Palestine Authority to take the urgent measures
necessary to facilitate concrete steps towards dialogue
and the search for peace. In this regard, it will be
necessary to comply in good faith with the letter and
the spirit of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1397 (2002), and to start to implement the recently
adopted resolution 1402 (2002).

Finally, my Government acknowledges the efforts
of the United States, the European Union, the Russian
Federation and the Secretary-General that are being
made through their special envoys to try to bring about
an immediate ceasefire.

