Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz of Chile for his
very comprehensive and detailed briefing on the work
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).

The representative of Ireland will later make a
statement on behalf of the European Union. As we
fully associate ourselves with that statement, I shall
confine myself to making some brief observations in
my national capacity.

First, I publicly thank Ambassador Mufioz for his
recent visit to Spain at the head of a Committee
delegation, and especially for expressing solidarity and
willingness to cooperate with the Spanish authorities in
the wake of the very grave terrorist attacks that
occurred in Madrid on 11 March.

For obvious reasons, the fight against terrorism
has been a priority for all Spanish people for decades.
Following the recent tragic events, that effort has been
strengthened even more, if possible, within our firm
commitment to international cooperation. In fact, one
of the points that was emphasized in the report of the
Chairman of the Committee is the need to strengthen
cooperation among all States at the bilateral and
regional levels, as well as through the relevant bodies
of the Security Council, namely the 1267 Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

In that connection, I wish to note that Spain is
among the leading countries in providing technical
assistance for combating terrorism. As well, we are
working intensely within the framework of the
European Union and the Council of Europe to enhance
and strengthen cooperation in this area at the European
level.

The recent Security Council resolution 1526
(2004) further improves the sanctions regime and has
undoubtedly contributed to strengthening
communication and fluid contact between the
Committee and all Member States, relevant
organizations and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The new Monitoring Team has a primary role in that
regard, and its work is essential for the Committee's
proper functioning. We welcome the fact that the
principle of transparency guides the Monitoring Team
and the Committee itself, as attested to by today's
public meeting of the Security Council.

The 1267 Committee's main working tool is the
consolidated list of persons and entities linked to Al
Qaeda and the Taliban and subject to the sanctions
regime. That list is almost constantly being updated.
We underline that the Committee is working to
improve the list and to overcome possible defects such
as the lack of sufficient information for some of its
entries.

For its part, Spain stands fully ready to make
available to the Committee any relevant information in
its possession, provided that the publication of that
information does not compromise investigations under
way and that the relevant legal guarantees are
respected.

As the delegation of Spain noted in the Council in
January (see S/PV.4892), the 1267 Committee is
making progress towards reaching the goals set by the
Security Council. However, achieving those objectives
ultimately depends on the cooperation of all States and
the relevant organizations. We therefore take this
opportunity once again to urge all States and
organizations to cooperate fully and decisively with the
Committee and its subsidiary bodies, which are
working effectively to achieve their objectives.

