Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the participation of
Mr. Mahdi, Vice-President of Iraq, and his statement.

The Chinese delegation thanks Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
the representative of the United States for their
presentations.

We have carefully read the comprehensive and
thoughtful report submitted by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon a few days ago. We agree with the report.

Last weekend, an international conference on Iraq
was held in Baghdad. The countries neighbouring Iraq,
the five permanent members of the Security Council,
the League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference all sent representatives to take part.
This was the first international conference held within
Iraq after the end of the Iraq war, and therefore it is of
particular significance. The conference was held in a
very good atmosphere. The various parties had an
extensive exchange of views on issues covering
politics, security, economic reconstruction and the
repatriation of refugees in Iraq. We hope that that good
atmosphere can continue so that there can be new
breakthroughs on solutions to the Iraqi issue.

Since the end of the Iraqi war, the people of Iraq
have traversed an extraordinary path. Under extremely
difficult circumstances they have overcome various
difficulties and have roughly completed the political
transition process set out in resolution 1546 (2004). At
present, Iraq is entering a completely new stage of
development. However, as the Secretary-General states
in his report, the security situation, the economic
reconstruction and the humanitarian situation in Iraq
all leave much to be desired, and the country still faces
many challenges.

At the political level, the new Iraqi Government
needs to do all it can to promote the inclusiveness of
the political process, to foster national reconciliation
and to find appropriate solutions to the outstanding
issues related to formulating a constitution. Iraq's
various regions and ethnic groups should put the
national interest first and resolve their differences
through dialogue. In that regard, we appreciate the
efforts of the Arab States to promote national
reconciliation in Iraq. We also support the initiative by
the League of Arab States on the convening of a
national reconciliation conference in Iraq.

As for security, the various factions in Iraq
should renounce force and seek to resolve their
differences by peaceful and democratic means. The
Iraqi Government and the Multinational Force must
attack the root causes of instability. Resorting solely to
military force attacks only the symptoms, rather than
the root causes. Furthermore, it would worsen the
vicious circle of responding to violence with violence,
giving rise to greater terror and instability.

We hope that the Iraqi Government will shoulder
greater responsibility for maintaining security and
public order in Iraq so as to restore public confidence
and trust in the Government. At the same time, the
Multinational Force must send a message that it will
not stay permanently in Iraq, so as to improve its image
in the country. We noted that the Iraqi Government
recently produced a new Baghdad security plan. We
hope that the plan will help improve public security
and win the hearts of the Iraqi people.

In economic terms, the Iraqi Government must
promote economic reconstruction expeditiously so as
to produce real results and effectively improve the
living conditions of the people of Iraq. We support the
International Compact initiated jointly by Iraq and the
United Nations. We hope that it will ensure equal and
equitable participation by all parties in the country's
economic reconstruction and will establish a new type
of cooperation partnership between Iraq and the
international community so as to help Iraq address the
various difficulties it faces. We hope that the
International Compact will play its due role as soon as
possible.

The issue of Iraq cannot be resolved without the
help and support of its neighbouring countries. The
security of Iraq has a direct bearing on the stability of
all its neighbours. We welcome the fact that the
Foreign Minister and Minister for Internal Affairs of
Iraq will hold regular regional meetings with their
counterparts in neighbouring countries. We hope that
all parties will continue to increase their mutual
confidence through dialogue.

China has always supported the upholding of the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Iraq. We also believe that appropriate solutions must be
found through political means. We support the United
Nations playing an important role in the reconstruction
process in Iraq, and we hope that the various parties
will create suitable conditions in that regard. We
sincerely hope that, with the support and help of the
international community and through their own
unremitting efforts, the people of Iraq can achieve the
objective of an Iraq ruled by Iraqis so as to re-create a
new Iraq that is equal to its past glory.

