Ms. Power (United States of America): The Middle
East has often been prey to the turbulence of conflicting
forces, but rarely have we seen efforts towards peace
and the staggering human costs of war so vividly and
so simultaneously evident. That contrast is especially
striking in Syria, where diplomatic initiatives have
intensified against the backdrop of an ever-more brutal
civil war.

The best way to begin to bring that war to an end
is through the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
scheduled to start in Switzerland on Wednesday.
My Government has been working closely with the
international community and the Syrian opposition
coalition to prepare for that Conference. We welcome
the coalition's courageous decision this past weekend
to participate in the talks, the purpose of which is to
ensure the implementation of the Geneva Action Group
communique (S/2012/523, annex). That document
calls for the establishment, based on mutual consent,
of a transitional governing body with full executive
authority, including over military and security entities.
It is vital that all participants in the opening ministerial
meeting and in subsequent talks support that core goal.

As of this morning, however, Iran has yet to
demonstrate its willingness to subscribe to the full
implementation of the Geneva communique, which is
a minimum requirement for participation in the peace
process.

The Syrian Government's recent and deadly
bombing campaign, including the use of Scud missiles
and barrel bombs in the Aleppo and Damascus suburbs,
provides further demonstration of the Al-Assad
regime's cruelty and of the fact that there is no military
solution to the conflict. That is why we are so focused
on a negotiated political transition of the type to be
discussed in Geneva.

The urgency of diplomatic progress is highlighted
by the deepening of the humanitarian crisis created
by the war and by the Syrian Government's failure
to implement the Council's presidential statement of
2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).

In recent days, the Syrian regime has seemingly
agreed to improve humanitarian access to besieged
areas, but we have not seen evidence of meaningful
implementation onthe ground. Formonths, communities,
including Yarmouk, East Ghouta, Daraya, the Old City
of Horns and Moadamiya, have been besieged and cut
off from food and medical supplies. It is not just the
case that food cannot get in; people - starving people,
desperate people - cannot get out. On the very rare
occasions that evacuations from besieged areas have
been organized, the regime has taken inhabitants away
to be screened. In many cases, the whereabouts of those
individuals are unknown and remain unknown today.

East Ghouta is an egregious example of Syrian
obstruction. It is an area where international chemical
weapons inspectors were allowed access but where
160,000 civilians remain cut off from humanitarian
aid. Pro-Al-Assad snipers regularly target residents
attempting to travel through checkpoints. The
Government has blockaded fuel supplies, and residents
have electricity for only a couple of hours per day. A
young child even died of carbon monoxide poisoning
because his family had been compelled to burn
firewood inside their house to keep warm. Let us be
clear: ifinspectors can obtain access to East Ghouta, so
too should the providers of medicine and food.

Yarmouk provides another tragic example. It has
been under constant siege since July 2013. Recent reports
of more than a dozen malnutrition-related deaths among
children and other Palestinian residents are horrifying
and should shock the conscience of all of us. We received
reports from the United Nations in recent days that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East was finally able to carry in
a small amount of food parcels - 200 parcels, which
will feed 1,000 people for one month. There are 18,000
people in Yarmouk who are under siege, lacking food
and medicine. It is devastating to imagine how starving
people will divide up the food parcels. Humanitarian
providers who managed to deliver those food parcels
literally had to dodge sniper fire.

Although the regime is primarily responsible for
denying humanitarian access, some opposition groups
have also been culpable in such communities as Nubal,
Zahra and Foua'a. That is unacceptable. The deliberate
blocking or withholding of life-giving aid by any party
cannot be justified and must stop now before more
innocent people die.

The plight of Syrian civilians and refugees is heart-
breaking and makes last week's conference in Kuwait
all the more important. The United States pledged
$380 million in new funds to help tackle the crisis,
bringing our total commitment since the fighting began
to more than $1.7 billion. We welcome the new pledges
from other donor nations, as well as the international
community's renewed commitment to assisting the
Syrian people and the neighbouring countries that are
providing a safe haven for refugees.
In the brief period before the second Geneva
Conference, it is critical that we make concrete
progress on humanitarian access issues. We must also
do everything that we can to halt the violence. To that
end, we call urgently on all parties to agree on local
ceasefires and to move ahead with prisoner releases.

We commend your country, Jordan, Mr. President,
for sheltering some 600,000 refugees, and we recognize
the enormous economic and social toll the conflict has
taken on your country. Jordan has opened its doors
for an emergency situation, and we know that that is
draining its domestic resources. The international
community has an obligation to ensure that Jordan's
generosity does not become an unsustainable burden
on its population.

In Lebanon the situation has grown even more
perilous, as the Syrian war has exacerbated the security,
financial and social pressures faced by the nation's
leaders. More than 1,600 Lebanese communities bear
the burden of hosting more than 900,000 refugees from
Syria. My Government continues to help Lebanon
tackle its massive challenges via the recently established
International Support Group for Lebanon. We urge
other donors also to provide aid that is consistent with
International Support Group priorities. A stable and
united Lebanon with strong democratic institutions
is in the best interests of the Lebanese people and of
citizens throughout the Middle East. In that context, we
encourage the formation of a new Cabinet to address
the country's security, economic and humanitarian
challenges and to meet its international obligations.

The Syrian civil war has contributed to rising
sectarian violence and political friction inside Lebanon.
As has been said, the assassination, on 27 December
2013, of the widely respected former finance minister
Mohamad Chatah was an outrage. The 2 January
suicide bombing in southern Beirut's Haret Hreik
neighbourhood killed 5 people and wounded many
more. Meanwhile, sporadic Violence has continued for
weeks in Tripoli and near the Syrian border.

In that respect, we note Saudi Arabia's commitment,
announced last month, to provide generous amounts of
additional aid to the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF). We
will continue to partner closely with Lebanon's security
services, which have a pivotal role to play in support
of Lebanon's security and sovereignty. We condemn
the violence, urge all parties to exercise restraint, and
commend the LAF for its efforts to stem the violence.
The Lebanese Government's policy of disassociation
from the Syrian conflict, as enshrined in the Baabda
Declaration, must be upheld.
It is equally vital that all relevant Security Council
resolutions be implemented, including resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006), which call for the disbandment
and disarmament of all militias in Lebanon. The United
States strongly condemns the 29 December 2013 rocket
attack that was launched from Lebanese territory into
Israel.

Finally, we welcome the start of the trial before the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon of four persons charged
with the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq
Hariri and others who were killed in the bombing. That
trial is a positive step towards justice and away from the
acceptance of impunity for political violence, and we
commend the Lebanese Government and other donor
countries for supporting the Tribunal.

Turning to the subject of Middle East peace, the
United States is continuing its efforts to assist the
Israelis and Palestinians in reaching a final status
agreement that recognizes two States for two peoples,
living side by side in peace and security. Secretary of
State Kerry returned to the region earlier this month in
support ofa proposed framework that addresses all core
issues. As the parties consider the difficult decisions
ahead, the United States remains convinced that the
benefits of peace for both sides can best be achieved
through the kind of process in which we are presently
engaged. Accordingly, the United States reiterates
its view that all parties should refrain from actions
that might undermine the atmosphere required for
ongoing negotiations. Steps that diminish trust, such as
continued settlement activity, only feed scepticism on
both sides.

Further, we are deeply troubled by the escalation
of violence leading to civilian casualties. We condemn
rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel and the attempt
to kill civilians by placing a bomb on a public bus in
Tel Aviv. We are also seriously concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, and urge all
parties to cooperate in expanding access for people,
goods and humanitarian supplies.

The consistent support of peace efforts by key
partners is essential. We particularly welcome the
European Union's generous pledge last month to provide
unprecedented political and economic support for Israel
and the Palestinians in the context ofa final status peace
agreement. We are gratified as well by the decision of
the League of Arab States, whose representatives met
with Secretary Kerry in Paris on 12 January, to reaffirm
its commitment to those negotiations.

Finally, on Iraq, I thank the Secretary-General for
reporting on his recent visit and would like to commend
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
for their efforts to ensure the delivery of aid to the
people of Anbar province. The United States strongly
condemns the attacks carried out by forces affiliated
with Al-Qaida in Anbar and elsewhere in Iraq. Their
brazen attempt at destabilization cannot be allowed
to succeed. As the Council made clear in its recent
statement,

"no terrorist act can reverse the path towards peace,
democracy and reconstruction in Iraq, which is
supported by the people and the Government of Iraq
and the international community" (S/PRST/2014/1).

In that spirit, we are encouraged by the cooperation
being shown by Iraq's Government, its national
security forces and local tribal leaders in trying to
restore stability, resist terrorist aggression and ease the
hardships faced by Iraqi civilians.

I, too, note that today is a national holiday in the
United States. Martin Luther King Jr. taught the citizens
of my country and people everywhere to pursue justice
and the resolution of differences by peaceful means. In
his words, "returning violence for violence multiplies
violence, adding deeper darkness to a night already
devoid of stars". The wisdom in that warning is always
and everywhere relevant, but never more so than now
in the Middle East, where peace initiatives demand our
support amid the anguish of continued conflict.

