Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamee, for his briefing on the latest developments on Libya. Estonia fully supports the United Nations- facilitated political process in Libya and the Special Representative's work towards that end. Estonia welcomes the commitments made at the Berlin conference on Libya held on January 19. The conference, as a step towards creating space for an intra-Libyan political process, was a success, and we congratulate all the participating States and international organizations on achieving that. Now, however, concrete steps need to be taken by all participants to honour the commitments and implement the conclusions of the Berlin conference. The most urgent step at this stage is to put an end to the violations of the arms embargo. In that regard, it is important to send a unified message from the Security Council and press on with the endorsement of the Berlin conference conclusions. Developments in the security situation in Libya and recent reports about the resumed fighting on the ground are extremely worrisome. We call on all parties to adhere to the truce that was agreed upon in Berlin and take concrete steps towards achieving a lasting ceasefire. It is absolutely clear that there can be no military solution to the conflict. The Libyan people deserve better than that. Moreover, the Security Council has at its disposal the sanctions tools to address the spoilers of peace and security in Libya. It should consider using those measures when and where necessary. The essential step in moving towards the ceasefire is the direct dialogue between the Libyan parties. We very much welcome the nomination of representatives of the Joint Military Commission for the 5+5 talks and hope that the first meeting can take place as early as possible. Agreeing to the terms of the ceasefire is a crucial step in order to move forward and concentrate on the political process in Libya. The goal of a stable Libya, with fully functioning, unified State institutions and authority, can be achieved only through a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process. For the political process to truly succeed, it needs to be inclusive. The adequate representation and meaningful engagement of women and young people throughout the entire process is of critical importance. Finally, addressing the violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law must remain high on the agenda. We need to keep working towards protecting the civilians, including women and children, and hold the perpetrators accountable.
