Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): From the very outset, the Russian Federation
has stressed the importance of a speedy agreement by
the Security Council in its response to the missile
launches by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Moscow expressed serious concern about those
actions by Pyongyang, taken without advance notice
and in contravention of the Pyongyang moratorium
established earlier.

We have consistently believed that the reaction of
the Security Council must be firm, but at the same time
carefully calibrated and weighed. We have always seen
the main objective as being not to heighten emotions or
threaten isolation and restrictive measures against the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, but, rather, to
try as soon as possible to return the country to the
regime of a moratorium on ballistic missile testing and
to ensure that it resumes its participation in the six-
party talks aimed at a peaceful diplomatic settlement of
the nuclear problem on the Korean peninsula.

Guided by those principled considerations, Russia
participated actively in the harmonization of a
response. We believe that an official statement by the
President of the Security Council would have been the
optimal format. Nevertheless, we and our Chinese
partners met several other Security Council members
halfway in their wish for agreement on a resolution and
jointly submitted the relevant draft. In this respect, we
based ourselves on the fact that the draft resolution
distributed earlier by the delegations of Japan, the
United States and other sponsors did not fully meet the
requirements. Consultations in the Security Council
were protracted and complex. It is significant that all
Security Council members showed political will and
responsibility. As a result, we managed to reach
agreement and prepared the draft resolution, which we
have just adopted and which was introduced by the
President of the Security Council.

It is, of course, a compromise. But we believe
that the decision sends an appropriate signal to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the need to
show restraint and to abide by its obligations regarding
missiles. At the same time, it should work in favour of
continuing the negotiating process in the interests of
strengthening security and stability in the region of
North-East Asia.

The adoption of the resolution by consensus
clearly confirms that the Security Council, as the body
with the primary responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security, is
able to react effectively to complex international and
regional challenges on the basis of the unity of its
members.

