Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for having convened today's
meeting. and especially for having invited our
colleague Ms. Maria Emma Mejia Velez, which gives
me an opportunity to renew the sincere condolences
of the Senegalese people to the people of Colombia
after the catastrophic natural disaster in the form of
the earthquake and mudslides that took place in Mocoa
on 2 April, leading to the loss of many lives and much
property damage.

I would also like to thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in Colombia, for the clarity
of his presentation and his tireless efforts. Under
Mr. Arnault's leadership, the Mission has already
proved to be effective and productive, especially when
it comes to the coordination of the tripartite Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism and the provision of
support for the demilitarization of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias the Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP).

Senegal is pleased at the major progress made,
despite delays, in the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement between the Government of Colombia and
the FARC, which put an end to an armed conflict that
lasted over 50 years. The Colombian people owes this
progress to both the Government and the FARC as a
result of their efforts to accelerate the implementation
of commitments made in the framework of the Peace
Agreement. The list of clear-minded, courageous
constitutional, legislative, institutional and other
measures taken and implemented since the beginning
of the peace process, the most recent of which the
Special Representative mentioned in his briefing, is a
long one. I will therefore not dwell on them, but rather
go directly to my point.

Senegal commends the fact that the ceasefire and
the cessation of hostilities are still holding and that
no casualties have been reported, which eloquently
reflects the parties' strong determination to keep to the
180-day timeline established by the Peace Agreement,
despite the delay, for completing the laying down of
arms. In addition, we welcome the FARC-EP's renewed
commitment to transform itself into a political party,
as well as the commitment of its leader, Rodrigo
Londofio, that the group will not field candidates
in the 2018 presidential election, in order to foster
national consensus around a candidate that guarantees
the continued implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement. That is important.

The process of the laying down of arms, which began
on 1 March, is an important step in the implementation
ofthe Peace Agreement. As of 11 March, the commission
for the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism reported
a number of weapons handed over. However, we remain
concerned about the actions of certain non-State armed
groups that have taken over some of the areas evacuated
by the FARC and are competing for control of illegal
activities, including illegal mining, drug trafficking
or other activities, thereby establishing a climate of
insecurity marked by attacks and acts of intimidation
that unfortunately target members of civil society and
human rights defenders. We denounce and condemn
those practices.

It is important that the security gap created by the
departure of FARC combatants be rapidly filled. The
desertion of several FARC fighters in the south-eastern
and Pacific coast regions, some 2 to 5 per cent of their
former membership, is also a matter of deep concern.

The progress Ijust referred to must be accompanied
by constant support for the Commission for the Follow-
up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement, made up ofthe High Commissioner
for Peace, the Minister of the Interior and the Minister
Counsellor for Post-Conflict, as well as three high-level
members of FARC-EP. It is also true that at this stage
of the process of implementation of the agreements, in
order to overcome the delay previously noted, efforts
need to be redoubled and concentrated in terms of
building FARC-EP camps, together with the necessary
communities, the security of FARC ex-combatants and
their reintegration into society as a political party and
as participants in the economic fabric of the country.

In conclusion, Senegal wishes to reaffirm its
support for and commitment to peace in Colombia,
with the reasonable hope that the Peace Agreement and
the support of the international community will make
it possible to put an end to a conflict that has lasted
all too long. Mr. Arnault was correct in saying that the
upcoming visit of the Security Council to Colombia
that is planned for May under the South American
presidency of Uruguay is a very timely one.

