Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation wants to
express its gratitude to you, Sir, for organizing today's
important debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

Pakistan welcomes the gradual improvements in the
Security Council's working methods, especially since
2006. Those improvements have in particular been the
result of efforts by the non-permanent members of the
Security Council. In that connection, the early election
of non-permanent members this year was a positive
step. We believe that that will help non-permanent
members play a more robust and effective role during
their tenure in the Council.

We are hopeful that, with the cooperation of
all Council members, the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters
will continue to endeavour to improve the Council's
working methods, thereby contributing positively to the
Council's openness, transparency and accountability.

Pakistan endorses the recommendations to be
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of NAM
to improve the Security Council's working methods.
Furthermore, and in deference to your request for
succinct suggestions today, Sir, Pakistan would like to
offer the following.

First, dialogue with the wider United Nations
membership is critical. After all, Member States
not serving on the Council have high stakes in the
Council's decisions.

Second, it is important for the Council to
implement its presidential note S/2014/565, in letter and
in spirit. That note was the culmination of Pakistan's
initiative, when it was a Council member in 2013, to
improve intra-Council communication and exchange
of information. It is important to hear the views
of the current non-permanent members regarding
implementation of the note.

Third, Pakistan would appreciate an assessment
of the implementation of presidential note S/2014/268.
An objective evaluation of the fulfilment of the
commitments made in the note is important to ensure the
wider participation of Council members in delivering
on the Council's responsibilities.

Fourth, troop- and police-contributing countries
(TCCs) must be closely consulted before the
formulation and approval of peacekeeping mandates.
Such involvement will address many issues related to
command, control, communication, coordination and
inter-mission movements. Such consultations will also
help to sync peacekeeping missions with the realities
on the ground.
Fifth, the implementation of presidential note
S/2013/630 is particularly important for the Council's
management and operation of peacekeeping missions.
In this regard, it is imperative to know how the major
TCCs view the implementation ofthis note. As a leading
troop-contributing country, Pakistan believes that much
needs to be done to ensure deeper and more meaningful
consultations on all aspects ofpeacekeeping. The Chair
of the Informal Working Group may wish to collate
the views of all TCCs speaking today to assess the
stakeholders' perception in this regard.

Sixth, regarding the working of the Council's
subsidiary bodies, Pakistan calls for transparent
processes leading to balanced representation on the
Council's expert panels.

Seventh, and lastly, ensuring the independence of
the Office of the Ombudsperson is of vital importance
to address concerns on due process in the sanctions
Committees. There is also no justification for
limiting the scope of the Ombudsperson to just one
sanctions Committee.

Before concluding, let me express my appreciation
for the practice adopted today of commencing work
on an important issue only after listening to the views
of the wider membership rather than concluding work
before giving an opportunity to non-Council members
to express themselves.

The Council, according to the Charter, is obliged
to act on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations. This responsibility can be fulfilled only once
the Council listens to them before acting on their behalf.

