Ms. Adan (Somalia): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to address this Council and to share
with you current events shaping the destiny of Somalia.
Allow me also to congratulate you on assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month.

First and foremost, the Somali people, for the first
time in more than two decades, are speaking of new
hopes, optimism, confidence and strong faith in the new
developments in our homeland. It is my ardent wish and
hope that my Government will prove the Somali people
right in their aspirations.

Let me say a few words about the current situation
in Somalia. The rise of a new dawn in Somalia started
with the successful end of the transition and the laying
of the foundations for credible and viable governance
structures. Today, we have a fully functioning and
lean Government, with a robust and lively legislature.
The well-known conflict and acrimony among Somali
leaders is something of the past and a cooperative
atmosphere prevails.

At the very outset beginning, my Government
adopted a six-pillar policy framework based on our
collective vision for the way forward. This vision is a
strategy for dealing with such urgent issues as security
and peacebuilding, law and good governance reform,
economic recovery and public finance management
reform, good and targeted service delivery, the
restructuring of international relations, and
safeguarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Somalia.

The Somali Government has adopted several
initiatives and programmes based on these pillars. In
the security sector, for example, Government troops,
in collaboration with the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), have succeeded in regaining
control of areas previously held by Al-Shabaab. Today,
Al-Shabaab is weakened and its leadership is in disarray
and on the run. We are committed to continuing the
fight against this scourge until the final victory is
achieved.

We are in the process of establishing local
administrations in the newly recovered areas of South
and Central Somalia. This is based on a bottom-
up approach - in other words, the empowerment of
local communities to select their own leaders and the
Somali Government as the sole legitimate facilitator,
as prescribed in the Constitution. This will promote
respect for Somalia's sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence; the legitimacy of the federal
Government of the Somali Republic; and respect for the
wishes of the local populations in those areas.

The Somali Government has also initiated much-
needed steps in establishing a credible, transparent
and accountable public finance system. The collection
of taxes as a major source of Government income is
a priority in this regard. We are also working on a
programme for the voluntary repatriation of Somali
refugees in neighbouring countries, as well as the
resettlement of internally displaced persons in their
areas of original residence.

Despite the progress made in different areas and
the multiple tasks ahead, serious challenges remain. We
have no illusions about this. Getting rid of the remnants
of the Al- Shabaab is a top priority for us. That, however,
will require strengthening the military capacity of the
Somali defence forces by way of training, providing
enablers in a timely manner, and further restructuring
command and control structures.

Consolidating peace in the recovered areas
in southern Somalia and securing the necessary
military and financial resources in a timely manner
is another priority. The lifting of the arms embargo
is a prerequisite for attaining this goal. The Somali
Government reiterates its request for the arms embargo
to be lifted. The Somali Government will put in place
the necessary mechanisms to ensure that armaments do
not fall into the wrong hands.

We have started strengthening the capacity of
State institutions by way of structural adjustments
and changes. Yet, further action is required, and this
is where the United Nations can step in by providing
the physical presence of the specialized agencies on the
ground in Somalia and teaming up with line ministries.
These and other programmes cannot succeed unless
there is the blessing, the political will and the long-
term commitment of the international community to
stepping up to the plate and partnering with the new
Somalia, through the Somali Government, in providing
the necessary technical and financial resources.

My Government is pleased to report the continued
commitment of and the enormous sacrifices made
by the Somali National Security Forces, AMISOM,
the Ethiopian National Defence Forces and their
international partners for the successful consummation
of the transitional road map, and urges greater support
to be provided in this regard.

Security is a prerequisite for political, economic
and social stabilization and recovery. The gains made
by AMISOM. and our national armed forces against
Al-Shabaab over the past year are impressive, and I
wish again to thank the nations that contributed their
forces to this courageous endeavour. The support
provided by the United Nations to AMISOM. has to
be acknowledged. We would like to stress again the
importance for our forces to be better trained, equipped
and structured. The Council's support is required, not
least in lifting the arms embargo to allow the Somali
national armed forces to assume full responsibility for
our own security. In this context, however, we would
like to voice and reiterate our strong opposition to the
authorization of a maritime force for AMISOM.

We discussed our concerns during the recent African
Union (AU) strategic review; our point was understood,
and that particular element has been removed from the
final report to the AU Peace and Security Council.
The naval capability of our forces must be the priority.
There is no compelling reason to take the campaign
against Al-Shabaab to sea. Piracy, human trafficking
and smuggling are important challenges, but they are
not linked to the mandate of AMISOM. This is our
task, which needs the Council's support.

With reference to paragraph 51 of the report, dated
17 September 2011, of the eleventh Ordinary Council
of Ministers of Defence and Security of the Eastern
African Region, held in Seychelles, the Council
Ministers of Defence and Security discussed the issue
of a maritime component for AMISOM, and Somalia
clearly stated its position that it does not need such a
component. In view of this, the Council of Ministers of
Defence and Security unanimously agreed to Somalia's
objection to a maritime component for AMSIOM. A
copy of this report, signed by all members, is available
for easy reference in this Chamber.

Significant progress has been made against piracy,
and we thank the international community for the well-
coordinated and robust operations that have almost
defeted this negative industry. The gains need urgently
to be supplemented with programmes aiming at the
young people in those communities. This is closely
linked to the reintegration of disengaged combatants
and youth at risk throughout the country. We will need
to urgently invest in our youth in order not to lose the
dividend of the military and anti-piracy campaigns.

We also urge the esteemed Council to remove
paragraph 38 of the Secretary-General's report
to the Security Council (S/2013/69) regarding the
implementation of the United Nations Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy. The Somali Government sees
this particular matter as applying only to our national
forces.

The humanitarian situation remains critical for
hundreds of thousands of our people. Many are at risk;
a million of our citizens remain displaced within the
country, and many more have sought refuge elsewhere.
We urge the international community to further
generously contribute through the United Nations
consolidated appeal or other means in order to alleviate
the suffering. The drought and the conflict have
disrupted the ability of our people to cope. So many
lives have been saved by the United Nations and the
many humanitarian agencies and friends of Somalia.
Let us build on this success and invest in the capacity
of our people to take care of themselves. We are strong
people and should not be dependent on aid.

The human rights situation needs further urgent
attention. We are aware of the shortcomings and the
prevailing abuses. Our Government is committed to
moving decisively to ensure that access to basic human
rights is guaranteed and that the culture of violence,
particularly against women and journalists, is brought
to an end.

I would like to reaffirm our support for resolution
2036 (2012) banning the trade in and export of charcoal,
and ask the Council to decide to punish the violators of
the ban.

Today, and on behalf of the Somali people and the
federal Government of the Somali Republic, I stand
before the Council to state that the Somali people
and Government seek a permanent partnership with
the United Nations, its Member States and the entire
United Nations family - a partnership for peace, good
governance, and socioeconomic, political and cultural
cooperation - in a manner that suits both of us, from
this moment until the time when we are fully able to
stand on our own feet. This underscores the need for a
paradigm shift in the manner in which the international
community engaged with the former transitional
Somali administration.

Let me again thank the United Nations for its long-
standing support for Somalia. We would have been
nowhere without the persistence of the United Nations
system, its agencies and their staff. The gradual return
of the United Nations system to Mogadishu has begun
over the past year. The regular presence of more and
more senior staff has made a difference. We understand
the difficulties of such a relocation in a security situation
that remains difficult but has now become manageable.
I would like to encourage the United Nations and our
friends to move decisively to come back. In line with
common practice, we will support the United Nations
and its Member States by providing security, land,
facilities and immunities, as required. United Nations
offices and embassies must be relocated to Mogadishu.

At this point, I would like to reiterate our strong
position that there must be an integrated United Nations
mission, which would help the system to deliver and
speak as one. We believe that the advantages of having
a unified structure outweigh by far the concerns of
those seeking to maintain the status quo in order to
disassociate themselves from the political and military
components of the international effort.

Integration would facilitate a coherent approach
to peacebuilding, stabilization and support for
institutions, which is the strength of the United Nations
system. We accept that the integration of the military
component can be gradual and begin as soon as the
active military campaign is over - which we hope will
happen in the months to come. I believe that this is in
line with the discussions we held with both the United
Nations and the AU strategic review teams. We need
clear and lean structures with which we can engage,
cooperate and partner. A United Nations presence with
a unified structure will be stronger and more efficient
and deliver with more vigour. We sincerely hope that
our voice is listened to.

The President has made this point in his travels
to the region and when visiting the United States,
the United Kingdom and the European Union and in
meetings with their leaders. He has shared his views
in writing with the Secretary-General, with whom
he also discussed the matter during his recent visit
to Addis Abeba. Furthermore, during the forty-sixth
Extraordinary Session of the Council of Ministers
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), held in Addis Ababa on 23 January, it was
agreed that IGAD's grand stabilization plan was to be
integrated into the six-pillar policy framework of the
Somali Government in the next six weeks.

To conclude, I would like to extend an invitation
to Security Council members to visit Somalia in
the near future to witness the dramatic changes and
opportunities.

