The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Cuba, the Czech
Republic, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, South
Africa, Thailand and Timor-Leste, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-
Leste, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste,
was escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend the warmest welcome to Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta,
President of Timor-Leste.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Atul Khare,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste and head of Mission of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.

It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members have before them document S/2009/72,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.

I wish to welcome the presence this morning of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We are very pleased
that he has made time available for this meeting. I now
have the honour of giving him the floor.


