Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Let me
start by thanking Ms. Sandra Honore for her briefing
earlier today and her ongoing leadership.

Canada aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

Allow me, on behalf of all Canadians, to express
our solidarity and friendship with the Haitian people
after the devastation wrought by Hurricane Matthew.
We are saddened by the heavy loss of life caused by the
hurricane in Haiti. In View ofthose tragic circumstances,
our immediate thoughts are naturally with the victims
and their families and loved ones. We are committed
to helping the stricken people of Haiti and will support
them during these trying times.

Canada rapidly deployed the Canadian Disaster
Assessment Team to Haiti, which worked closely with
Haitian authorities and international humanitarian
organizations to assess the most pressing needs.
Canada has already allocated more than $4.5 million
to meet the urgent needs expressed by our partners.
Canada's humanitarian assistance is being delivered
through United Nations humanitarian agencies and
international organizations that are currently on the
ground to address the emergency needs of vulnerable
populations in such areas as shelter, food assistance,
water, sanitation and basic health care in the coming
days and weeks.

This natural disaster poses an additional challenge
to the organization of elections originally scheduled
for 9 October. Helping victims must remain our top
priority. Canada notes the decision of the Provisional
Electoral Council to take stock of the situation after
the hurricane and to communicate its assessment on
Wednesday, 12 October. Canada urges the Haitian
authorities, including the Provisional Electoral Council,
to continue to pursue the electoral process diligently
and resolutely and to provide an election date as soon
as possible in order to inaugurate an elected president
on 7 February 2017, at the latest. We also encourage
all political actors, civil society and each citizen to
contribute actively to a successful electoral process.

The restoration of constitutional order through
impartial, credible and transparent elections is an
essential step towards greater stability and prosperity in
Haiti. The emergence of strong democratic institutions,
guided by the principles of representativeness and good
governance, is an absolute prerequisite for the country's
reconstruction on a solid and sustainable foundation.

(spoke in English)

I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate Canada's
support for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the renewal of its mandate on
the basis of proposals made by the Secretary-General
and the Group of Friends of Haiti. We are also grateful
to MINUSTAH and its components for their work in
the country and with the population in the wake of this
devastating hurricane.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report to the Security Council
(S/2016/753), the security situation remains fragile
and the Haitian National Police must continue to rely
on the support of the international community to
pursue its professionalization and, ultimately, to fully
and independently assume its security prerogatives.
Consequently, Canada remains convinced that any
decision regarding the mandate, composition and fate
of MINUSTAH must be in keeping with the situation
on the ground and the Haitian National Police's
ability to fully discharge its duties as a public service.
MINUSTAH must also continue to have the resources
and means necessary to carry out its mission. While
MINUSTAH is not a permanent solution for security
in Haiti, we should avoid reduction scenarios that could
jeopardize the results achieved to date.

Beyond security considerations, Haiti still faces a
multitude of challenges. The socioeconomic situation
remains precarious against a backdrop of chronic
political instability and persistent humanitarian
challenges, compounded by the recent disaster. There
has been an increase in reported cases of cholera over
the past year, and we applaud the Secretary-General's
intent to deploy renewed efforts to fight that problem.

In addition, many victims of the 2010 earthquake
are still waiting for a resettlement solution. The
repatriation of large numbers of Haitians and people
of Haitian descent from the Dominican Republic also
continues to place demands on the State's resources. At
the same time, Canada continues to be concerned about
the slow progress in strengthening the rule of law,
persistent weaknesses in the judicial and correctional
systems, and the status of women.

More than ever, those challenges require not
only coordinated and sustained action on the part of
international partners, but also increased effectiveness
on the part of the Haitian authorities, more particularly
in terms of identifying needs, setting priorities and
coordinating responses. Canada will continue, for
its part, to work closely with national actors and the
international community to focus on an integrated
response combining socioeconomic considerations,
a security dimension and development issues, while
continuing to pay special attention to the most
vulnerable, including women and children.

