Mr. Zmeevsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, allow me to express my
appreciation to the Pakistani presidency for the
initiative to hold this Council meeting on the
strengthening of a comprehensive approach to counter-
terrorism. The Russian Federation supports that
approach through national measures and in advancing
international counter-terrorism cooperation under the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and the
Security Council.

We consider today's meeting a practical
manifestation of that general course and the logical
continuation of the special meetings on counter-
terrorism held by the Council last year (see S/PV.6765 and S/PV.6890).

Unfortunately, the terrorist threat has not declined.
A few days ago, a number of savage terrorist acts in
Pakistan caused many casualties. We express our
condolences to the bereaved family members and loved
ones, our solidarity with them and our wishes for the
victims' speedy recovery.

Terrorism is quickly adapting to new realities
and adopting a new dimension and gravity. Reports
on terrorist acts issue more frequently from regions
previously untouched by such acts. We are facing an
exceptionally dangerous global challenge to today's
world order and civilization that is hard to predict and
threatens international peace and security.

New grave problems in counter-terrorism security
are building, spurred by conflict situations in North
Africa, the Middle East and the Horn ofAfrica. That has
resulted in increased terrorist group activities, including
mobile cross-border displacement, rapid weapon
acquisition - mostly from Libyan arsenals - and the
establishment of new sources of financing. Terrorism
is integrating more tightly with organized crime,
including in West Africa and the Sahel region. It is no
coincidence that criminal challenges in that region at
the start of the past year became the subject of an open
meeting of the Council (see S/PV.6765).

The activity of Al-Qaida and the Taliban in the
Afghanistan-Pakistan region continues to generate
transnational terrorist threats, along with the illegal
production and trafficking of narcotics.

Terrorism is a non-traditional adversary. Terrorist
organizations, unlike States, have no international
obligations, bear no responsibility to society and
operate under other references and moral practices.
Assisted by modern information technologies and the
Internet, terrorists have actively spread their ideology
in order to recruit, organize and train rebels.
A very dangerous trend is the determined spread
of terrorist ideology and violent extremism often seen
in anonymous inputs to social networks, under slogans
of democracy and reform calling for the organization
of street protests. We must be concerned about media
broadcasts depicting crowds of dissatisfied people
determined to protest under Al-Qaida flags and
portraits of Osama Bin Laden.

Equally, we are concerned about attempts made by
supporters of Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations
to infiltrate Governments and civic organizations.
Against that backdrop, a growing destructive wave
of radicalism is provoking dangerous interreligious
tensions in various regions, resulting in favourable
conditions for attracting new adherents - especially
young people - to such movements.

One extremely alarming trend is the integration
of terrorism into today's regional and other armed
conflicts, as seen, for example, in Mali. Under the flag
of separatism, terrorists directly threaten the territorial
integrity of States, thus undermining the foundations of
international peace and security.

It is encouraging that in neutralizing the
terrorist threat in that country, the international
community - as was particularly evident in yesterday's
Council consultations - is using common approaches.
At the same time, we cannot but be concerned by the
lack of a common Council position with respect to
condemning the terrorist acts and threats in Syria,
particularly in view of the growing influence among
the opposition of terrorist organizations linked to
Al-Qaida.

The transnational nature of today's terrorist threats
requires the entire international community to pool its
efforts to ensure effective cooperation in countering
that dangerous challenge. A good effort has been
made in that context, namely, the establishment of a
global collective response to terrorist challenges that
includes a solid treaty base, participation in which we
must expand. On that basis, an extensive institutional
cooperation model has been established under the
central coordinating role of the United Nations.

Regional, subregional and bilateral counter-
terrorism efforts are developing dynamically. The
scope and results of that work have, in turn, improved
effective law enforcement cooperation under
international, regional and bilateral formats. As a
result, the potential of terrorist organizations has been
significantly hampered through obstacles to the spread
of their work and depriving them of important financial
and logistical support channels.

Nevertheless, the challenges in providing a timely
and appropriate response to the changing terrorist threat
remains a priority issue of the United Nations and the
Security Council. We support strengthened cooperation
among the General Assembly, without prejudice to the
independent, active role of the Council in that area.

We attach vital importance to the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011).

We note that with the December 2012 agreement
of the Council on two resolutions on Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, the Council has maintained its focus on
the existing sanctions mechanisms in order to counter
credible terrorist threats emanating from those
organizations. Measures ensuring the transparency of
those sanctions and allowing them freedom to operate
should promote their effectiveness and increase their
support for the quality of their work combating the
Taliban and Al-Qaida.

It is an international imperative that we prevent
any kind of assistance to terrorists, whether military,
technical or financial. States that disregard this
obligation will eventually find that it backfires on them
and will pay with their citizens' lives for pandering to
terrorism. One of the urgent tasks we face is ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 2017 (2011),
adopted on Russia's initiative, which calls for a cluster
of measures aimed at combating the uncontrolled
proliferation of arms in Libya, particularly man-
portable air-defence systems, This area has become an
extremely dangerous source of support for terrorist and
criminal organizations, not just in the Sahara-Sahel
region but far beyond its boundaries.

Also still relevant is the goal laid out in resolution
1624 (2005) of countering the ideology of terrorism
by creating an atmosphere of total repudiation within
the global community. It is essential that the struggle
for people's minds and hearts be conducted on the
basis of a deepened intercultural dialogue and mutual
understanding among civilizations and religions that
firmly suppresses incitement to terrorism in all its forms.
We must therefore establish effective cooperation with
civil society in order to neutralize manifestations of
violent extremism and terrorism at the earliest stages.
The goal of universal implementation of the
General Assembly's approved Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy is more important than ever. It is
a harmonious combination of hard and soft counter-
terrorism approaches, the goals of various high-profile
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
The results of the third review of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy held in June last year present
additional possibilities for building on the work of
improving complex approaches to combating terrorism.

In the context of the theme of today's meeting, and
bearing in mind the rapidly changing character of the
global terrorist threat, it is especially important that
the international community establish measures not
only to respond quickly to crisis situations but also to
prevent them altogether. We attach vital importance
to the issues of preventing terror, suppressing the
production of ideologies of extremism and violence,
including by combating incitement to terrorism,
as well as preventing the use of media spaces or the
global Internet for terrorist purposes. It is Vital that we
develop consolidated responses to new terrorist threats,
including in cyberspace. Practical efforts to comply
with Security Council requests on banning terrorism
propaganda sites, such as Kavkazcenter.com, the
Swedish-based information mouthpiece of the terrorist
organization Imarat Kavkaz, should also include
the development of a global agreement as a basis for
combating the use of cyberspace for terrorist and
other criminal purposes, through organizing practical
cooperation and confidence-building in this area.

The terrorism of mass destruction increases the
threat to international peace and security, and steps
to prevent nuclear terrorism are particularly relevant.
It is essential to broaden States' participation in major
United Nations and International Atomic Energy
Agency conventions, in the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism and in implementing the decisions
of the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit. The Committee
established pursuant to 1540 (2004) should play an
important role in achieving these goals.

Russia intends to continue to actively support
counter-terrorism efforts under United Nations
auspices, including through our own expert experience
and practice. In October, we received a mission
from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to evaluate our country's implementation of
individual provisions of the Security Council's baseline
anti-terrorism resolutions, 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The results of the visit demonstrated Russia's
commitment to the work of increasing international
cooperation in this area under United Nations auspices
and affirmed our contribution, as a permanent member
of the Council, to the development and advancement of
international standards in the field.

We see socioeconomic prevention as one of the
most important anti-terrorism priorities today and
impossible without vigorous targeted measures aimed
at caring for people and ensuring and protecting their
rights, including the right to a dignified and secure
existence and decent compensation for honest labour.
People must be able to see an alternative to terrorism
and other criminality and have the opportunity to
make a conscious choice for development and creation.
Contributions to achieving socioeconomic development
projects could be made not only by States but also by
United Nations anti-terrorism bodies and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
together with specialized economic organizations such
as the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization, the Economic
Commission for Europe and regional bodies such as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Commonwealth
of Independent States. This type of synergy would
open a new chapter in international donorship, uniting
cooperative development with the fight against
terrorism and other criminality.

We believe it is particularly important to involve
the business community in such efforts. In dealing
with the challenges of preventing terrorism, this would
help to weaken the socioeconomic basis of criminality,
which as a rule puts down deep roots precisely in those
places where poverty and unemployment prevail and
the conditions for normal life are lacking. Partnerships
with business are also useful for developing effective
measures for ensuring the rights ofvictims ofterrorism,
including compensation through transnational
insurance and reinsurance models for major acts of
terrorism.

Russia was the initiator of an international project
partnering States with businesses in the fight against
terrorism. At the proposal of the Russian presidency
of the Group of Eight, a major conference was held
in Moscow in 2006 to lay the foundations for such
cooperation and seeing fulfilment in the form of
numerous projects both in Russia itself and at the
international level. In our View, it is currently important
to support the decision, taken on Russia's initiative in
April 2012, of the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice to begin work on establishing the
foundations of international cooperation in providing
security in the area of tourism from terrorist and other
criminal threats. As part of a public-private partnership,
a project is being developed under the auspices of the
United Nations and the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute to prevent the
flow of precious metals into the hands of terrorists and
other criminals.

It is essential that efforts be continued to trace
and cut off financial sources supporting terrorism. On
Russia's initiative, the Financial Action Task Force is
working on such relevant issues as exposing financial
flows from the illegal production and trade of Afghan
narcotics, a significant part of which goes to financing
terrorism. Needless to say, finding solutions to these
new challenges should in no way be seen as undermining
the law-enforcement components of counter-terrorism,
including information exchange, the conduct of joint
anti-terrorist workshops and operations, cooperation on
the criminal prosecution of terrorists and their resulting
punishment, the suppression of financing, delivery of
arms and other forms of support, as well as cooperation
with training qualified staff and improving national
legislation.

These challenges can be met only on the basis
of a firm commitment to the principles laid down in
the United Nations Charter and the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. Above
all, we are talking about respecting States' sovereignty,
non-interference in their internal affairs, observing
human rights and fundamental freedoms, condemning
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
and by whomever terrorist acts may be committed,
and refraining from supporting such criminal activity
in any way. It is categorically unacceptable to depart
in any way from the international community's
principled and consolidated position unconditionally
condemning and actively combating terrorism. Political
unscrupulousness in that regard will lead to an objective
increase in the risks of terrorism.

Combating international terrorism remains a
priority of Russia's foreign policy. We support the
draft presidential statement to be delivered as a result
of today's meeting, emphasizing the importance
of strengthening the comprehensive approach to
international anti-terrorist cooperation under United
Nations auspices. We wish to continue the dialogue
and constructive cooperation in this area with all
States Members of the United Nations, with the aim of
increasing confidence in and unswerving compliance
with international law.
