Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Before
beginning my statement, I would like to extend the
condolences of my delegation and my country on the
killing of three United States diplomats in the Gaza
Strip. Bulgaria categorically condemns this heinous
terrorist act.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report of 6 October 2003 (S/2003/944), and to
thank his Special Representative, Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, for his efforts on behalf of the
international community and for his excellent work.
The extensive and detailed analysis that he has just
made is, once again, evidence of his dedication to his
work. I also take this opportunity also to pay once
again a most earnest tribute to the valuable contribution
made to Timor-Leste by the unforgettable Sergio Vieira
de Mello.

As an associated country of the European Union,
Bulgaria fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made soon by the representative of Italy on behalf of
the Union. I would like to make a few brief comments
in my national capacity.

My country welcomes the efforts of the Timorese
Government to build a State of law based on the
principles of democracy and respect for human rights.
We greatly appreciate the Government's "open
governance" initiative and President Gusmao's "open
presidency" initiative. Those initiatives reflect a clear
commitment to the process of building a responsible
and representative network to govern the country.

In that context, we also welcome the resumption
of the work of the Court of Appeal. Bulgaria agrees
with the conclusions of the report of the Secretary-
General of 6 October 2003 (S/2003/944). It should be
noted that, despite the praiseworthy efforts of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and of local bodies, the Timorese
Government continues to face serious problems and
challenges. My country agrees with the view that the
United Nations must find the best way to support
Timor-Leste following the expiration of the UNMISET
mandate.

Bulgaria supports Timor-Leste's policy to
develop relations with neighbouring countries. Active
dialogue with the Republic of Indonesia testifies to the
determination of the two countries to develop fruitful
cooperation. Bulgaria hopes that the two countries will
seek the best solutions to unresolved issues - the
demarcation of land and sea borders and facilitating
cross-border transit with West Timor for those who live
in the border region.

In conclusion, I would like to say that my country
greatly appreciates the positive contribution made in
Timor-Leste by such countries as Australia, Portugal
and Japan.

