Lieutenant General Kamanzi: Like my
colleagues, I have been asked to provide a perspective
on the impact of the changing security and operational
environment on United Nations missions and mandates.
I would like to start by reviewing the evolution of the
conflict in South Sudan. I will then talk about the
operating environment and associated challenges,
drawing on our experience, before then turning to
how we are addressing those challenges in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

The start of the conflict in December 2013 was
due to a split of the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) and the formation of the SPLA-in Opposition.
At that time, fighting mostly took place in the Upper
Nile, Jonglei and Unity states. The Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, signed on 17 August 2015, collapsed in July
2016, and the conflict resumed.

Since then, fighting has spread to other parts of
the country, including the Equatorias, a critical food-
growing area, where a multitude of new actors are
currently involved. At the same time, long-standing
communal conflicts, fuelled by competition for land
and water resources, have persisted and, in most cases,
have became more violent and destructive due to the
widespread availability of automatic weapons.

The Intergovernmental Authority on Development-
led process known as the High-level Revitalization
Forum resulted in the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement on 21 December2017. However, fighting
among the SPLA, the SPLA-in Opposition affiliated
with Riek Machar, the SPLA-in Opposition affiliated
with General Tabang Deng, and other armed groups has
continued in violation of the Ceasefire Agreement. The
fighting often increases each time we approach another
round of talks as parties jostle for prominence, as we
are currently witnessing.

The security and operational environment in South
Sudan has become increasingly complex. We have
moved from a conflict that involves only two parties to
one in which the Transitional Government of National
Unity has the upper hand but faces political and military

opposition from multiple actors. The Government
has increasingly gained control in central states, the
capital, Juba, and in other population centres. However,
opposition groups continue to operate in several
outlying areas, in particular in the north, east and south
near international borders, where they enjoy support
and seek to retain control or gain tactical advantage.
The protection of civilians remains our priority.
We continue to provide physical protection to more
than 209,000 internally displaced persons, United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors who
live and work Within the five protection-of-civilian
sites throughout the country. In addition, our presence
in Bung reassures and supports the 15 humanitarian
agencies that assist 13,000 refugees at the refugee site
and the 11 humanitarian agencies that work with 54,000
refugees at the Jamjang refugee sites in Upper Nile and
Unity states, respectively.

While that population is a small fraction of the
estimated 1.69 million internally displaced persons
within South Sudan, it requires more than 40 per cent
of the force to accomplish that task. We are therefore
working to free up more forces for mobile and outreach
operations by introducing surveillance systems and
other technologies to enable the protection of those
sites with fewer troops and to improve our operational
efficiency. More mobile operations will provide an
increased security presence and create the confidence
that allows people to return to their homes from
protection-of-civilian sites and neighbouring countries.

The terrain and climatic conditions in South Sudan
are particularly demanding. During the rainy season,
from May to October, most of the unsealed roads that
link states and major population centres are impassable.
Our ability to be mobile for nearly half of the year is
therefore highly constrained. As a result, we have had
to disperse forces in order to maximize our ability
to reach out to and support humanitarian actors. To
achieve that, we operate from 17 bases, seven of which
are occupied by a single company, each with a maximum
of 150 troops. Our forces must travel more than several
hundred kilometres between bases, along single-track
roads or by the limited number of helicopters we have.
That presents additional challenges for resupply and
force security.

To address those issues and challenges, we are
taking the opportunity afforded by the recent induction
of the first elements of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF) into the Mission, by reinforcing our operating
bases in Yambio and Torit and establishing a new one
in Yei, in the south of the country. At the same time,
UNMISS military engineers have been repairing roads
and operating in remote locations to enable us to be
more flexible when responding to new requests for
assistance. Those operations also improve security
along the main supply routes that link the seaport at
Mombasa to South Sudan through Kenya and Uganda.
In the course of carrying out our mandate, we
face obstruction, access denials and violations of the
status of forces agreement. Sometimes those tactics
are employed by Government forces as well as by
opposition parties to try to prevent us from gaining
access to areas where fighting is taking place. At
other times the fragmentation of opposition groups
leads to commanders acting independently and not
effectively responding to orders or direction from
their higher headquarters. In other cases criminals and
opportunistic armed groups have inhibited the work of
humanitarian actors, at times detaining them for several
days in order to demonstrate that they control particular
areas. Maintaining a relationship with the Government
and opposition groups is vital, while realizing that all
parties are responsible for violating the cessation of
hostilities agreement and the associated destruction
and atrocities against civilians.

Employing patience, good communications with
all parties and a robust posture are therefore important
to our approach. Our patrols have demonstrated
unwillingness to be turned back or otherwise inhibited,
even if we have to negotiate for several hours or
escalate the issue for resolution at headquarters level
before proceeding with our work. We also endeavour
to be agile and proactive, where necessary positioning
troops where we believe conflict might break out.
That has often calmed situations and lessened or
prevented violence.

We continue to improve the security and
performance of our force peacekeepers. A review of
each of our operating bases and protection-of-civilian
sites has been completed and action points, including
the maintenance of perimeter fencing, security lighting
and the provision of closed-circuit security systems, are
now being addressed. We are undertaking a detailed
review of casualty evacuation procedures and have
established a force-protection advisory team, whose
responsibilities include identifying risks to the force
and sharing best practices to mitigate them.

Resolution 2406 (2018) authorizes a troop ceiling
of 17,000 peacekeepers, which includes the Regional
Protection Force. We currently have more than 13,700
personnel; we expect the remainder of the Ethiopian
battalion of the Regional Protection Force to arrive
next month, bringing us closer to 15,000 personnel.
In addition to enabling us to deploy more forces in the
strategically important Equatorias, the deployment
of the first elements of the RPF allows us to provide
more security in Juba, protect civilians and assist other
United Nations agencies and partners. We also work
closely with the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism to enable it to
monitor ceasefire violations and to understand what
transitional security arrangements may be necessary
in future.

In conclusion, encouraging all parties to reach a
political solution is imperative. That will in turn improve
the Mission's prospects of achieving its mandate. For
our part, we continue to work to deter violence against
civilians through proactive deployment, while working
closely with humanitarian actors, monitoring and
investigating human rights abuses and working with
all stakeholders to build durable peace. At the same
time, we are working to improve the organization,
capabilities and employment of the force, along with
the required enablers in order to effectively support the
Mission mandate and protect our force.

We are grateful for, and continue to count on, the
Council's support.

