Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The drafting by Security Council members in
2006 of recommendations on the Council's working
methods, which were incorporated into the relevant
note of the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/507), was very significant for strengthening
the principles of transparency and effectiveness in the
work of the Security Council.

In recent years, Security Council members have
made significant progress in these areas through
constructive dialogue with interested Member States
that are non-members of the Council. The number of
open meetings of the Council has increased. The
Council President has adopted the systematic practice
of holding briefings for Member States, including on
the Council's programme of work.

The subsidiary bodies of the Council present
regular reports on their work. The quality of the
Council's annual reports has improved. Comprehensive
and regularly updated information on the work of the
Council is posted on its website. Items on the Security
Council's agenda are added and removed in an orderly
manner. Opportunities for contact between the Security
Council and interested States have increased, including
as part of the Arria Formula meetings and the so-called
informal interactive dialogues.

The Security Council is actively cooperating with
countries contributing troops and police to United
Nations peacekeeping operations through the
Peacebuilding Commission and its country
configurations. An additional impulse was given to
dialogue with regional organizations with a View to
fully harnessing the potential of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. This is by no means a full list
of the real achievements in improving the working
methods of the Security Council.

We believe that Member States will take
reciprocal steps and demonstrate even greater interest
in cooperating with the Security Council. In practice,
despite the increased number of open meetings of the
Council and briefings by the President of the Security
Council, low Member attendance persists. It is
important for countries that contribute troops to United
Nations peacekeeping operations to participate more
actively in the discussions at their regular meetings
with the Council and to offer specific assessments and
opinions for Council members could use in their work.
In other words, we must note that, to date,
opportunities that are currently available have not been
fully exploited by non-members.

Article 30 of the Charter defines the prerogative
of the Security Council to establish its own rules of
procedure. In implementation of that role, it is striving
methodically in its Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions to
improve its working methods. Russia notes the
professional leadership of the Group by its current
Chair, the Permanent Representative of Japan,
Mr. Takasu.

Academic and unrealistic approaches in this area
could have a negative impact on the productivity of the
Security Council's work. It is important to maintain a
balance between openness in the work of the Security
Council, on the one hand, and ensuring the
effectiveness, functionality and appropriate
confidentiality of its work, on the other. Security
Council members are prepared to further heed the good
advice on improving its working methods. We trust that
today's meeting will facilitate the gathering of more
information on the opinions and preferences of
non-members of the Council. However, decisions in
this area will be taken only by members of the Council
in the context of their Charter-mandated
responsibilities.

