Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Armenia thanks the
Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for
initiating this open debate, and the Secretary-General
for his briefing and recent comprehensive report on the
subject matter dated 27 April 2015 (S/2015/289). We
also thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for his detailed overview.

The excessive accumulation, uncontrolled spread
and illicit trafficking of small arms in all its aspects
pose a serious threat to peace and undermines efforts
to ensure an indivisible and comprehensive security.
In that vein, Armenia remains committed to the full
and effective implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which outlines a number
of important steps including measures pertaining
to regional cooperation. We are convinced that the
further development of regional and subregional small
arms control mechanisms, with the participation of all
stakeholders and interested parties on a status-neutral
basis, could promote better control of small arms and
light weapons (SALW).

Armenia also acknowledges the important
contributions made by civil society to the implementation
of the Programme of Action, and encourages
cooperation with a broader participation of civil
society in that process. We support the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) initiatives aimed at promoting
the implementation of SALW-related commitments.
Armenia submits information on international SALW
transfers to the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs and to the OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre
annually.

It is noteworthy that last year OSCE adopted
a decision on voluntary guidelines for compiling
national reports on SALW exports. We believe that
such a voluntary guide could also be useful to other
United Nations Member States in their efforts to
implement international agreements on SALW. We
are of the opinion that a standardized reporting form
may encourage greater transparency on SALW exports
and imports, especially in our region. Dialogue
and goal-oriented cooperation among international
organizations are essential to better address the issue
while avoiding the duplication of activities.

When SALW fall into the wrong hands, they
exacerbate violence, prolongs conflicts, undermine the
security of States, increase the activities of transnational
organized crime, and allow for terrorism. They affect all
levels of society, economically and socially, causing a
great degree of human suffering. Therefore, combating
the threat of the uncontrolled and illicit spread of
SALW is crucial in order to strengthen transparency
in military matters and build a climate of trust and
confidence between all stakeholders, particularly in the
regions where the threat perception is real.

It is also important to take necessary steps to
prevent the export of SALW to countries where there is
a clear risk that force might be used for the violation or
suppression ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms,
including that of the right to self-determination. In that
regard, Member States should ensure that they have
adopted relevant laws, regulations and/or necessary
administrative procedures to exercise control over the
legal possessions of SALW and their transfer in order to
prevent illicit trafficking.

At the international level, Armenia continues
to support efforts aimed at the regulation of SALW-
related matters. In that regard, we stress the importance
of financial and technical assistance in building the
capacity of Member States to implement such controls.
We are pleased to inform the Council that, jointly with
the United Nations and the OSCE, a round table on the
implementation of SALW commitments, which was
aimed at supporting Armenia in the elaboration of a
national strategy on SALW control, was organized in
October last year in Yerevan. The United Nations-OSCE
team of experts recently presented recommendations
based on the results of the discussions.

We are currently working on the organizational
modalities of the second round table, entitled Effective
Stockpile Management and Security, and Destruction
of SALW and Conventional Ammunition, which
will be held in Yerevan in July with the participation
of relevant stakeholders including the Ministry of
Defence, the police, national security service, and
International Criminal Police Organization National
Central Bureau. The purpose of the round table is to
raise awareness of the international commitments,
examine best practices related to stockpile management
and security, the destruction of SALW and conventional
ammunition, as well as, where appropriate, to consider
the review of national procedures on handling SALW
and conventional ammunition.

In conclusion, we are confident that the Security
Council will continue to pay particular attention to
SALW-related issues.

