Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming Foreign Minister Holguin Cuellar
to the Security Council.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Council's
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2366 (2017).
Last month, President Santos Calderon called on
the Council to continue its support for Colombia on
its journey towards peace. We are delighted that we
have collectively been able to respond so swiftly and
so positively to that call by establishing a second
United Nations mission to accompany the next
phase in Colombia's implementation of Colombia's
peace process.

We have witnessed an extraordinary journey in
Colombia since we established the first United Nations
mission in January 2016. That journey, beginning just
18 months ago, culminated with the FARC laying down
its weapons on 27 June and ending the days of Colombia
at war. We are privileged to have been able to play a
role in support throughout this momentous period.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the work of the first United Nations Mission,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Arnault and his team in helping the parties reach this
remarkable achievement. They have truly exemplified
the best that the United Nations has to offer.

But experience from our own history in Northern
Ireland has taught us that the hardest part remains
ahead. A sustainable and lasting peace will depend on
the FARC's successful reincorporation into civilian
life. So we welcome the leadership shown again by
both parties in calling for United Nations support to
accompany this next crucial phase in implementation
of the peace process.

As penholder on today's resolution, we have of
course consulted closely with the Government of
Colombia and the FARC. We have every faith in the
commitment President Santos Calderon made during
our visit in May that every last comma of the Peace
Agreements will be implemented. The FARC leadership
told us that they are grateful for the support of the
Security Council, including the action it has taken
today. They told us that they look forward to the Council
continuing its support in the months and years ahead. I
am confident that we will not let the parties down.
Colombia has offered a beacon of hope for the
world. This Chamber is no stranger to the worst
conflicts and crises of our time. In too many places war
is the norm and peace remains a distant dream. Thanks
in small part to our efforts and our unity, Colombia is
showing that peace is possible. I encourage all of us to
continue to demonstrate that unity and stand with all
of the people of Colombia during the next phase of the
peace process.

