The Secretary-General: Let me first say how
happy I am, Mr. President, to see you presiding over
this meeting.

Let me also welcome the Political Committee of
the Lusaka Agreement. I hope that this meeting with
the Security Council will enable all parties to agree to
move forward together in the peace process.

In my last report to the Council, I recommended
that the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) be
authorized to enter phase III of its deployment. For that
deployment to succeed, however, the parties
themselves must live up to their responsibilities. I
would therefore like to reiterate some of my concerns.

First and foremost, the fighting in the east of the
country must stop. No one should give any further
support to the armed groups that continue to fight in
the east, and no one should take any further aggressive
action against them.

At the same time, everything possible must be
done to create conditions that will encourage former
combatants to return voluntarily to their homes, and
enable them to be settled safely.

(spoke in French)

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda must reach an understanding on the process of
the disarmament, demobilization and repatriation of
combatants, and on the creation of a coordination
mechanism to facilitate a smooth transition from
disarmament to reintegration.

Kisangani must be demilitarized, in accordance
with resolution 1304 (2000). I call on the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratic (RCD) to
implement, without further delay, the measures
proposed to that end by my Special Representative, Mr.
Ngongi. It is also my intention to strengthen the
military presence of MONUC in Kisangani in order to
facilitate the demilitarization of that city.

The deployment of MONUC at Kindu is aimed at
creating a climate of security, encouraging the armed
groups to disarm. I therefore note with concern the
decision of the RCD and the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo (MLC) to establish a special joint
force based at Kindu that would be in charge of
tracking down and neutralizing all negative forces.
Kindu must in no instance be used as a base for the
launching of military operations.

(spoke in English)

The withdrawal of the Namibian troops and, also,
many of the Ugandan troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is encouraging. I
strongly urge the Angolan, Zimbabwean and Rwandan
Governments to speed up preparations for the rapid
withdrawal of their troops.

The reopening of the River Congo and its
tributaries is the most important single step that can
now be taken to reunite the country and stimulate
economic and social life. I call on all parties to help
MONUC to do its part in achieving that objective,
notably by dismantling checkpoints and removing any
other remaining barriers to free movement.

I urge members of the Political Committee,
especially the Congolese parties, to support the neutral
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, and I welcome the willingness of the
Government of South Africa to host the dialogue when
it resumes. But the Congolese parties should not wait
for this formal resumption. I hope they will continue to
meet informally for constructive discussions on the
country's future.

I would also urge the three Congolese parties to
continue efforts to improve human rights within the
areas they control. All those in authority have a duty to
investigate alleged violations and to take appropriate
action. The international community will judge them
by the actions they take or fail to take. The Congolese
parties must also facilitate access for those seeking to
bring humanitarian relief to the suffering population in
the areas they control.

And finally, not enough is being done to address
the plight of children, particularly those who have been
inducted into the various armed forces. I urge all
members of the Political Committee, especially the
Congolese parties, to work with the United Nations
Children's Fund and my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as with
MONUC's child protection officers, to draw up and
implement agreements on demobilizing child soldiers
as soon as possible.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo may be at a turning point. At stake is the
reunification of the country after years of war.
MONUC stands ready to make a decisive contribution
by deploying to the East. As the Security Council
prepares to take action on my recommendations, I call
on the parties to fulfil their important responsibilities
and so bring to completion the peace process they
began in Lusaka more than two years ago.

