Mr. Ja'afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting. I would also like to thank
you because, during this meeting, we have heard the
views of the members of the Security Council. As an
open meeting, this is truly an opportunity to listen to
the views of different countries about the changing
situation in my country, Syria. In that regard, I would
like to share some comments on the subject we are
dealing with today.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
the twenty-eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/631) on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The Council has already adopted resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015), on
what has been referred to as the humanitarian crisis.
Nevertheless, we have not achieved the hoped-for
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Syrians are therefore rightfully asking why their
suffering has not been alleviated after almost five and
a half years since the beginning of the international
terrorist war waged against my country by several
countries, including members of the Security Council.
The Ambassador of Angola was quite right in asking
why we do not hold regional and international parties
accountable for the continued humanitarian crisis and
the international terrorist war against my country. That
is a vital question that must be asked.

Bringing about a sustainable end to the suffering
of the Syrian people cannot be achieved by prolonging
their suffering indefinitely, or by holding them hostage
to political blackmail - as certain capitals are trying
to do by putting the Syrian people between a rock
and a hard place and forcing them to choose between
ongoing terrorism or abandoning their country to
chaos. We cannot improve the situation by issuing
dozens of reports or by holding periodic meetings and
sensationalist conferences - nor, in fact, by providing
humanitarian assistance to one region over another.
However important such humanitarian assistance may
be, it must be provided equally to all regions. The so-
called coalition forces - led by the United States of
America - will not put an end to the suffering by
destroying grain silos, electrical facilities and power
plants, costing the Syrian people money and effort that
are difficult to repay; nor by making light of the relative
geography of Syrian bloodshed; and nor by establishing
dubious alliances to eliminate terrorism. Instead, it
can be achieved by seriously combating terrorism, as
is being done by the Syrian Government with the help
of the Russian Federation, at the request of the Syrian
Government itself, which has led to an improvement in
the humanitarian situation in certain regions of Syria.

The solution is clear to us all, including the entire
Council and Mr. O'Brien. It means dealing with the
root causes of the crisis that has been imposed on the
Syrian people. This is a crisis that has been imposed
on - not created by - the Syrian people. Some
members of this organ insistently and deliberately
ignore the real cause of the humanitarian crisis in Syria
and of the exacerbation of the crisis. They attempt to
ignore the reasons that led a large number of Syrians
to seek refuge in the areas of our country controlled by
the Government and many others to do so abroad. The
basic cause of this crisis is terrorism.

As we informed members at the beginning of the
crisis in this very Chamber, Aleppo had not experienced
any terrorist activities in the first year and a half. We
had called upon Council members to assist the Syrian
Government in pressuring the Government of Turkey
to close the borders in order to make it impossible for
terrorists to reach Aleppo. But there was no response.
That led to the entry of tens of thousands of genetically
modified terrorists from all over the world, who came
to be called the "moderate opposition" or "non-State
armed groups". Those groups did what they did
in Aleppo.

In response to references made to Castello road, I
would like to say that the Syrian Government has not
closed that road. Instead, it is attempting to open and
liberate it from the terrorists who use it to block the
flow of humanitarian assistance into Aleppo and Idlib.
The Government is also attempting to deny terrorists
coming from Turkey entry via that road. Terrorism is
the main cause of the Syrian crisis, first and foremost;
furthermore, the unilateral coercive measures that
have paralysed economic activity are another cause of
the humanitarian crisis in my country. A sustainable
solution would therefore consist in combatting terrorism
by implementing the resolutions of the Security Council
itself, in coordination and full cooperation with the
Syrian Government and free of the double standards
and hypocrisy that have been demonstrated by certain
parties in the fight against terrorism. Such a solution
must also avoid making Syria a magnet that would
attract more terrorists.

The representative of the United States of America
spoke earlier of the crimes perpetrated against a
young Palestinian refugee by the Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki, a group of Turkish origin. She spoke of those
who slit the throat of a child as "rebels" but she did
not call them terrorists. The same holds true for other
terrorist groups, including the Jaysh Al-Islam, the Jaysh
Al-Fatah and others. Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and
other countries should end their support for the armed
terrorist groups that, in certain villages of Syria, have
committed atrocious acts against civilians whom they
use as human shields.

They must also stop legitimizing these armed
terrorist groups in Syria by referring to them as the
"moderate armed opposition" or as "non-State armed
groups". All such epithets seek to convey neutrality,
but they are incompatible with the provisions of the
Security Council's own anti-terrorism resolutions. The
mere fact of not calling terrorism by its name sends a
false message to hundreds of terrorist groups that their
terrorism is legitimate so long as it is undertaken in
defiance of the Syrian Government and they continue
to destroy infrastructure and to open the way to further
human and material loss.

French aircraft recently bombed the village of
Al-Tukhan, killing 164 people whom Da'esh had taken
hostage and was using as human shields. But when the
leaders of Da'esh heard the French President claim that
he would seek vengeance for the attack in Nice, they
gave orders for the village to be evacuated. Thus, the
Da'esh fighters left Al-Tukhan just before the French
bombing. The French airforce went ahead and bombed
the village anyway, claiming twice the number of
victims as the Nice attack. The President of France
had sought revenge for Nice by killing 164 civilians in
that Syrian Village. Who used those villagers as human
shields? It was Da'esh who killed civilians under the
cloak of the mission of revenge launched by the French
and United States airforces.

We have submitted dozens of examples of similar
acts through official channels. I will not scroll through a
lengthy list of names, as was done by the representative
of the United States, because it would take me weeks to
list all the victims of terrorist attacks in Syria. Let us
instead name those who attacked Le Bataclan and the
offices of Charlie Heba'o in France, or who perpetrated
the attacks in San Bernardino, Munich and Bangladesh.
Why not give the names of all the groups that have
committed such terrorist acts? Why not call them the
"armed opposition"? Why do we say that terrorism in
Syria is carried out by the moderate opposition, instead
calling their attacks "terrorist acts carried out by
terrorists"? There is no legitimate, halal terrorism on
one side and non-legitimate terrorism on the other. It
is all terrorism, and it is our people who are suffering
from it.

The proof of what I am saying lies in the fact that, a
few days ago, the Harakat Nour al-Din al-Zenki terrorist
group decapitated a 12-year old Palestinian boy. In an
horrific act, they cut off his head. That organization is
said by certain States to belong to the moderate armed
opposition. Those very same Governments have assisted
such entities by providing media support since late 2011.
The practices of those terrorist groups do not differ one
whit from those of similar terrorist groups, including
Jaysh Al-Islam, Ahrar Al-Sham, Jaysh Muhammad
Abu Ubaidah Al-Muhajir, Al-Liwa Al-Tawhid, the Badr
Martyrs' Brigade, the Army of Mujahideen, the Islamic
Front, the Jaysh Al-Fatah, the Turkistan Islamic Party,
the Sultan Murad Brigade and others that are described

by some, both within and outside the Security Council,
as a "moderate opposition army".

These entities are said to be a part of the moderate
opposition, but their supporters have turned them into
monsters and cannibals whose favourite pastime is to
take selfies with their decapitated innocent victims,
and who push people from the rooftops and burn their
victims alive in Aleppo and the villages. We can never
know the names of the many thousands of women and
children who have been taken hostage in the cities of
Syria. We will never know their names, but they are
the victims of horrendous crimes against humanity.
We need no investigations, evidence or police dogs to
identify those responsible for those acts. We know who
they are.

We cannot explain how some members of the
Security Council that claim to protect human rights
and the rule of law continue to prevent some of those
groups from being included on the list of terrorist
organizations. They know that if they were to do so they
would be giving them the green light to continue to kill
and decapitate. That reveals their total lack of sincerity
in their fight against terrorism, which they use as a
political weapon to pressure the Government of Syria,
which has met its constitutional obligations with respect
to protecting its citizens and combatting terrorism.

Nevertheless, we cannot work alone. We need
the Council's support, and we need it to understand
the scope of the threat posed by the terrorism we
are facing in Syria, in the region and throughout the
world. This danger is beginning to affect Council
members themselves, in their own countries. I am
firmly convinced that the citizens of the countries that
have been engulfed by this wave of terrorist acts can
legitimately ask themselves about the reasons that are
leading their countries' Governments to turn a blind
eye to such acts.

Talk of combating terrorism and the lifting of
unilateral coercive measures brings me to the second
step needed to resolve the humanitarian crisis, that
is, support for a political solution, because combating
terrorism can only contribute to success in that respect.
The solution should ensure that there is respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria, as affirmed by all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on Syria. This is in keeping with
the provisions of the United Nations Charter and the
principles of international law, so as to ensure that
abuses and crimes that contravene these principles
are not repeated, as was the case in Iraq, Libya
and elsewhere.

In this regard, the Government of my country
has closely read the statement issued following the
visit of the American Secretary of State to Moscow
on 15 July. In that statement, both parties, Russia and
the United States, asserted the need to combat the
terrorism fomented by the Al-Nusra Front and Da'esh.
The Syrian Arab Republic, which is at the forefront
in terms of combating this global scourge, welcomed
the statements and reiterates that we are committed
to finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people and ensures
their support. We are ready to pursue the inter-Syrian
dialogue without any preconditions in the hope that the
dialogue will lead to a comprehensive solution devised
by the Syrian people themselves, without foreign
interference and with the support of United Nations and
the international community.

I wish to reiterate that the Syrian Government fully
supports its commitment and obligation to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people. We are
prepared to take every step necessary at the national
level to reach that goal. We will continue to cooperate
with the United Nations by facilitating its mission, but
that cooperation is notjust a one-way street. The United
Nations also must cooperate with the Government of
Syria and coordinate with it with it with regard to the
various humanitarian issues rather than take issue
with Syria and criticize it, which will not lead to any
positive results.

The United Nations and international organizations
active in Syria could not have achieved what they did
over the five years of this crisis in terms of providing
humanitarian assistance to millions of Syrians on a
monthly basis had it not been for the cooperation,
facilities and protection provided by the Syrian
Government. This is not a favour we are doing, as long
as Syrian people in need benefit from such humanitarian
assistance and there is respect for sovereignty.

I would like to recall what was said on 12 December
2012 in Marrakesh, when an attempt was made to create
an opposition. The French Minister for Foreign Affairs
at the time, Mr. Fabius, said, "The jihadists are active
in Syria". He said,

(spoke in French)

"I cannot do anything to prevent French
jihadists from going to Syria".
(spoke in Arabic)
That was said by a former Prime Minister. When

French terrorism struck in Nice, at the Bataclan and
against Charlie Hebdo, the French President took
revenge by bombing the village of Manbij, killing 164
civilians.

I could say a great deal more, but owing to time
constraints I will end here.

