Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome you to the
Security Council, Madam President, and to thank you
for organizing today's debate on issues related to the
training of peacekeepers and building the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We are also
grateful to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the
other briefers for their informative statements.

We share the concerns about the fact that today's
challenges demand particularly thorough training of
peacekeeping contingents. That is especially important
in missions with complex mandates operating in
extremely difficult and dangerous situations. High-
quality training for personnel plays a decisive role in
the process of putting together modern multicomponent
peacekeeping missions, and the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping is directly dependent on it.

The issue ofpersonnel training cannot be resolved by
the United Nations on its own. The main responsibility
lies with the States themselves. We know that from
experience. Russian men and women peacekeepers
are serving in eight United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we take an active part in providing
aviation services for United Nations needs. We have
therefore gained significant experience in issues related
to training peacekeeping personnel. We train foreign
peacekeepers as well as our own - police, formed
units and military observers - in Russian training
centres. We have developed an instruction system that
includes both general and specialized training just prior
to peacekeepers' deployment to specific missions. We
also adapt language training to what is needed.

We believe firmly in the need for robust triangular
cooperation and the coordination of efforts on training
and capacity-building issues between the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. However, direct contact between States that
are developing training programmes and those taking
part in them is no less important. In general, we hope
that the institutionalization of the light coordination
mechanism and linking intergovernmental cooperation
to the work of the Secretariat will not create additional
obstacles or lead to unnecessary competition between
States providing training programmes, and that it will
lead to a better awareness among troop-contributing
countries about the training programmes available
to them. Of course, it is extremely important to take
into account modern realities and needs. We have to
understand what kind of peacekeepers are needed
today and the areas where training is most relevant. It
is essential to take into account the views and concerns
of troop-contributing countries. It is their Blue Helmets
and Blue Berets who understand better than anyone the
kinds of tasks that have to be dealt with on the ground
and the skills that are needed for them.
We also want to point out that peacekeepers'
effectiveness and security certainly does not depend only
on how well their training went. The way the Security
Council formulates their missions' mandates is no less
important. In fact, that may be the most crucial stage,
where we ensure that the tasks are commensurate with
peacekeeping capabilities. In that regard, we continue
to be alarmed by the excessive enthusiasm for so-called
robust mandates. We should not forget that among other
things, the right to use force increases security risks
for Blue Helmets themselves, turning them into targets
and even parties to conflicts. That cannot be allowed to
happen. Peacekeeping's job is maintaining peace, not
creating new risks. I want to remind the Council that
this became one of the key issues during the discussion
of the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, especially at the stage when the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations was being drafted.

It is no secret that despite the broad support for
such initiatives, States still disagree about a number
of very important aspects. In September of last year
Russia circulated an official note as a Security Council
document in which we explained that we couldnot support
the linking of human rights issues to the protection of
civilians, since the latter involves the use of force based
on Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Needless to say there can be no question of monitoring
human rights with the use of force. We also stressed
that United Nations peacekeeping missions' activity
should prioritize working with host Governments.
Lastly, we maintained, and continue to maintain, that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping should play
a key role alongside the Security Council in defining
the parameters for United Nations peacekeeping. At
the time, we thought that a common understanding
had been reached between the States Members of the
United Nations and the Secretariat that it was essential
to continue working to establish a consensus on general
peacekeeping issues. Unfortunately, however, we are
still encountering attempts to circumvent the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping in order to push issues
through the Security Council that have failed to reach
agreement in the General Assembly. Needless to say,
we cannot accept that approach.

However, we are definitely not denying the
significance of the Secretary-General's initiatives on
very concrete issues of peacekeeping. That applies first
and foremost to the training and capacity-building of
peacekeepers. In this area we should act collectively
to find appropriate and balanced solutions. We
were pleased to see that it is precisely such balanced
approaches that are reflected in the presidential
statement issued today (S/PRST/2019/4). There is no
hiding the fact that the drafting of the statement was not
easy. Some delegations refused to be actively involved
until the very last round. However, we salute the efforts
of the Indonesian delegation, whose extreme diplomatic
skill ultimately made it possible to achieve a result that
satisfied everyone. We believe we should continue to
work on developing United Nations peacekeeping on the
basis of consensus, listening carefully and respecting
one another, which is the only approach that will make
it possible to fully realize the Secretary-General's
ambitious goals for the field of peacekeeping.

