Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We too join others
in congratulating the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August, and in expressing our appreciation to the
delegation of Sweden for its successful stewardship
of the Council's work in July. I also join others in
thanking Special Envoy Griffiths and the Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
their clear and comprehensive updates, and commend
them both for their efforts to bring a political and
humanitarian solution to Yemen. Kazakhstan is closely
following the recent developments and would like to
make the following two points.

First, on the political front, we note the importance
of continuing to strive for sustainable peace, conflict
prevention and resolution through political and
diplomatic means, including confidence-building
measures, by achieving trust that can bring parties
together around the common goals of peace and
development. We are closely following the recent
United Nations diplomatic efforts in Sana'a and
Riyadh to persuade the warring parties to return to the
difficult and much-needed negotiations. Undoubtedly,
the diplomatic moves led by Mr. Griffiths have helped
to prevent an all-out military invasion of the city of
Al-Hudaydah. They have also facilitated the warring
parties' negotiation of a potential deal that could allow
fighters to leave. Nevertheless, local health facilities
reported in mid-July that to date around 328 people had
been injured and nearly 50 killed during the fighting.
Kazakhstan supports the efforts of interested countries
and parties to reach a political path through negotiations
for a full and fair settlement, including at the upcoming
political consultations in Geneva in September. That
is the only kind of approach that can preserve the
sovereignty, independence and unity of Yemen and
realize the interests and aspirations of its people.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian
dimension, we voice our support for the repeated calls
of the United Nations for all parties to safeguard civilian
lives, prevent deaths and injuries, allow freedom of
movement and protect hospitals, clinics and schools,
in accordance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We therefore note and welcome the
coordinated efforts of stakeholders - United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and the
Gulf countries - to provide humanitarian assistance
to the people of Al-Hudaydah. Kazakhstan salutes the
selfless work of the humanitarian partners who have
been providing food, water, emergency kits, cash and
health care. Unfortunately, 22 million people - that
is, 75 per cent of the Yemeni population - still require
protection from malnutrition, cholera and other diseases
that have killed or afflicted thousands of civilians.
Like others, we share the concerns of the Government
authorities and the United Nations system that the hot
summer months could rapidly escalate the spread of
cholera, which infected more than 1 million people last
year. Against that backdrop, we express the hope that
critical health infrastructure, particularly reproductive
health centres, sanitation facilities and stations that
supply water to the population, will not be targeted. We
therefore believe it would be very helpful to create a
de-escalation zone, where appropriate, so as to reduce
military tensions. That in turn would mitigate the
humanitarian crisis.

Finally, Kazakhstan fully supports the tireless
efforts of Mr. Griffiths and other interested parties to
reach an inclusive political solution in order to put an
end to the conflict in Yemen.

