Mr. Van der Pluijm (Belgium) (spoke in French):
The African continent will have 2.5 billion inhabitants
by 2050. One in four people will be African. The
cradle of humankind has also become its future. It
is a young continent, endowed with extraordinary
economic dynamism and a civil society bursting with
energy. But that future continues to be thwarted by
Violent conflicts, some of which are the deadliest and
longest in the world. Responding to those challenges
inevitably involves a strengthened partnership between
all peace forces.

My country, like the European Union, has long
advocated for a renewed, more global, dynamic and
ambitious partnership with the African continent. Such
a partnership would be based on strengthening the
values we share. Let us move past former antagonisms
and see what brings us together, namely, respect for the
rule of law, democracy and human rights. Those same
values inspire the United Nations, the European Union
and the African Union. Let us strengthen them and
work even more closely with the African Union in the
area of peace and security, with the aim of silencing
the guns in Africa. But let us also work together more
on development, human rights and good governance as
powerful vectors of stability.

As Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat reminded
us today, the African Union has embarked upon a
voluntary and ambitious path to peace and security.
I welcome the progress made not only in revitalizing
the Peace Fund, but also in establishing a continental
framework for compliance with human rights and
international humanitarian law.

As a member ofthe Council, Belgium is committed
to working closely with its partners to support those
efforts. African Union operations, which complement
United Nations operations, mustbe eligible for strong and
predictable funding. But we must do more. The Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union must take a step further in terms of coordination
and collaboration. Risk and conflict analyses need to be
better aligned. That can start with simple actions, such
as better coordinating agendas, conducting more joint
visits, making our joint meetings more operational and
taking joint decisions on shared commitments.

Such renewed partnership will be relevant only if it
takes into account African diversity, both geographical
and institutional. The principle of subsidiarity, which
is also well known in Europe, requires public action
to be carried out as a priority at the most appropriate
level. Some crises are well managed at a subregional
level. The Economic Community of West African
States, for example, has demonstrated that with its
effective and swift management of the Gambian crisis
in 2017, as well as with its involvement in Guinea-
Bissau. However - and I would like to stress this
point - the principle of subsidiarity should in no
way serve as an excuse for inaction and should not be
a barrier to progress. The peace and prosperity of all
Africans should serve as our compass. In our view,
the African Union and the United Nations still have a
leading role to play, in accordance with their founding
Charters, and must stand ready to play it.

I would be remiss if, before concluding, I did not
pay tribute to African women. How Africa harnesses
women's skills and perspectives in the coming years
will be essential. Women leaders and entrepreneurs
prove to us every day that they are prepared to
transform the continent. Women mediators and
women's organizations have already demonstrated time
and time again that their involvement in peace and
transitional processes is essential to achieving lasting
peace. Finally, African women, like all women in the
world, demand respect for their rights. Belgium stands
with those women, whom we support in many ways.

