Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me express our
appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leila Zerrougui for her maiden briefing on the
current situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo
and the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). We take this opportunity to
extend our congratulations to her on her appointment
and wish her all the best in the discharge of her heavy
responsibilities at this very critical juncture in the
political developments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is indeed a matter of serious concern. The
continued instability in the country has displaced many
and caused a major humanitarian crisis that requires
attention. We look forward to the discussion on this
particular issue to be held next week. We welcome
progress made in preparations for the holding of
elections, including the completion of voter registration
across 26 provinces, including the troubled Kasai
region.

Initiatives such as the release of the former Chief
of Staff of the opposition leader Moise Katumbi and the
granting of amnesty to several individuals sentenced
for various offenses are steps in the right direction, but
more needs to be done in terms of confidence-building
measures, which we believe is Vital to creating the
atmosphere needed for the successful holding of
elections this year.

It is absolutely necessary that all Congolese parties
exercise maximum restraint, refrain from making
inflammatory statements and defuse the political
tensions prevailing in the country. They should also
fully commit to implementing the 31 December Political
Agreement, which remains the only viable framework
for resolving the current political impasse in the
country. It is also incumbent upon all Congolese parties
to provide all necessary support and cooperation for the
timely and peaceful conduct of the elections.

The support of the international community will be
vital to ensuring the successful holding of the elections.
In that regard, enhancing the coordination of the United
Nations, the African Union (AU), the Southern African
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and other international
partners is necessary to facilitate coherent and effective
support for the electoral process, which is critical to the
peace and security of not only the Democratic Republic
of the Congo but also the wider Great Lakes region.
In that regard, we welcome the various discussions
held recently by regional leaders with President
Kabila. The idea of a possible joint visit by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Chairperson of the AU
Commission Moussa Faki Mahamat that has been
mentioned is also very welcome.

The implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region remains very important.
We appreciate the outcome of the meeting held in
Addis Ababa last month, which brought together
representatives of the signatories and the guarantors to
review the status of the implementation. In the light of
the regional dynamics and the continuing multifaceted
challenges, the need to redouble efforts towards the full
implementation of the framework agreement cannot be
overemphasized.

The role of MONUSCO continues to be very
important in supporting the implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement and the electoral process
and in protecting civilians, in line with its mandate as
set out in resolution 2348 (2017). We therefore support
the extension of the mandate of MONUSCO for another
year based on the recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

We appreciate the protection through projection
concept that MONUSCO is implementing by introducing
the review of the locations of the operational bases
and rapidly deployable battalions to ensure better
protection ofthe civilian population. The engagement of
MONUSCO and the strengthening of local community
protection mechanisms in areas affected by the closure
of forward bases are also a creative initiative to better
mitigate conflicts and violence. We also take note of
the measures undertaken by the Mission to enhance
the security of its bases and peacekeepers following
the tragic Semuliki incident, as well as to review its
footprint, in order to adopt a more agile and robust
posture in its operations on remote and difficult terrain.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
Mission needs to be sufficiently resourced and
equipped. That is also reinforced by the findings of
the special investigation into the Semuliki incident.
Finally, we are ready to discuss those and other issues
in the upcoming negotiation on the draft resolution.

