Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis for his
briefing. Let me join others in expressing our sincere
gratitude for all the work he has done in support of
Iraq during his time as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We very much appreciate his
tireless efforts, including his firm commitment on
women and peace and security and, under his leadership,
the advocacy efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to promote women in
political and decision-making processes in Iraq.
Let me start by welcoming the confirmation of
President Barham Salih and Prime Minister Adil
Abdul-Mahdi. The partial formation of the Council
of Ministers is encouraging. At the same time, we are
disappointed by the lack of women among the ministers
so far appointed. As inclusiveness and representation
are key in the Government-formation process, I join
others in calling for the consideration of women
candidates for the remaining Cabinet posts.

Iraq needs a stable national Government that brings
Iraqis together and restores hope going forward. In
the aftermath of the defeat of Da'esh, it is particularly
important for the Iraqi people to feel that their voices
matter and that they have an accountable Government.
As has been underlined throughout this meeting this
morning, the resurgence of Da'esh must be avoided.

As the new Government now gets to work and
starts addressing the many challenges that lie ahead,
intensified efforts are needed to advance political and
economic reforms, address basic-service delivery, fight
corruption and strengthen the rule of law. The economic
prospects for all Iraqis, not least the youth, must also
be improved. Success will require strong national
leadership, but also international support, including
by a united Security Council. A long-term perspective
is needed for continued and coordinated international
efforts in support of Iraq.

To ensure long-term peace and development,
the root causes of conflict must be addressed. That
includes the distribution of resources and influence
among different groups in society. Reconciliation is
critical to building a stable country and preventing
future conflicts, and accountability is, in turn, crucial
for reconciliation.

Sweden supports initiatives to strengthen
accountability for violations of international law. We
welcome resolution 2379 (2017), on the United Nations
Investigative Team to hold Da'esh accountable. That is
an important first step in holding those responsible for
the atrocities carried out by Da'esh to account. We are
pleased that Special Adviser Karim Khan has started
his important mission and look forward to his first
briefing to the Council.

Like others, I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Nadia Murad for being
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts to end
sexual violence against women in conflict. We also
welcome that Iraq has adopted a national action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000). We encourage UNAMI to
assist the Government in the implementation of the
plan, including protecting internally displaced people
from sexual violence.

We welcome progress made in the dialogue between
Baghdad and Erbil. With the new Government in place,
the dialogue should be fully resumed, with both sides
showing good faith and a constructive approach. We
encourage the United Nations to use its good offices to
facilitate dialogue among Iraqi stakeholders. UNAMI's
role remains crucial, and its political mission must be
fully utilized. We welcome the Mission's strengthened
mandate, in particular with regard to the role of women
and the situation of children. Rehabilitation and
reintegration must be prioritized.

The inclusion - for the first time - of an
operational women and peace and security component
in the mandate will allow the Mission to further
focus on those issues. Implementation is now key,
and adequate financial resources are needed. How the
Mission will mainstream gender as a cross-cutting
issue must be followed up and reported upon. We
appreciate the advocacy efforts that have already been
made to promote the effective participation of women
in political and decision-making processes.

Finally, Iraq must be able to pursue its own national
interests and not become a proxy for confrontation by
regional interests. We strongly emphasize the need for
the continued respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Iraq, and we welcome Prime
Minister Abdul-Mahdi's approach in that regard. As
Iraq moves forward on its path towards reconciliation,
stability and sustained peace, it can continue to count
on Sweden's support. Strong national leadership and
the unity of the Council will be critical for sustainable
peace in Iraq.

