Mr. Nishida (Japan): Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this very important and timely meeting. I also
appreciate the presence of the representative of Somalia. I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Under-Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for their
statement and briefing, respectively. At the outset, as this
debate is my first Security Council meeting as the new
Permanent Representative of Japan, I would like to ask
for the continued support of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Secretariat, the President and
members of the Security Council, Member States and
others.

Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to join others in condemning the attack that took place
in Mogadishu and expressing our sincere condolences
to the families of those who were killed in that attack
and to the Transitional Federal Government. The
Government of Japan will continue to support the
Transitional Federal Government and the African
Union Mission in Somalia in order to promote the
Djibouti peace process.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia continues to be a
serious source of concern despite the high level of
engagement by the international community, including
the Security Council and the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. The issue of Somali piracy
not only threatens regional stability; it also prevents
safe maritime transport and threatens the people and
property of many countries, including those of my
country, Japan.

In order to address the issue of piracy
comprehensively, it is essential to ensure the
prosecution of suspected pirates, in addition to the
various anti-piracy activities of Member States and
organizations. In that regard, Japan highly commends
the efforts undertaken by the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia, Kenya and Seychelles.

We view the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/394) as a very good foundation for further
considerations on how to ensure prosecution of those
engaged in Somali piracy, as it presents the advantages
and disadvantages of various options.

Considering that piracy is subject to universal
jurisdiction, Japan believes that it is appropriate for
coastal States to prosecute those who engage in piracy.
It is also very important to strengthen the ability of
coastal States to prosecute acts of piracy. Japan is
cautious about the idea of establishing a new tribunal,
considering the time and resources necessary for that,
as presented in the Secretary-General's report.
Furthermore, aspects such as incarceration, extradition
and provision of evidence must also be considered. We
are committed to continuing our discussion in various
forums, including the Security Council and the Contact
Group.
Countering piracy is a high priority for Japanese
diplomacy, and we have been actively contributing to
anti-piracy efforts, including through the deployment
of two vessels of the Japan Self-Defence Forces and
two P-3C maritime patrol aircraft, and by participating
actively in the discussions of the Contact Group since
its establishment. Japan chaired the fourth plenary
meeting of the Group.

Japan has also passed the Anti-Piracy Measures
Law, whereby it criminalized piracy domestically, and
contributed $13.6 million to the International Maritime
Organization. This money is being used to establish a
training centre in Djibouti and three information-
sharing centres in Yemen, Kenya and Tanzania. Japan
also contributed $500,000 to the trust fund that will be
set up, as agreed at the fourth meeting of the Contact
Group, under Japanese chairmanship. Our support
since 2007 to Somalia for its security sector,
humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation of public
infrastructure has reached $122.4 million. This was
provided based on our belief that the ultimate solution
to the piracy issue rests in stability in Somalia itself.

I wish to express Japan's continued commitment
to participating actively in the discussion on anti-
piracy operations and stability in Somalia.

