Mrs. Haley (United States): I thank you, Sir,
and members of the Security Council for what has
been another frustrating day. My parents always said
that you should always see the good in everyone and
in everything. I have therefore been trying to figure
out what the good is in Russia. I believe that it is very
good at being consistent, and I believe that it is very
good at playing games. We saw that when we took up
the issue of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. Russia loved the Joint Investigative
Mechanism until we found one side guilty, and then
it decided that it did not want it. We then adopted the
ceasefire, and Russia loved the idea of the ceasefire
until Al-Assad had a problem with it and subsequently
violated it. Today Russia vetoed for the sixth time a
draft resolution (S/2018/321) condemning Al-Assad
for chemical-weapons attacks on his own people. No
matter what we do, Russia will be consistent.

Russia will continue to play games, and once again
it is putting forward yet another surprise draft resolution
(S/2018/322). The first time that any of us saw it was
today at 11 am. The Russians held no negotiations. It
took no input, and, when Sweden asked that the Council
be allowed to discuss the draft resolution, Russia
allowed that but did not want any changes to it. There
is a reason for which Russia did not want to discuss its
resolution, and that is because it does not accomplish
anything. The draft resolution mainly asks for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to send its Fact-finding Mission to Douma, but
the Fact-finding Mission is already travelling to Douma.
It already has a mandate to investigate and collect
samples. What makes it worse is that Russia includes
several provisions in its draft resolution that are deeply
problematic and once again seeks to compromise the
credibility of the international investigation.

The draft resolution puts Russia and the Al-Assad
regime itself in the driver seat for making arrangements
for the Fact-finding Mission investigators. We are just
supposed to trust that the same Government that says
that everything concerning the Douma attack was fake
will work in good faith with the OPCW. This draft
resolution also tries to micromanage how the Fact-
finding Mission should carry out its investigation,
while dictating where the investigators should go. As
we have always said, for an investigation to be credible
and independent, the investigators must choose
where they believe they should go. Members of the
Council - least of all Russia - should not be calling
the shots. For those reasons, the United States voted
against the draft resolution.

