Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the delegation of Peru for organizing
today's open debate on the linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the briefers for their
insightful interventions and, through them, their teams,
for their continued engagement on this critical issue.

As the concept note (S/2019/537, annex) from the
Peruvian presidency indicates, the Security Council
has repeated expressed concern over the linkages
between organized crime and terrorism. That concern
is entirely justified, as the linkages continue to both
widen and deepen. Absent a coordinated response
by the international community, we will be less
effective on all fronts. But the response also needs to
be inclusive and gender responsive in order to address
the drivers of insecurity that perpetuate terrorism and
organized crime.

Canada believes that a key actor in the response
is the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF). The
GCTF is an informal coordinating body that supports
United Nations efforts to advance the implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
relevant resolutions. That work helps sustain the
collective international commitment to our obligations
to fight terrorism under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. For example,
the GCTF Nexus between Transnational Organized
Crime and Terrorism Initiative organized four regional
meetings in 2017 and 2018 in Algeria, Albania,
Singapore and Kenya. Those meetings included diverse
representatives from the United Nations, Member
States, international and regional organizations,
international experts, practitioners and academia to
review knowledge and share information about the
regional contexts and variations of this threat. Under
the leadership of the Netherlands, the GCTF developed
non-binding good practices and a related practical
policy toolkit to disrupt that nexus. In our future role
as GCTF co-Chair alongside Morocco, Canada plans
to further strengthen the GCTF's relationship with the
United Nations, its collaboration with other multilateral
and regional organizations and United Nations States
Members. It is that type of partnership-driven response
that we would also emulate if elected to a term on the
Security Council for the period 2021 to 2022.

Opportunities to confront the criminal-terrorist
linkage also flow from work in regional bodies. Canada
currently chairs the Organization of American States
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism and
provides more than half of its budget. At the recent
meeting of the Committee, which was focused on
building resilience, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and other key United Nations counter-terrorism entities
were invited to share their perspectives.

We see the value of establishing standards, best
practices and measures to improve border, port and
document security, and are encouraging this work
across the Americas. Doing so provides the dual benefit
of making the hemisphere more resistant to the spread
of terrorism, the core mandate of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, while also impeding
transnational organized crime.

(spoke in French)

Another important tool for the international
community is the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
The 40 recommendations of the FATF form the basis
for coordinated global action to counter the abuse of the
financial system by criminals and terrorists. However,
the effectiveness of the FATF framework, as with other
counter-terrorism and organized crime initiatives, lies
in its implementation by Member States. Recognizing
that, Canada provides $55 million for training,
equipment procurement and technical assistance to
build capacity to prevent and respond to terrorist and
criminal activities. For example, Canada has funded
INTERPOL projects to strengthen the ability of front-
line border officers to use INTERPOL databases,
such as the INTERPOL database on foreign terrorists.
Moreover, the use by returning foreign terrorist fighters
of the same routes used by migrants renders the latter
even more vulnerable. For that reason, Canada supports
projects that take those specific risks into account and
attempt to address them.

In summary, Canada remains strongly committed
to tackling transnational organized crime and
terrorism. By working together, the United Nations
and Member States cannot only disrupt terrorist groups
and criminal organizations, but also prevent them from
joining forces.

