Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt)(spoke in Arabic): As the
Security Council resumes its consideration of the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the report of the working group that
followed up that report, we wish to reaffirm our position:
the Security Council should not be the only body to
consider this issue or its report. We believe that the report
should also be considered by the General Assembly, with
all its recommendations, so that the Assembly can look into
the general principles therein on reducing human suffering,
including the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
may recall what the Council has said in the past regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict within the
context of full respect for the delicate balance of powers
between the principal organs of the United Nations, as
reflected in the Charter. These include the General
Assembly, other United Nations organs and governmental
and non-governmental bodies outside the United Nations
involved in the protection of civilians.

We welcome and advocate action by the Council, in
accordance with the powers entrusted to it in the United
Nations Charter, in situations where civilians are targeted
or where there is interference with the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We also strongly condemn the
targeting of civilians in time of war. Egypt calls on all
States parties to a conflict to respect the rights of civilians
and to refrain from using civilians as a means of achieving
political or military goals. Egypt believes that the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to civilians should not be
hampered and that civilians should not be used as human
shields.

We also call for the same standards to be universally
applied. There are rules of international humanitarian law
that apply to all States, large and small. In this context, we
note the Council's position on issues referred to in the
report before it. First, targeting civilians in armed conflicts
is prohibited, and respecting human rights is a binding
obligation. It is indeed our primary objective to ensure the
implementation and application of that law. The Charter
calls for respect for such legal norms and standards. Failure
to respect these laws can lead to threats to international
peace and security. Certain ideas that have not yet achieved
international consensus are being voiced in certain quarters.
However, we believe we must continue to develop specific
criteria to be used where the violation of legal norms leads
to a threat to international peace and security.

We must never use double standards or favour the
political interests of certain Members of the United
Nations, more specifically, of the permanent members of
the Security Council. We must not favour their interests
over those of the other Members of the United Nations as
a whole. We believe the Council should take into account
the entire issue of powers granted to it under the Charter.
When the Council takes action vis-a-vis certain States that
have violated international norms, it must respect the
restrictions contained in the Charter. It must consider the
situation, then report on the situation and determine
whether the conflict in question is indeed a threat to
international peace and security. Any internal dispute over
a territory should not be regarded ipso facto as a threat to
international peace and security.

We support action by the Council to protect
personnel providing humanitarian and international
assistance. We believe they must be allowed to do their
job. They must have access to areas of conflict.
Organizations involved in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance must also respect the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and humanity. These points are contained in
the guidelines contained in General Assembly resolution
46/182.

Egypt believes that the provision of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in time of war should be carried out
with the consent of or at the request of the countries
concerned. There must be full respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States
and for their national legislation. Humanitarian assistance
must not be used as a cover for action in support of the
political interests of any particular State or group of
States. When we speak of providing humanitarian
assistance, we are thinking of programmes carried out
under the auspices of the United Nations or the
International Committee of the Red Cross. The consent of
the States parties to the conflict is required. Those States
must then provide protection for the personnel providing
the humanitarian assistance. We do not believe that any
organization should take unilateral decisions to offer
assistance to civilians in any particular State without
obtaining the prior consent of the State concerned.

There are provisions in the Charter on the sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and political independence of
States, and the Council has to take those principles into
account when dealing with issues of security - for
example, in the establishment of temporary secure zones
or safe corridors for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.

 

Another point I would like to make is that when
dealing with humanitarian assistance to civilians in armed
conflict, the international community has to distinguish
between States within whose territories there are
Governments that impose the law and other States where
there is virtually no legitimate Government. The latter case
is of course an exception to the rule. However, one must
always proceed on the basis of consensus.

Internally displaced persons do not constitute a totally
separate category; they are civilians and international
human rights laws and conventions provide appropriate
protection for civilians. So we believe that we need to
ensure respect for these conventions, rather than invent new
norms to protect one particular category of civilians to the
exclusion of others. Protection for displaced persons is the
responsibility of the Governments of the States represented
in the United Nations as a whole.

On the question of preventive diplomacy, fact-finding
missions and so forth, we believe that the Council can carry
out certain actions in order to prevent conflict and reach a
peaceful settlement to a conflict. Chapter VI of the Charter
is relevant here, and of course the consent of the State
concerned is required, because these procedures are in fact
voluntary.

In connection with peacekeeping missions and
operations, and how they are related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, the Security Council must be
cautious in those cases where it gives a mandate to a
peacekeeping operation to protect civilians against any
dangers threatening them in armed conflicts. When the
Council takes such a decision, it must also take into
account the fact that, in considering each case individually,
it is setting a precedent for other, similar cases. Double
standards and selective application of such standards should
be avoided.

We also believe that human, technical and other
resources must be made available so that any
responsibilities given to peacekeeping operations can in fact
be fulfilled. Perhaps I could just give one rather glaring
example, that of the tragic events of Srebrenica, which
should never have been allowed to recur.

In concluding, I should like to thank you very much
indeed, Mr. President, for all the work that you have done
in promoting the activities of this Organization. Canadian
diplomacy has always had an important role to play in
connection with the United Nations. You have also done
your utmost to ensure respect for the law. I would also note
the excellent relations, based on mutual respect, between
Egypt and Canada. Also, at an individual level, you
yourself have excellent relations with your Egyptian
counterpart.

