At the outset, I wish to thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive reports. The International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is carrying out commendable work and has undertaken significant efforts to improve its functioning in a number of ways. As pointed out in the President's report (S/2020/309, annex), the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has had a tremendous impact on the functioning of the Mechanism, especially on anticipated timelines and the consequent impact on the Mechanism's 2021 budget proposal. In this respect, the Mechanism should be commended for the measures that it has implemented in order to ensure that it remains operational and continues to work. It is also pleasing to see that significant acknowledgement is given to the staff of the Mechanism for the exemplary work done in order to ensure that the work of the Mechanism continues seamlessly despite the COVID-19 pandemic and requirements to work remotely. The people working in the background are often overlooked and not afforded the credit that they are due. In this respect, South Africa wishes to express its extreme gratitude to all those who work tirelessly to ensure that the Mechanism is a success. Despite a number of challenges, the Mechanism has done impressive work and continues to do so, in terms of both the prosecution of perpetrators and also the residual functions. In that regard, South Africa wishes to highlight the assistance provided to national jurisdictions, which is highly beneficial. South Africa wishes to congratulate France on successfully arresting Mr. Felicien Kabuga. Having been involved in efforts to arrest a fugitive, we acknowledge the noteworthy nature of France's efforts and the operational coordination with the Office of the Prosecutor and other States, which resulted in the arrest. We note that six fugitives remain at large and that the President, in his report, states that full cooperation by States remains a challenge. In that regard, the President reports that the Office sought cooperation from South Africa in relation to the arrest and transfer of a fugitive located on its territory in mid-2018 and that South Africa did not attempt to execute requests for assistance until December 2019. In this respect, we regret that challenges presented by South Africa's domestic law unfortunately constrained the country's cooperation. However, this has since been addressed. Furthermore, the report notes that on 18 December 2019, the Office submitted a further request for assistance to the South African authorities - and South Africa responded on 8 May 2020 - but that much of the information requested by the Prosecutor was not provided. In this respect, we note that two reports were indeed submitted to the Office of the Office - the first on 19 February 2020 and the second on 8 May 2020. The Prosecutor's Office was informed in April that the complete lockdown in South Africa in response to the COVID-19 pandemic would likely delay the submission of the second report. South Africa reiterates its full commitment to cooperating with the Prosecutor. Action taken by the Government had to conform to our national laws. We have always endeavoured to engage and cooperate with the Mechanism. South Africa is committed to its obligation under article 28 of the Mechanism's statute. We have consistently reaffirmed that obligation, and we have taken positive steps to give effect to the Prosecutor's request for assistance. We remain determined to continue all efforts, in cooperation with the Office and, where possible, other relevant States, to trace and surrender fugitives from justice. That Mr. Kabuga could avoid arrest for almost three decades, allegedly moving among a number of countries, emphasizes once again the importance of international cooperation in order to prevent suspects from escaping arrest. In relation to the evaluation by the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the methods and work of the Mechanism since October 2019, which was presented in the report of 26 March (S/2020/236), we congratulate the Mechanism on the fulfilment of the recommendations, and we are confident that the two outstanding recommendations will be swiftly addressed.
