The President: I thank the representative of Chile
for his leadership on the Council for the last two years
on a host of issues.

I shall now make a statement, in my capacity as
the representative of the United States, with regard to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

I again thank Ambassador Roman Oyarzun
Marchesi for his informative briefing and his deep and
personal commitment to this set of issues and for his
leadership as the 1540 Committee moves through a
period in which there is an appeal for more to be done
and for all of us to combine our efforts to ensure that
the Committee receives the support needed with regard
to enforcement and implementation.

There are few areas of such immediate and direct
relevance to the maintenance of international peace
and security as the efforts of Member States to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). The recent terrorist attacks
across the world have made clear the willingness of
violent extremist groups to inflict mass suffering.
Those attacks underscore why it is essential that
the international community keep weapons of mass
destruction out of their hands.

We have made important progress since resolution
1540 (2004) was adopted in 2004. Some 174 countries,
90 per cent of Member States, have reported on the
measures that they have undertaken to implement the
resolution. But I agree very much with other Council
members and with the Ambassador that, given the
human stakes and the demonstrable malevolent intent
of many non-State actors, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, we have to do more. Resolution
1540 (2004) has a global mandate, backed up by Chapter
VII obligations, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations. However, the Committee has not yet had to
rely on such measures in order to achieve its objectives.
Instead, it has engaged in dialogue with Member States
and incrementally built up support for an international
climate of non-proliferation through cooperation.

In the Security Council, where political infighting
all too often stands in the way of finding consensus, the
1540 Committee shows what can be achieved when such

differences are put aside. The Committee is generally
united on key issues and works as a team to effectively
carry out its mandate. Under Spain's leadership this past
year, the 1540 Committee has made significant strides
in promoting full implementation. For the first time
since 2010, the Committee completed an assessment
of all Member States on their implementation of the
resolution. That was an arduous and highly technical
effort. That monitoring and accountability allows
the international community to measure progress in
combating proliferation and the means of delivery of
WMDs and to identify those areas in which we are
coming up short, the areas to which we must pay the
most attention.

Furthermore, the Committee has made important
strides to increase transparency. It will soon publish
online its data set on Member States' implementation
of non-proliferation obligations, creating one of the
world's best information troves on the issue available
to the public. Again, that is essential for accountability
and for improvements. The Committee increasingly
uses social media and public-service announcements,
ensuring that the public is not only better informed, but
also that the key actors, such as parliamentarians and
civil-society partners, can help the Committee achieve
its aims. Under Spain's direction, the 1540 Committee
developed and has started executing its plan for the
completion of a second comprehensive review of the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We look forward to robust participation of all States
and relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, civil society and industry in the review
process.

The United States encourages the review to generate
recommendations in the following areas, among others:
closing the persisting gaps in implementation in the
areas of biosecurity, chemical security, export controls
and proliferation financing; making national reporting
and Committee monitoring more regular and more
robust; and improving the assistance process so that
more States can implement the resolution. I have heard
that a lot of States complain that they have been unable
to gain assistance to remedy their reporting problem.
In addition, we must develop better mechanisms for
effective engagement by the Committee and Member
States with parliamentarians, academics, industry
experts and civil-society members in combating the
proliferation of WMDs, especially to non-State actors,
and making the Committee more effective and efficient
in fulfilling its mandate, especially by identifying
priority tasks for the Committee to complete by the end
of its current mandate in 2021.

Since the last briefing on non-proliferation before
the Council in June (see S/PV.7469), the United States
has continued to strengthen its efforts to combat
proliferation by ratifying four important international
non-proliferation instruments: the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism and two Protocols to the Convention
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Maritime Navigation. As has been noted, the
United States will also convene the fourth international
Nuclear Security Summit beginning on 31 March 2016
to advance global measures to secure nuclear materials
and facilities. By meeting the obligations of the
resolution, every Government can do much to reduce
the vulnerability of the entire international community
to the threat.

The United States looks forward to continuing to
work closely with our colleagues and our allies and
partners and everyone on the Committee and on the
Council to deepen and broaden implementation of and
support for resolution 1540 (2004).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
December, although we are hoping to convene another
again shortly on Libya, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of the United
States to the members of the Council, especially my
colleagues, the Permanent Representatives and all of
their staffs and to the secretariat of the Council for all
the support they have given to us. I am not sure that
this was the month that everybody bargained for, but
it was the month that fortune handed us, and we got a
lot of business done. The Secretariat, the interpreters
and others must be truly exhausted, so we would like
to thank them. I saw the Arabic interpreters fanning
themselves earlier, which suggests that it is even worse
up there than I thought. In 2016 we must deal with the
conditions in the interpretation booths. We thank them
all. As one of the faster speakers here, who tries to
cram a lot in, I feel great sympathy for the interpreters.
I feel I commit human rights abuses every time I give a
speech, so our thanks go to the interpreters, who have
done a tremendous job all of this month and all year.

On behalf of everyone here, I would like to wish
Uruguay the best. It is not easy to come onto the
Council and immediately take over the presidency, but
we have every faith in the great Uruguayan team and
all the support that all of us intend to give them as they
preside over the Council in January.

I would now like to say a few words to the Council
members who are departing. I often say to my own team
that life lived prospectively on the Security Council can
be very frustrating. One can feel as if one is watching
paint dry and that we are not making enough progress.
We are reminded of that every day by the human toll
that is taken when we are unable to reach consensus,
or when we reach consensus but our resolutions are not
implemented. Sometimes, however, it is better to live
life retrospectively, and to look back on what has been
achieved over a longer period of time. I think all of us
could benefit from doing that more often. I would like
to single out each of the departing Council members.

Chad has focused on peacekeeping issues. It is a
country that knows of what it speaks, because it has put
its troops in harm's way in extremely difficult missions,
particularly in Mali, where 18 Chadian peacekeepers
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali have been killed. Chad
has led the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
and we have just received another example of its
commitment, which we will work on until the end of the
month. We are not giving up on the month of December.
Chad has also emphasized - in my view, really moving
the ball down the field - the relationship between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations, including through the open debate it
organized (see S/PV.7343). Although we were not able
to take a trip to Burundi this month as we had hoped,
it looks as if we will be taking one in January, and
not a moment too soon. I think that trip will bear the
hallmark of Chad's influence on the Council, because
we are thinking very carefully about how to do it in
conjunction with the regional and subregional efforts
that are under way. Even though Mr. Cherif will not
be on the Council next year, his voice will be with us
inside our heads.

I would also like to commend Chad for the steps
it has taken at home to eradicate the problem of child
soldiers, which has given it a position from which it
can lead. It is a very difficult issue, and Chad has done
a great deal to ensure that its army does not include
child soldiers and that recruits meet the minimum age
requirements. Chad has taken that issue and has led
with it here on the Council and in the broader United
Nations community, and that is very important.

Chile has made international justice a hallmark
of its time on the Council, and that could not be
more important. Its work culminated in resolution
2256 (2015), on the international tribunals, which we
adopted today, but it has also banged the drum in every
context on the issue of the protection of civilians. In the
Arria-Formula meeting held earlier this month, Chile
took up the issue of the responsibility to protect and
non-State actors, which has not had enough attention.
The open debate it organized during its presidency on
the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7374) was on an
important subject, but so was Chile's voice in every
discussion we have had, reminding people of the fates
of civilians. For Haiti, although the work is not done and
the elections have gone forward, Chile has also been
one of the most important voices here, helping to lead
and shape the trip that we took to Haiti as a Council
13 months ago. I do not know whether we would have
predicted that the elections would have gone as well as
they have, but I commend Chile for its leadership there
and regarding the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti itself.

In addition, I will always value the privilege I had of
presiding together with Chile over the first-ever Council
meeting on lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
(LGBT) issues, and I am eternally grateful for Chile's
leadership on that. It was a harrowing briefing on what
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is doing to
LGBT persons, and not one that anyone in the United
Nations community will forget, I think.

Having Jordan on the Council, reminding us of
the human toll that the Syrian conflict is taking and of
the fact that Jordan has shouldered such an enormous
burden, along with Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq, is
extremely significant. The fact that Jordan was also a
penholder on the Syrian humanitarian resolution was
one of the main reasons we were able to secure the
international border crossings in the way that we did.
Having now renewed the agreements on those border
crossings, we credit Jordan greatly for its leadership.
I would also like to thank Jordan for its leadership
on the signature issue of violent extremism, and for
the way it has drawn the attention of the Council and
the United Nations family to the issue of youth and
extremism - pointing out that if we do not get that
right, we will not have success with any of the other
steps we are taking. I believe we have only just begun
to think about what it means to really target our efforts
to that population.

I did not think, when Ambassador Murmokaite
joined the Council, that her part of the world would take
centre stage. It is unfortunate that it has and that events
in that region turned so dark and deadly, although,
fortunately, not in Lithuania. However, I can say that
her courage and her voice will be remembered by the
people of Ukraine, I know, in addition to whoever the
groupies are who watch United Nations Web TV. Her
performance and truth-telling has been a signature
feature of her leadership here. I would also like to thank
her for breaking a seal, in terms of Council meetings,
by convening the first-ever meeting of ministers of the
interior to look at border controls and foreign terrorist
fighter flows (see S/PV.7453). I think we are going to see
more and more of that happening at the United Nations,
and it will always be Lithuania that led the way.

In addition, Ambassador Murmokaite has given
much attention to the protection of j ournalists. Her work
organizing the meeting on small arms (see S/PV.7442),
over which she presided, along with the support of many
Council members here has been tremendous, and she
has been incredibly vigilant on the sanctions issue as
it relates to some very serious crises in Africa. I know
that she will be working right up until 31 December to
try to ensure more progress.

Finally - and I am grateful to all for indulging
me, but the people who are leaving the Council are
amazing - I turn to Nigeria. Ambassador ngu is the
voice of reason - as she just described, she is the only
person here who quotes Shakespeare from memory,
and I have never heard her repeat a Shakespeare quote,
which suggests that she has memorized the complete
works, and I congratulate her on that. This past year of
Nigeria's time on the Council has been a very difficult
period for the country, with the advances ofBoko Haram
and, of course, the urgent need to mobilize international
support for Nigeria's efforts to fight Boko Haram in
every area, not just militarily. In addition, Nigeria
has just shown the world something very important
through its peaceful transition of power from President
Jonathan to President Buhari. That role modelling is
probably more important than any resolution we adopt,
as it shows a leader handing over power democratically
and in accordance with term limits. That is inherently
stabilizing. During its time on the Council, Nigeria has
given attention to security sector reform and to dignity.
Nigeria showed its leadership on Ebola, both within
the country - by acting as a role model in eradicating
the epidemic when it briefly sneaked in, showing the
world how it could be done and giving people confidence
in how the epidemic could be defeated - and also by
using its leadership in the Council to rally the United
Nations community around the issue.

Ijust wanted to thank all those Council members.
Those are just a few of their achievements. I am sure
they have different versions of their own narrative
history, but this is from just one observer who has had
the privilege oflistening to them. I became Ambassador
to the United Nations in August 2013, so it was just
in January 2014, when the five who are departing now
came onto the Council, that I was finally learning my
way around. I feel that I have grown up in the Council
with them and could not have learned more or dreamed
of having five better colleagues for the past two
years. They care so much, and it shows in everything
they do. I thank them and wish them well, as I do the
incoming members, who will, I hope, amass the kinds
of achievements that these great leaders and public
servants have amassed in their time on the Security
Council.

The meeting rose at 4.50 pm.
