Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his briefing. We take this opportunity to
assure him of our full support in the work ahead. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock for his informative briefing.

Regrettably, we face a disheartening situation
in Yemen. Once again, we deplore the fact that, in
spite of the Security Council's repeated calls for the
parties to resume political dialogue and end the severe
humanitarian crisis plaguing the country - described
by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock as the worst
humanitarian crisis - we continue to witness an
increase in the number of armed clashes. Violence
has escalated in the governorates of Al-Hudaydah,
Ta'iz, Saad and Al-Jawf, among others. There have
been reports of air strikes and armed clashes, which,
according to a report issued on 9 April by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, have caused
the deaths of at least 41 people in March and April. In
addition, ongoing clashes have led to the displacement
of more than 85,000 people who have been forced to
leave their homes since December last year, thereby
increasing the total number of internally displaced
persons to more than 2 million people.

Similarly, there are growing reports about the
recruitment of children as combatants. According to
a report issued by UNICEF on 27 March, since 2015
at least 2,400 children have been recruited as fighters
amid threats and promises of financial compensation to
their families.

More over, the dire humanitarian crisis must
contend not only the problem of food insecurity, which
has put 8.4 million people at risk of famine and 60 per
cent of the population at risk of food insecurity, but also
the cholera outbreak that has affected nearly 1.1 million
people in 22 of the 23 governorates of Yemen and
caused more than 2,200 deaths since its outbreak in
April 2017. Unfortunately, that situation is exacerbated
by the dangerous diphtheria outbreak, which, according
to a 17 March report published by the World Health
Organization, has recorded more than 1,300 infected
people and 76 confirmed deaths so far this year.

Against that backdrop, my delegation reiterates once
again its call for the Council to maintain a unanimous
and firm position on condemning the belligerent acts
and campaigns that aggravate the crisis in Yemen and
recklessly threaten the lives of 27 million innocent
people. We must also be consistent in categorically
condemning and rejecting any indiscriminate attacks
against the civilian population, including, of course,
missile launches and air strikes, as such acts constitute
flagrant violations of international law,

Likewise, our voice must be clear and determined
in calling on all parties to guarantee the full and
continuous operation of all ports, airports and access
routes, especially the Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports
and the Sana'a airport, since they are lifelines for
the population's survival. We also call on the parties
to comply with the presidential statements adopted
on 15 March (S/PRST/2018/5) and 15 June 2017
(S/PRST/2017/7) and to definitively implement the
provisions of resolution 2216 (2015).

To that end, the parties must abandon any
preconditions to engaging in dialogue, cease hostilities
immediately and commit to taking up negotiations,
which would enable an inclusive and orderly political
transition in line with the demands and aspirations of
the Yemeni people within the framework of respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Yemen.

In that vein, we recall the words of the Secretary-
General on 13 April, when he stated in this Chamber
that

"There is only one pathway to ending the Yemeni
conflict and to addressing the humanitarian crisis:
a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue." (S/PV823I, p. 2)
