Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Belgium for organizing this important briefing. My country's delegation welcomes Mr. Edi Rama, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Prime Minister of the Republic of Albania, and thanks him for his valuable briefing on the programmes planned in the context of the Albanian chairmanship of the OSCE. I would also take this opportunity to once again congratulate the Republic of Albania on assuming the chairmanship of the OSCE for the year 2020, and I wish it every success in its efforts to promote international peace and security. Pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE is the largest regional security organization. Its Mediterranean, European and Asian dimensions have made it a distinguished partner of the United Nations as it continues to play an active role in strengthening regional and international peace and security. In view of the OSCE priorities for 2020 that Mr. Rama highlighted today, which are in line with the priorities of the United Nations, particularly those of the Security Council, my delegation supports such priorities and stresses the importance of a stronger coordination and partnership between the OSCE and the United Nations, since they have common values and goals, with a view to strengthening preventive diplomacy mechanisms in line with respecting the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of other States. Based on Tunisia's firm belief in the importance of multilateral efforts as the best mechanism to achieve the peaceful settlement of conflicts and conflict prevention, my delegation believes that this noble mission cannot be achieved without strengthening the capacity of regional and subregional organizations, given their knowledge of ongoing situations and the particularities of the regions, as well as their ability to establish direct communication channels between parties to a conflict. In that context and in view of the important role played by the OSCE in resolving the crisis in eastern Ukraine, my delegation stresses its support for the tireless efforts of the OSCE to reach a comprehensive and balanced solution based on the Minsk agreements of 2015, particularly in line with the framework of the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group. In that regard, Tunisia welcomes the Normandy format summit held in Paris in December 2019 and the agreements reached on a number of confidence-building measures. My delegation also expresses its hope that efforts will be stepped up and a new dialogue opened in order to achieve comprehensive solutions to some of the protracted conflicts in the Euro-Mediterranean region. Given the connections between the political, security, economic and humanitarian aspects of realizing the concept of comprehensive security and because Tunisia belongs to the Mediterranean region, my delegation stresses the need to confront joint security challenges, whether traditional or emerging, in the Mediterranean, especially in the areas of combating terrorism and violent extremism and _ achieving environmental security and cybersecurity. We call forpromoting strategic cooperation between the OSCE and various partners to ensure security and stability in the region. In order to ensure effective multilateral action towards achieving peace and security and preventing conflicts and given the challenges facing the African continent and the effect on peace and security in Europe and the Mediterranean, my delegation hopes to further cooperation between the OSCE and regional organizations on the African continent. We also support the efforts of the OSCE to promote good governance, a culture of tolerance and non-discrimination as part of the international approach to enhancing human rights and fundamental freedoms. In that context, my delegation welcomes the OSCE's focus on strengthening the role of young people and women as part of building international peace and security. In conclusion, I reiterate the importance of the collective efforts made by the OSCE and the United Nations, especially in the context of partnership with the Security Council, to achieve international peace and security and to achieve prosperity for humankind.
