Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, my delegation welcomes the initiative taken to discuss
this important issue. We hope that this effort will help us
in our debates, especially since at the dawn of the third
millennium the international community hopes that the
Council will put an end to disputes throughout the world
by laying the foundations for a world of peace and
security based on cooperation and solidarity.

Aware of the importance of preventing armed
conflicts, the Security Council issued a presidential
statement at its summit held on 31 January 1992, asking
the Secretary-General to submit an analysis and
recommendations on ways of strengthening within the
provisions of the Charter the capacity of the United
Nations to prevent armed conflicts. This was to be done
under what was called preventive diplomacy and on the
basis of the establishment and maintenance of peace.

 

Following this request, Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-
Ghali submitted his "Agenda for Peace", in which he stated
that international circumstances were such that the United
Nations was ready to play an important role in the
prevention of armed conflicts. According to the "Agenda
for Peace", if the Security Council had not been able to
settle many international crises and conflicts it was because
of the repeated use of the veto by the permanent members
of the Security Council due to the cold war and the tensions
that prevailed throughout the world.

Preventive diplomacy is one of the most important
ways of preventing conflicts. The "Agenda for Peace", has
shown that the roles of the Security Council and of the
Secretary-General are important. The roles of the General
Assembly, regional organizations, programmes and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system are also
of importance in ensuring the success of efforts to prevent
armed conflicts. The Secretary-General, the Security
Council, the General Assembly, other bodies of the
international Organization and regional organizations must
all cooperate and coordinate their efforts. Selectivity and
policies of double standards in dealing with conflicts should
not prevail in the Council's discussions, and mechanisms to
avoid this should be developed.

For example, we see that the issues of the Middle
East, Palestine, the occupied Syrian Golan Heights and the
occupied Lebanese territories are not currently on the
agenda of the Security Council, even though the basic
principles for the continuation of peace negotiations taking
place outside the Council are based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978). These
resolutions of the Council have not yet been implemented,
meaning that the occupying Power has flagrantly
disregarded the will of the Council.

In this connection, we should highlight policies and
strategies to strengthen confidence and provide early
warning on the basis of detailed analysis and of determining
facts, particularly since many conflicts have economic,
social and historical causes. In this regard, conciliation and
post-conflict peace-building are of particular importance.

The United Nations should encourage the international
community to rebuild the economic infrastructure of States
that have recently emerged from armed conflicts in order
for them to avoid falling into a spiral of Violence again. In
accordance with the "Agenda for Peace", fact-finding
commissions should be increasingly used as special tools on
the initiative of the Secretary-General, the Security Council
or the General Assembly. Any request for a country to be
assigned a fact-finding commission should be considered
without delay, and Member States should submit all
necessary information needed to bring about effective
preventive diplomacy.

There are many important tools available for the
settlement of disputes under Article 33 of the United
Nations Charter: negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement and other
peaceful means. Those peaceful means are generally
effective and can play an important role in settling many
disputes and preventing armed conflicts.

There is no doubt that we are speaking about
conditions in the best of all possible worlds. What is
happening now, however, is that the most important
United Nations bodies and institutions are working
without proper coordination, a situation that has led to
duplication of efforts, waste, contradiction and bad
organization. The United Nations is a single Organization
that has created many bodies to serve Member States.
How, then, can one explain this contradiction and
duplication of efforts? This is due to bad organization
between efforts to build peace and to maintain it.

We note that the Security Council works apart from
other bodies and institutions of the United Nations
system, whereas the subjects and issues discussed in the
Council are complementary and cannot be separated from
each other. For example, the Council examines the issue
of the maintenance of peace, but its role ends at the
signing of a ceasefire agreement. Peace-building
institutions such as the Economic and Social Council then
intervene, without any real coordination between the two
bodies and without a discernible line between the
beginning of the role of one and the end of the role of the
other.

Experience has shown that those roles are
necessarily complementary. The lack of cooperation we
are currently witnessing may lead to a dangerous renewal
of conflict if the Security Council does not urge the
Economic and Social Council to fill the gap left by armed
conflicts by rebuilding peacekeeping institutions through
the implementation of economic and social development
programmes.

There is no doubt that the Security Council is the
principal body responsible for the maintenance of peace
and for coordinating the substantial resources provided by
Member States for the settlement of conflicts. But is it
not better to prevent conflicts before they erupt? Is it not

 

better to prevent the repetition of conflicts by consolidating
institutions and peace-building? Areas of tension still exist
and will continue to exist as long as there is a lack of
organization between United Nations bodies - particularly
between the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council.

Another instrument available to the Security Council
to stem conflicts is the committees on arms embargoes. It
is true that the United Nations is not a Government and that
it has no army. Its weight and prestige come from Member
States. What happens, however, when there is a
contradiction between the interests of the United Nations
and those of certain Member States?

We are all aware that certain areas of tension have
existed for over 20 years. Those tensions continue. We
know that arms flows have continued without interruption
and that mercenaries exist. This leads us to believe that
such internal conflicts can exist for long periods of time
only through the provision of outside and continually
flowing arms and munitions. In other words, the United
Nations is powerless in the face of the interests of certain
Member States or certain parties within those Member
States that try to gain quick benefit at the expense of
peoples' lives and property.

The role of the Security Council in the prevention of
conflict also involves the protection of refugees and victims
of conflicts. The Council should give serious consideration
to their situation, even if this is not strictly within the
framework of its responsibilities. In that case, we should
coordinate the action of the Council with those of
organizations that help refugees, because it is unacceptable
for refugees, the victims of conflicts, to be forced to bear
arms by one or the other party to a conflict. They should be
given sanctuary and taken to protected areas until their final
return and rehabilitation, so that they become active
members of society rather than causes of conflict.

Finally, what about the culture of conflict prevention?
All that we see in the media is pictures of refugees in a
state of despair and distress. The culture of conflict
prevention is something more complex than that. It requires
a heightening of awareness so as to instil in people's minds
from childhood the harmful consequences of conflicts in
order that they would not become involved in such
conflicts. This would encourage us to ask for the creation
of a detailed, targeted culture of peace in order to teach the
harmful effects of conflicts.

The United Nations has teaching and training
institutions and agencies that can teach such a culture on
the basis of peace, which would prevail throughout the
world, or on the basis of the sufferings of peoples in the
wake of two devastating world wars. Even though current,
post-cold-war conflicts are of an internal, ethnic or
religious nature, it is necessary to adopt an integrated
approach so as to teach the bases of peace and to
heighten peoples' awareness of the harmful effects of
conflicts by giving practical examples of what is taking
place in current areas of tension, of which there are
numerous examples.

An important point is that there is still hope, and we
should reiterate this. There is still hope that we might see
coordination between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies. Indeed, the Security Council
coordinated its activities with the Economic and Social
Council by delegating to that body the task of building
peace institutions in Haiti after a lengthy conflict.

Indeed, a similar situation exists in Guinea-Bissau.
By happenstance or coincidence, the Secretary-General
appointed as Special Representative to Haiti the former
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau. We are
convinced that these two peace-building operations, in
Haiti and in Guinea-Bissau, will succeed and thereby
convince those who have doubts about the Security
Council that there is an organic link between
peacekeeping and peace-building. Such expected success
might be an example for other regions in the world that
have been exposed to conflicts.

Finally, the Security Council must be fully
convinced of the need to ensure coordination and liaison
between it and other United Nations bodies in word and
deed, through its methods of work and its practices,
mainly by implementing the following points: first, a
more strict implementation of arms embargoes in areas of
conflict; secondly, participation of the States parties to
conflicts in the deliberations of the Council, pursuant to
Article 31 of the Charter; thirdly, dealing with the status
of refugees in a positive way, so as to prevent their
participation in conflicts; and fourthly, creating a targeted
culture which would highlight the harmful consequences
of conflicts.

The Security Council has a duty to play a role as
coordinator in order to establish a complementarity with
other United Nations bodies, especially the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, so as to
actively prevent conflicts before they erupt. The Council

 

could then rebut criticism that it is detached from the
outside world, even if this affects Member States which
depend on it. We all hope that we will see action, not just
words, and that the Council can refute the criticisms that it
is a private club.

I have been a bit lengthy, but I felt it was necessary
given the significance and gravity of the subject.

