Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve and Ambassador
Skoog for their insightful briefings.

My delegation joins others in welcoming the eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
ofresolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/934). I wish to reaffirm
South Africa's commitment to the full implementation
of the resolution.

South Africa welcomes the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as an important and, indeed
timely and relevant, non-proliferation instrument,
which came out of intense diplomatic efforts and
complex negotiations among China, France, Germany,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, the United
States, the European Union and the Islamic Republic of
Iran in 2015. My delegation therefore fully supports the
Secretary-General's view that such diplomatic efforts
must be preserved and be built upon.

South Africa notes the four steps undertaken by
Iran to partially cease the implementation of some
of its commitments under the JCPOA, which came
understandably 14 months after the withdrawal of the
United States from the JCPOA. Notwithstanding the
merits of such undertakings by Iran, South Africa
wishes underscore that it remains of the utmost
importance for Iran to continue to comply with the
provisions of the JCPOA. Likewise, it is also critical
for all the remaining parties to the JCPOA to fully
implement and abide by its provisions.

South Africa continues to regret the decision of the
United States to withdraw from the J CPOA, and we share
the disappointment expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report regarding the United States decision not
to renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects
in the framework of the JCPOA. It is our view that the
decision of the United States will inadvertently affect
the ability of Iran to fully implement the provisions
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). It would
be important to recall that the lifting of sanctions,
especially on certain nuclear-related materials, was
part and parcel of the JCPOA.

While we commend the benefits of the JCPOA as
an essential instrument of nuclear non-proliferation,
we wish to stress that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the only guarantee that those weapons will
never be used again by anyone under any circumstances.
South Africa wishes to remind the Council that nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually
reinforcing processes. A lack of progress on nuclear
disarmament will inadvertently affect the gains made
in the area of nuclear non-proliferation. South Africa
also wishes to underline the importance of respecting
the inalienable right of States parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

South Africa is a staunch supporter of nuclear-
weapon-free zones as one of the major contributors
to nuclear non-proliferation and critical building
blocks towards achieving the goal of a world without
nuclear weapons. In that regard, my delegation wishes
to highlight the urgent need for the establishment of a
zone in the Middle East free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction and, accordingly,
we take note of the political declaration agreed at the
Conference on the Establishment ofa Middle East Zone
Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass
Destruction, held from 18 to 22 November.

Finally, with regard to the broader security of the
region, South Africa joins others in expressing its
concern about the growing tensions in the Persian Gulf
and their impact on international peace and security.
South Africa urges all parties involved to exercise the
utmost restraint and not allow the situation to get out
of hand. The Council must support initiatives aimed at
the restoration of peace and stability, not only in the
Persian Gulf but also in the broader Middle East region.

