Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate and for your
commitment in guiding the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters. As
we know, this year has been one of the most productive
in terms of the President's notes, and we greatly
appreciate that. I would also like to warmly thank
today's briefers, Ms. Kimberly Prost and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for their contributions. Issues of due process
in sanctions regimes and, in particular, of the Council's
follow-up of its referrals to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) have long been discussed in the context
of the larger debate on the Council's role in ensuring
accountability and justice.

Before making a few specific points, I would like
to briefly refer to the recent progress made in the work
of the Council. This year saw the number of public
meetings increase by 25 per cent compared to those in
2013. Of the 10 Council presidencies to date this year,
seven opted for open wrap-up meetings. This year,
briefings to the United Nations general membership
on the monthly programme of work, as well as end-
of-month briefings, have been common. The Council's
website has been further improved and a new website
dedicated to sanctions launched, while the use of
e-rooms has been helpful in managing information
flows.

While progress has been made, there is still ample
room for further improving the Council's working
methods, first in regard to how we translate our

statements on justice and accountability into tangible
efforts to end impunity. In that context, the link between
the Council and the ICC demands a fresh look and new
ideas. Executing arrest warrants is one of the Court's
most difficult challenges. While the Council has made
referrals to the ICC, it has so far failed to take any action
with regard to repeated ICC notifications, which does
not speak well of its ability to enforce its decisions and
therefore affects its credibility. Whether we can task
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
with tackling those issues, or whether we should develop
a different format for it, we need to effectively address
the relationship between the Council and the Court as
well as the issue of follow-up mechanisms.

Secondly, the Security Council increasingly
relies on sanctions regimes as an indispensable tool
for maintaining international peace and security.
Sanctions, whether intended to coerce, constrain
or deter, can serve their underlying purpose only
when they are properly targeted. The Office of the
Ombudsperson has proved to be an effective mechanism
for improving the credibility of measures taken within
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. A core aspect of such a
mechanism - its independence - must be continually
upheld, including by removing any remaining channels
of interference, ranging from various administrative
constraints to procedural filters.

Ensuring the systematic and consistent application
of due process is fundamental. We fully agree with
Ms. Prost that those targeted under other sanctions
regimes should have the same access to mechanisms
of redress. We should reconcile any existing
inconsistencies between various sanctions regimes,
either by extending or replicating the Ombudsperson's
mandate under the Al-Qaida sanctions regime or
by applying other mechanisms to the same effect.
Transparency and outreach in the work of the Sanctions
Committees remain paramount, and I fully agree with
our Australian colleague's remarks today to the effect
that public briefings to the Council should be standard
rather than an exception. The Sanctions Committees
should also ensure that they are better heard by sending
their messages through press releases and making sure
that those concerned can read them in other relevant
languages besides English and French, such as Arabic
in the case of Yemen, for instance.

In our View, Sanctions Committee briefings by the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and by the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, as well as exchanges between Sanctions
Committees, panels of experts and the Prosecutor of the
ICC, can be very useful and should become common
practice.

Thirdly, we believe that the structure of the
annual report of the Council to the General Assembly
should be updated in View of the vastly improved
Security Council website and the detailed monthly
assessments prepared by all the Council presidencies.
The $2,500 per page spent on the annual report raises
the question of whether that is the best way to spend
our permanently scarce resources when most of the
aggregated information is already available on the
Web. My delegation has submitted proposals to the
Working Group on the matter. At the same time, we
should further encourage increasing the analytical and
thought-provoking aspects of the annual report.

Fourthly, while dialogue between the Council and
the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs and PCCs) has improved, in our view one formal
annual meeting with the force commanders may
no longer be enough. The Council needs to engage
with them more regularly and improve the quality of
exchanges, especially as we are moving from numbers-
based peacekeeping operation processes to capacity-
based planning and a shift in the expectations and
role of peacekeepers. It must also ensure that there is
a meaningful follow-up to such discussions. TCCs/
PCCs should be engaged earlier in the force generation
process. Regular interim briefings by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support on planning and force generation would
enable Council members and TCCs to better address
existing gaps.
Lastly, my delegation strongly supports the French
initiative on limiting the use of the veto, especially
in cases of mass atrocities, genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. The Council's failure to take
action in preventing the worst atrocities and crimes
against humanity is erosive to its credibility. The use of
the veto should therefore be part and parcel of our future
deliberations and, as our Australian colleague said,
deserves ambitious follow-up. Furthermore, meetings
under the Arria Formula format and horizon-scanning
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs should
be used more vigorously to signal emerging crises and
provide sharper focus on situations where populations
are at risk of mass atrocities and crimes against
humanity.

Before concluding, let me also thank our colleagues
from the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group and non-governmental organizations such as
Security Council Report and others, whose efforts
at encouraging transparency and improving the
institutional memory regarding the work of the
Council serve as a constant reminder to Council
members to advance efforts aimed at improving its
working methods. A more effective, transparent and
open Security Council is in the interests of the entire
membership of the United Nations.

