Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): The terrible acts of terrorism this month
in Nairobi, in Dar es Salaam and in Omagh in Northern
Ireland are a stark reminder that terrorism spares nobody.
They also remind us that terrorism will not be defeated
unless those responsible are brought to justice.

It is almost 10 years since Pan Am flight 103 was
blown up over the town of Lockerbie in Scotland. In this,
and in the UTA bombing, a total of 440 innocent people
were killed. These were among the most savage acts of
terrorism and premeditated mass murder. For almost 10
years the families of the victims have been seeking justice.

It is seven years since warrants were issued for the
arrest of two Libyan nationals in connection with the
destruction of Pan Am 103. Since then, Libya has
persistently failed to carry out its obligation to hand over
the two accused for trial despite binding resolutions of this
Council requiring it to do so. In March 1992 the Security
Council demanded that the accused be handed over for trial.
For six years Libya has disregarded its obligation as a
Member of the United Nations to comply with that demand.

Over the years my Government gave repeated
assurances about the guarantees for the accused under Scots
law. Throughout this same period Libya has repeatedly
stated that it would accept a trial before a Scottish court
sitting in a third country. Mr. Omar Muntasser, Foreign
Minister of Libya, said only last January in a letter to the
President of the Security Council [5/1998/5, annex] that
Libya

"accepted the proposal of the League of Arab States
that the two suspects should be tried by a court in a
neutral country and that they should be tried at The
Hague by Scottish judges and in accordance with
Scottish law".

During the Security Council debate held last March
[3864th meeting] the Libyan Foreign Minister said that the
concerns about trial in Scotland of the lawyers for the two
suspects related solely to the venue and have nothing to do
with the judges or the law.

 

That the accused would receive a fair and impartial
trial in Scotland with all due safeguards was confirmed by
the independent experts appointed by the Secretary-
General to examine Scottish legal procedures last
December. We would still prefer that the two accused
submit themselves to a trial before a Scottish court in
Scotland. Persons accused of terrorism have no right to
determine their place of trial. Nevertheless, the British
Government has also been mindful of the interests of the
families and of justice. We concluded finally that in order
to bring to an end the years of waiting for the relatives of
the victims of Lockerbie, it would be possible to arrange
for a Scottish court to sit in the Netherlands. The joint
United Statesfllnited Kingdom letter of 24 August and its
attachments set out in transparent detail the precise
arrangements whereby a Scottish court could sit outside
Scotland. Today's resolution provides the basis for the
necessary changes to British and Dutch law. I wish to
record the British Government's deep gratitude to the
Government of the Netherlands for responding positively
to our request to hold the Lockerbie trial in the
Netherlands.

Let no one think that this was an easy decision
politically to take or legally to implement. We were
conscious of the desire of the international community for
justice and for an end to the stalemate. We have therefore
acted on the proposal of the Organization of African
Unity and the Arab League, and we have taken the
necessary steps and placed our initiative before the
Security Council.

The adoption of this resolution is an opportunity to
resolve the matter with justice in a manner acceptable to
the families and to all the parties concerned. It is also the
moment of truth for Libya.

For years Libya has promised that it would accept a
trial under Scottish law with Scottish judges in a third
country. That way forward is now open to them. We have
noted the Libyan Government's statement of 26 August
that they will deal positively with this initiative. We also
heard the Libyan Permanent Representative state clearly
his Government's acceptance that the two accused be
tried in a Scottish court in the Netherlands by Scottish
judges under Scottish law. We welcome this. But what is
now required is that Libya should without delay confirm
through the United Nations Secretary-General its clear
and unequivocal acceptance of this and its willingness to
do so speedily and without prevarication. The
arrangements for the trial are clear, and there are no
hidden conditions. The central requirement is the delivery

 

of the accused to the Netherlands. The resolution makes
clear that it is Libya's responsibility to ensure the
appearance of the accused in the Netherlands. If the
Government of Libya is willing to do this without delay,
everything else will flow from that.
The resolution now adopted says clearly that sanctions
will be suspended as soon as the Secretary-General is able
to confirm that the accused have been delivered to the
Netherlands and that the requirements of French justice
have also been met. The Governments of the United
Kingdom and the United States have stated their
commitment to that clearly in our letter to the Secretary-
General. Furthermore, once Libya accepts the proposal in
its entirety we are prepared to do everything necessary to
implement speedily the legal and other arrangements.

 

Respect for the role and decisions of the Security
Council is a basic obligation and a cornerstone of
international order. It is the responsibility of the whole
international community to stand firm on terrorism and to
pursue justice for the Victims of acts of international
terrorism. By this resolution the Security Council is
upholding those principles. We hope and trust that those
who advocated this solution will now help to deliver it.

