Mr. Feltman: I will focus my briefing on two
aspects: recent developments in Ukraine and the work
of the United Nations.

It is a reflection of the severity of this crisis and its
possible wider ramifications that the Council is meeting
to discuss Ukraine today for the second time this week
and for the sixth time since 1 March. Serious attention
has been accorded to this issue by the Council, in
addition to multiple multilateral and bilateral diplomatic
efforts, all aimed at seeking a peaceful resolution of the
crisis.

The frequency of the deliberations, however, is
also a reflection of the fact that, as the international
community, we have not yet been able to deliver on
our obligation - of which the Secretary-General has
reminded us so often - to contribute to the de-escalation
of tensions in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. Although it has so far
proved elusive, the path towards a peaceful resolution
of the crisis is still open. Let us seize it.

I will first speak about the developments in
Ukraine. Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7l3l), the Secretary-General's concern about the
deteriorating situation in Crimea and rising tensions
in eastern Ukraine has further deepened. In Crimea,
the seizure and blockade of Ukrainian military bases,
as well as the majority of the State border service
facilities, continue. There have been reports that a
military hospital has been taken over by unidentified
military personnel. On 11 March, it was reported that
the Crimean authorities had closed down the airspace
of the peninsula to all commercial flights except those
to and from Moscow, citing the need to keep so-called
provocateurs away from the peninsula.

We understand that the referendum called by the
authorities in Crimea is expected to go ahead on Sunday,
16 March. There are no indications to the contrary.

On 11 March, Crimea's Parliament adopted a
"declaration of independence of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea". On the same day, the Parliament
of Ukraine, citing specific articles of the country's
Constitution, adopted a resolution urging the Parliament
of Crimea to

"reconsider its decision of 6 March 2014 and
bring it in line with the Constitution of Ukraine
and the Constitution of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea, approved by the Law of Ukraine of
23 December 1998".

The resolution further stated that if the parliament of
Crimea failed to do so by 12 March 2014, the Parliament
of Ukraine would "initiate the issue of early termination
of powers of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea".

Turning to United Nations activities, the Secretary-
General continues his active efforts to speak with all
relevant parties with the aim of seeking a peaceful
resolution of the ongoing crisis. To that end, he will
receive Mr. Yatsenyuk later this afternoon.

As I stated on Monday, the scheduled referendum
has further complicated an already difficult and
volatile situation. In that context, I regret to report
to the Council that the local authorities have denied
the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights,
Mr. Ivan Simonovie, access to Crimea, citing their
lack of readiness to receive his visit and an inability to
provide security.

Upon his departure from Ukraine, Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie intends to report on
the human rights situation throughout the country.
For Crimea, he will have to rely on, inter alia, reports
from the residents of Crimea, foreign diplomats
based in Crimea and international non-governmental
organizations, with whom he has been in contact.
Given the vast divergences in reports about what is
actually happening on the ground in Crimea, we would
have much preferred that Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovie had been able to collect first-hand accounts
himself.

Assistant Secretary-General Simonovic' has so far
held meetings in Kyiv, Kharkiv and Lviv, including with
representatives of local administrations, the Russian
minority, non-governmental organizations, including
a representative of the Crimean Tatars, and other civil
society representatives, as well as with ombudspersons.
During his mission, he has also continued to discuss
options with the authorities for practical human rights
measures that could be taken to strengthen human
rights protection and contribute to de-escalation.

The human rights monitoring mission of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights is set to become operational in Ukraine by
this coming Monday. In the light of the unpredictable
situation, which could affect human rights, the
Secretary-General is considering asking Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie to extend his mission.

Since the beginning of the crisis, the Secretary-
General has called for a peaceful resolution that respects
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The Secretary-General continues to advocate for a
resolution of the crisis in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. He appeals to all parties to avoid
hasty actions or provocative rhetoric and to engage
in direct and constructive dialogue in order to forge
a peaceful way forward. He also continues to remind
all parties that democratic values and international
human rights norms must be upheld for all the people
of Ukraine, including minorities. As part of the United
Nations efforts, we also continue to closely coordinate
our activities with key players and relevant regional
organizations, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.

In the highly charged atmosphere in Ukraine,
exacerbated by a lack of trust and fear, the potential
for intentional or unintentional escalation or
miscalculations is real. We underscore that all sides
must avoid unilateral actions that could further raise
tensions and make de-escalation more difficult. It is
high time for constructive engagement. Instability
in Ukraine is in no one's interests and will have dire
consequences for the region and the world.

The Secretary-General, under the auspices of his
good offices, is the Council's partner in supporting and
facilitating a peaceful resolution through dialogue. We
are convinced that with genuine and concerted efforts
by the international community, we can together pull
Ukraine back from the brink.

