The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which she requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Booto
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Bertrand
Gangapersaud Ramcharan, United Nations Deputy
High Commissioner for Human Rights and Officer-in-
Charge of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ramcharan to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to a letter dated 25 June 2003 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council transmitting two reports from the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo regarding the events of 3 April
2003 in Drodro and the events that took place between
31 December 2002 and 20 January 2003 in Mambasa,
respectively. Photocopies of the two reports have been
circulated informally to members of the Security
Council. That letter and its annexes will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2003/674.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and by Mr. Bertrand
Gangapersaud Ramcharan, Deputy High Commissioner
for Human Rights and Officer-in-Charge of the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

I give the floor to Mr. Guehenno.


