Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Let me at the outset
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his comprehensive
briefing and for his continued leadership at the head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

I also thank His Excellency Mr. lvica Dacie,
Deputy Prime Minster and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj of Kosovo for their
statements.

Rwanda welcomes the commitment of the new
Government of Serbia to the dialogue with Pristina,
facilitated by the European Union (EU), and to
the full implementation of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
of 19 April 2013. We equally welcome the holding on
8 June of peaceful, transparent and well organized
elections for the Assembly of Kosovo, following the
dissolution of the previous Assembly. We commend
the Kosovo authorities, working with the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
for the smooth organization of the elections. We
extend our appreciation to the Kosovo police, which,
in coordination with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force,
provided security for the elections.

We note, however, that owing to electoral and
political procedures on both sides, the EU-facilitated
process slowed down, as no high-level meeting was
held during the reporting period. But we are confident
that the parties will soon resume dialogue to iron
out the underlying differences in that respect, and
we call for the leadership of the European Union in
facilitating the dialogue. We believe it is one of the
examples highlighting the crucial role that regional and
subregional organizations can play in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

We note that the security situation in Kosovo has
remained generally calm and stable despite various
incidents, such as the incident near the villages of
Orlovac and Kushtove/Kosutovo, of which the Council
was informed by the Special Representative. In northern
Kosovo, we deplore the incidents that occurred in
June in the area of the main Mitrovica bridge, which
led to rising tensions and protests, during which 13
police officers and 12 civilians were injured. However,
we are encouraged by the establishment by Belgrade
and Pristina of a working group, following a meeting
held in July between both sides, under the auspices of
the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy in Brussels, to discuss the matter. We
hope that both sides will continue working together to
avoid further security incidents.

Rwanda takes note with concern of the findings
of the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force, as
presented by its Chief Prosecutor on 29 July. We were
also alarmed by reports of ethnic cleaning targeting
minorities, organized by former senior officials of
the Kosovo Liberation Army, as well as a climate of
intimidation against current and potential witnesses. In
that regard, we welcome the ratification by the Kosovo
Assembly of the agreement between Kosovo and the
EU establishing a specialized court to try cases arising
from the findings of the task force. But it is important
that the Government and the Assembly of Kosovo, as
well as the European Union, take additional measures
to expedite the establishment of the court in order to
ensure that the perpetrators are held accountable.

It is unfortunate that the voluntary return of
displaced persons to Kosovo remained low during
the period under review. Nonetheless, we commend
the Kosovo authorities for the implementation of the
2013/2014 confidence-building measures programme
throughout the country, aimed at promoting genuine
reconciliation among the communities. We believe
that community-based initiatives and other projects,
particularly those aimed at integrating minorities
into the education system and into the public service,
including the police, will eventually contribute to a
higher number of returnees, thus fostering sustainable
reconciliation.

In conclusion, Rwanda recognizes the commitment
of Belgrade and Pristina to the EU-facilitated dialogue,
and we encourage both sides to remain constructively
engaged, as we are convinced that the process will

ultimately lead to long-term stability, reconciliation
and development on both sides.

