Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan warmly
welcomes His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and African Integration of the Republic of Mali to
today's briefing.

We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Annadif, for his
comprehensive briefing and acknowledge him and the
Mission's personnel for their commitment and service
under such hazardous conditions.

We welcome the findings contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/478). My delegation
would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.

First, Kazakhstan appreciates the efforts of the
Malian Government and other signatory parties,
with the support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in implementing the June 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
believe that the installation of interim authorities in
Mali's five northern regions will lead to the restoration
of Government authority in the north of the country.

While progress is noted, it is still fragile and needs
to be stabilized and made irreversible. The emergence
ofnew armed groups has undermined the peace process
and spread instability from the north to the centre of
the country. The pace of implementing the Agreement
needs to be accelerated so that the crisis in Mali does
not spill over to neighbouring countries. The Agreement
will succeed only if all stakeholders collaborate and
conform to the clearly formulated vision and process and
realistic timelines. It is critical to lay the foundations for
stable rule of law and just, independent and accountable
judicial and security institutions. It must also address
the grievances of communities excluded from the peace
agreement and its benefits. It is necessary to restore the
confidence of Malians in State institutions, which must
begin to provide essential services for all segments of
the population.

Secondly, elections and constitutional referendums
are part of Statebuilding and must be given full
attention. The nation's aspirations for peace and
stability must be supported by the African Union and
the United Nations, especially in implementing the
outcomes of the Conference for National Harmony
and the drafting process of the charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation. The revision of the new
Constitution should proceed in a robust yet inclusive
and consensual manner. The international community
has to come forward with funding for the elections and
constitutional referendum by supporting the electoral
process project managed by the United Nations
Development Programme. MINUSMA's mandate
should include the provision of technical assistance
to reform the national and local electoral process, its
mechanisms and procedures. It is equally important
that ministerial nominations comply with the 30 per
cent quota for the representation of women, as was
stipulated on 18 December 2015.

Thirdly, cooperation with regional actors must
be intensified to support Mali in overcoming its
vulnerabilities and embarking upon the path to stability.
The investments and efforts of the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and the Sahel countries need to be
augmented considerably to strengthen border security
and the capabilities of the Malian security forces,
especially in the areas of training and financial and
technical assistance. In order to fight the threats facing
Mali, including terrorism and transnational crime, the
Council should enhance partnership with the African
Union and the forces of Operation Barkhane, and
provide the necessary support to the Group of Five for
the Sahel joint force. At the same time, there can be
no durable peace without an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, which
must be adequately funded so as to reintegrate ex-
combatants and prevent their relapse into violence.

Fourthly, the capabilities of MINUSMA is a
key consideration in the light of its asymmetrical
standards. Mali is one of the most dangerous countries
for its own national forces, regional and international
peacekeepers, civilians and humanitarian workers. We
join others in strongly condemning the violent attacks
perpetrated by terrorist groups against them. We salute
them for their bravery and unsurpassed commitment,
and honour those who have sacrificed their lives for the
cause of peace.

In the light of the deteriorating security situation
in northern and central Mali and the escalation in
inter-ethnic violence, last year the Council reinforced
the MINUSMA mandate, backing it with the necessary
capabilities and up to 2,049 additional troops. However,
the relevant provisions of resolution 2295 (2016) have
not yet been implemented because of the gaps in
operational capabilities, which must be bridged if the
Mission is to effectively fulfil its mandate. We also
need more deterrence and predeployment preparedness
of contingents. At the same time, more predictable
military assets are necessary. We therefore welcome
commitments from troop- and police-contributing
countries to address current gaps made at the force
generation conference held in New York last month.

