Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would, first of all, like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. We appreciate his efforts to
safeguard peace and stability in Kosovo and in the
Balkans. We have also listened attentively to the
statements made by His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie,
President of Serbia, and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu.

The overall situation in Kosovo has been stable in
the past four years, but it remains tense and sensitive.
That fragile situation affects the peace and stability of
the Balkans and Europe as a whole. China hopes that
all parties will view the relevant issues from a broader
and longer-term perspective, and avoid any statements
and actions that could lead to tension and endanger the
peace and stability of the region.

China has always maintained that all parties
should adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the
Security Council and respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries. Likewise, China
has always maintained that a final resolution of the
status of Kosovo should be a settlement acceptable to
both sides reached through negotiations. We support
further efforts to find a proper solution for Kosovo's
status through negotiations.

Nine years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), which has become the legal
basis for settling the issue of Kosovo. Since that time,
Kosovo has indeed experienced many changes; but the
basis for the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
has not changed.

Moreover, China has taken note of the
observations of the Secretary-General contained in
paragraph 17 of his report (S/2008/354), namely, that
events in Kosovo have had, and will continue to have,
a significant operational impact on the functioning of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and that, after 15 June, UNMIK will
no longer be able to perform effectively the vast
majority of its tasks as an interim administration.

We attach great importance to the
Secretary-General's proposal regarding UNMIK's
reconfiguration. We believe that the Secretary-General
should continue to maintain close communications
with the relevant parties concerned in order that the
reconfiguration plan will be more reliable and feasible
and focused on a proper solution to the question of
Kosovo.

We understand and encourage the intention of the
European Union (EU) to enhance its role in the
Western Balkans. We hope that the EU will play a
positive role in the framework of resolution 1244
(1999), support the work of UNMIK and, together with
the United Nations, maintain the peace and stability of
the region.

