Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Croatia's initiative to convene this thematic
debate on global security and international terrorism is
very timely. It is all the more so at a time when the
international community has condemned the recent
terrorist attacks in the city of Mumbai, India, which
took the lives of hundreds of innocent people and
injured hundreds more.

We reiterate Colombia's condolences to the
Government and the people of India and express our
solidarity with the victims and their relatives. Having
suffered the effects of terrorism, my country well
understands the extent of that tragedy.

The fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, for whatever reasons and committed by
whomever, must continue to be one of the priority
goals of the international community. Colombia
accords the highest priority to efforts aimed at agreeing
upon international instruments and mechanisms to fight
that scourge. That is why we have supported initiatives
at the hemispheric and global levels to prevent, combat
and eliminate terrorism.

My country has ratified the relevant agreements
on terrorism adopted within the framework of the
United Nations. It has also participated in defining
mandates and political commitments to prevent and
suppress terrorism, agreed upon at summits of the
Americas, the Rio Group, the Organization of
American States and the United Nations. In that regard,
I would like to underline my country's recent
ratification of the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism.

Strengthening cooperation and assistance among
States and international organizations is a fundamental
aspect in the fight against terrorism. The Government
of Colombia believes that this fight demands a
cooperative approach through bilateral, regional and
subregional instruments that help to address the
manifestations of that scourge. The fight against
international terrorism can be effective only if all
countries are equally committed and progress in
implementing their international obligations. We
cannot relent in our efforts to eradicate that threat. As
long as the security of our citizens and institutions is
under siege from that phenomenon, the progress
achieved in various areas will be weak and vulnerable.

In that regard, the need for policies that include
comprehensive action against money-laundering and
the global drug problem as sources that feed terrorism
is increasingly evident. The resolute will of all States
to stop providing safe haven to members of terrorist
groups and to promote the exchange of intelligence
conducive to dismantling the existing networks is also
required.

My delegation considers it appropriate that
initiatives aimed at strengthening the capacity of
Member States to implement strategies to tackle that
problem, particularly through technical assistance
mechanisms, are a priority of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. The formation of
five groups to deal with cross-sectional assistance in
the areas of finance control, arms trafficking, border
control, legal issues and other matters provided for in
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) is a step in the
right direction. So, too, is the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's focus on assessing the efficacy of
measures adopted by States and on identifying
capacities, resources and infrastructure that could be
improved.

Recently, through those mechanisms, my country
had the opportunity to offer technical assistance for
financial analysis as a tool to address money-
laundering. That offer was welcomed and has been
channelled, for example, into cooperation with
Jamaica, through financing provided by the Inter-
American Committee against Terrorism. Also with the
Committee's support, Colombia has hosted regional
events on such issues as port security management,
travel document administration and cybercrime.

The adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy set a new and decisive
milestone, as it provided the international system with
a comprehensive perspective in the fight against that
scourge. It also allowed a definite course to be marked
out to strengthen international cooperation and to
tackle the various forms of terrorism and the activities
from which it feeds.

My delegation supports the negotiation and
adoption of the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism as a complement to the Global
Strategy. It is necessary to strengthen efforts to
complete the negotiation of that important instrument.

I would also like to highlight the progress
achieved in the implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). That progress
should encourage an additional effort by the Security
Council and the General Assembly to strengthen
coordination and coherence in the criteria, mechanisms
and efforts of the Organization in the fight against
terrorism.

At the national level, the defence and democratic
security policy, implemented by the Government of
Colombia, has achieved results that are widely
recognized internationally. Thanks to that policy, my
country is now able to better defend the democratic
system and the rule of law, guarantee the security and
freedom of the people, protect human rights and
promote economic and social development.

Colombia has been carrying out measures and
actions against terrorism within the framework of a
State policy that engages the different entities and
institutions, in accordance with the international
agreements to which Colombia is a party. It is clear
that the isolated actions of States or international
institutions are not enough to address the threat of
terrorism. The continued commitment of all States and
relevant actors is therefore indispensable, particularly
in matters pertaining to crimes closely related to
terrorism, such as the global drug problem, money-
laundering and the illicit traffic in arms, among other
things, which demand a joint, coordinated and
sustained effort.

Conscious of that, Colombia wishes to reiterate
the need to strengthen cooperation in that area,

including at the bilateral, regional and global levels.
The responsibility, willing and commitment of all
States are essential for the efforts of the international
community to be truly effective in that regard.

