Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of August. I should also like to welcome the
presence among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Central African Republic and to reaffirm that my
country fully shares his heartfelt concerns, stands
steadfastly at his side and joins its voice to his in
calling for the support of the international community.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/409) introduced by his Special Representative
Mr. Mahmoud, whose presence I welcome here today, I
should like to say that it accurately reflects the reality
on the ground and the concerns of various parties,
including us and our humanitarian partners. We
therefore welcome the high quality of the report.

We take this opportunity to stress that we have
spared no effort to respect the implementation of the
road map set out in resolution 1923 (2010) of 25 May.
Above all, we wish to reiterate our commitment to
protecting civilians, especially refugees and internally
displaced persons, until their voluntary return to their
places of origin. That will involve, without the shadow
of a doubt, the De'tachement inte'gre' de securite (DIS) -
an institution that, it should be recalled, was originally
created by Chad, with the support of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, then strengthened by
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). DIS will need to be
maintained and strengthened in terms of personnel,
resources, and support for the Chadian security and
defence forces. That is currently taking place and will
continue after the full withdrawal of MINURCAT.
10-48016

To give the Council an idea of the efforts we are
making to ensure security in the eastern part of the
country, I wish to underscore that approximately we
are devoting $12 million of our own resources to that
purpose each month. Furthermore, it is our hope that
the international community will pursue its efforts to
help case our burden. Specifically, this will require the
promised infrastructure to be provided to the benefit,
of course, of DIS and our judicial and penal
institutions. The trust fund must be maintained after
MINURCAT's drawdown in order to meet the needs of
DIS, which is a unique pilot force of which the United
Nations and Chad should be proud. We have always
said that it is a rather unique community police unit
whose role on the ground is of major importance. It is
only right to reaffirm our recognition of and gratitude
to the generous contributors to the fund, and to call for
these efforts to be kept up, with the encouragement of
the Security Council.

In this regard, I cannot conclude my statement
without informing the Council that the plan for the
Chadian takeover of DIS, which was expected by the
Security Council on 31 July, will be transmitted to the
Council as soon as possible. We encountered a delay in
awaiting some information from MINURCAT on its
takeover of DIS to include in our report.

We have also taken due note of the concerns
expressed and comments made by members of the
Security Council in various settings, including informal
meetings, and we will do our utmost to follow up on
them accordingly.

Finally, we reiterate our full cooperation with the
United Nations in the accomplishment of its noble
peace mission in our country and the subregion.

