Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): During the four years of the Syrian crisis,
terrorist organizations have striven to destroy the
innocence of children and to create fertile ground
for that tactic and for hatred. They have done that by
educating terrorists - ifI can put it that way - in
training camps in Syria and neighbouring countries.
Various groups are involved in this, and they have
become more deadly than in the past. Their recruitment
targets children as young as the age of four years.
Given the silence of some and the complicity of others,
terrorism has been given license to spread across the
globe, covering all four corners of the world.

We note that my country's delegation has on many
occasions here in the Council Chamber vainly sought
to draw the international community's attention to the
phenomenon of the recruitment of Syrian children in
those areas controlled by armed terrorist groups such as
Daesh, the Islamic Front, the Army of Islam and other
armed groups. Criminal brigades have been created
and annointed with names such as Ashbal Al-Zarqawi.
These young groups of children are part of the Al Nusra
Front, and maybe the Council is unaware of what that
group consists of. These brigades use children aged
from 5 to 15 years; for them, childhood ends very
early. They become adolescents who are trained to
participate in fighting. Brainwashing takes place in the
training camps, which prepares them to defend fatwas.
They grow into ignorent, bearded criminals who know
nothing of civilization and the tenets of the Islamic
religion.

In the regions where they are present, these armed
terrorist groups are depriving children education. Their
education has been replaced by terrorist indoctrination.
Similarly, those very groups have decreed that there is
to be no education in certain areas of Syria until the
State schoolbooks are modified in line with the groups'
religious rulings. As documented in a January 2015
UNICEF report, the education of more than 670,000
potential Syrian schoolchildren in major cities has been
disrupted. Furthermore, after being pillaged, schools
and hospitals have become barracks and execution
centres. Terrorist attacks perpetrated by armed
terrorist groups and by moderate opposition groups
have increased in number and have targeted hospitals,
infrastructures and schools, resulting in many victims,
particularly among children. In 2015 alone, 85 children
have been killed and 224 wounded. Those terrorist
crimes have been the subject of many letters sent by the
Syrian Government to the Secretary-General and to the

President of the Security Council. The latest two are
identical letters dated from 23 March 2015.
Since the outset ofthe crisis, the Syrian Government,
in line with its constitutional responsibilities to protect
its own citizens, as is the case with all Member States,
has taken measures to protect children, including some
legal measures that prevent the recruitment of children
into combat of any form. Furthermore, the Syrian
Government adopted a decree to that effect on 6 May
2013. As an example, the Ministry for Social Affairs
and Labour has identified a number of safe areas for
children who have been liberated following their
abduction and training by terrorist and Takfiri groups
of all sorts. Those children with legal difficulties
are sent to correctional facilities. Their cases are
comprehensively evaluated by specialists, including
in terms of their psychosocial state, so as to identify
appropriate programmes and assistance to be provided
to these children.

Despite tireless efforts made by the Syrian
Government to protect children from destructive
Takfiri and Wahhabi ideology, we all know that we
must uproot that phenomenon in order to deal with the
problem. What we now need to do is to put an end to
the policies of the Governments that support terrorism
with financial resources, weapons and training. We
must take steps against those countries to implement
the Council's resolutions against terrorism, including
resolution 2199 (2015). And the Government of Syria
must be given assistance to rehabilitate and reintegrate
children into their communities. Otherwise, war
materiel will continue to flood into Syria and there
will be further bloodshed. The crisis will continue,
producing future generations willing to kill or trained
to kill under orders.

In conclusion, the recruitment of children by
non-State armed groups is an international issue that
requires radical solutions. It is vital, therefore, to
uproot organized terrorism, which prevails in a number
of countries, such as in my own country, Syria, and
in Iraq, Nigeria, the Central African Republic, Mali,
Colombia and others. The legitimate Governments of
those countries, just as in my own country, are trying
to uproot such terrorism, day after day. We must
therefore all concentrate on this issue in an honest way
instead of politicizing the debate and coming up with
concept papers. We must also distinguish between the
rights of legitimate Governments to combat terrorists
who recruit children on the one hand, and the issue of
children who are victims of non-State armed terrorist
groups, on the other.

