The President (spoke in Spanish): I should now
like to make a statement on behalf of Argentina.

First of all, I would like to join the other
members of the Security Council in thanking Mr. Tom
Koenigs, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, for his excellent and
comprehensive briefing.

Argentina concurs with the main conclusions and
observations in the Secretary-General's report,
especially as regards the achievements in Afghanistan
during the past four years and the numerous challenges
that lie ahead. We believe that in order to consolidate
the institutions established by the Bonn process and to
continue to normalize the situation in the country, the
continuous assistance of the international community is
needed in several areas. The Afghanistan Compact,
signed in London, clearly identifies the various aspects
of that ambitious peacebuilding agenda for the next
five years, especially in the areas of security;
governance; the rule of law and human rights;
economic and social development; and combating
narcotics. Even though the Afghan Government and the
Afghan people themselves must take the leadership in
all of those fields, the international community also has
an important role to play.
I would like take this opportunity to briefly refer
to five issues.

The first is the security situation, which continues
to be a cause for great concern. The south and south-
east of Afghanistan continue to be the scene of a large
number of violent incidents, and the fact that armed
groups are using increasingly sophisticated methods is
a particular cause for concern. The finalization of the
political process does not seem to have had the positive
impact in the security area for which all of us were
hoping. Given that the Afghan forces are not yet in a
position to deal with that challenge, we believe that the
international community must continue to provide
assistance in the security area. We therefore welcome
the adoption by NATO of a new operational plan that
would also cover the south of the country.

In our view, a second main challenge is
combating narcotics. The Afghan economy continues
to be dominated by the production of and traffic in
opium, which accounts for 50 per cent of the country's
gross domestic product. Thus far, the efforts
undertaken have yielded only modest results,
especially as regards the eradication of poppy
cultivation. We therefore support the adoption of an
integrated strategy, such as that presented in London.
We should not lose sight of the fact that adopting laws
and presenting plans is not sufficient in itself; the key
lies in their implementation. The Afghan Government
must take decisive leadership on this issue, and the
international community must continue to provide
assistance.

The third issue is the human rights situation,
which is also a cause for concern. We believe that
impunity for certain leaders of armed groups accused
of grave human rights violations - some of whom
have been elected to the Wolesi Jirga and hold public
office - is unacceptable. We would like to request the
Secretariat to provide us, in the near future, with more
detailed information about the national Action Plan on
Peace, Justice and Reconciliation adopted in
December. We hope that the search for reconciliation,
important though it is, will not be carried out at the
expense of justice, and that impunity will not
ultimately prevail.

The fourth issue is the fight against terrorism
linked to Al-Qaida and the Taliban. In my capacity as
the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), I should like to reaffirm our
readiness to assist the Government of Afghanistan in
all aspects of the implementation of the sanctions
regime established by the Security Council with a view
to being able to apply the Committee's established
procedures so as to resolve anomalous situations that,
in the view of the Government of Afghanistan, have
arisen with regard to people included on the
Committee's list.

Lastly, with regard to the future presence of the
United Nations in Afghanistan, generally speaking and
as I stated earlier, my delegation supports the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General. We agree that UNAMA's mandate
should be extended for 12 months, with some
adjustments, with the aim of assisting the Afghan
people and Government in the next phase of the
peacebuilding process. With that goal in mind, we shall
once again participate constructively in the
negotiations that will take place in the Security Council
in the coming days.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Before proceeding, I should like to say that, in an
effort to optimize the use of our time and allow as
many delegations as possible to take the floor, I shall
not individually invite speakers to take seats at the
table or to resume their seats at the side of the
Chamber. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
Conference Officer will escort the next speaker on the
list to the table. I thank participants for their
understanding and cooperation.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Afghanistan, on whom I now call.

