Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): First of all, I
should like to extend to you, Sir, my congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of this Council for
the month of December.

The task of protecting civilians from the physical
threat of and deprivation by armed conflict remains a
formidable challenge to the international community.
The Secretary-General's observations and
recommendations, contained in his third report, provide
us with a comprehensive and in-depth account of the
1ssue.

My delegation has been closely following the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
particularly since we first introduced the subject of
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations during the Republic of
Korea's presidency of the Security Council in May
1997.

It is noteworthy that we have witnessed a
growing tendency to include the civilian protection
element as a key guiding principle both in peace
agreements between warring parties and in the
mandates of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping
and peace-building missions. The cases of Angola,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo present relevant examples in one form or
another.

In addition, the strengthening of the international
legal regime for the protection of civilians offers
another source of optimism. The entry into force of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court last
July and the work of the Security Council regarding ad
hoc tribunals serve as a deterrent to potential
perpetrators of acts of inhumanity against civilians.
Thus, those legal tools explicitly counter the culture of
impunity.

We welcome positive developments on the
regional front in tackling this issue. The recent
initiative of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to hold a series of six regional
workshops on the protection of civilians is a case in
point. The Republic of Korea, along with other
regional countries and relevant governmental and non-
governmental organizations, participated in the East
Asian session of the workshop programme held in
Japan last month. Furthermore, the resolute
commitment of the international community to protect
civilians in armed conflict situations has been
demonstrated by frequent high-level gatherings, such
as special United Nations meetings on women, children
and small arms.

However, final success in this field will
invariably hinge on the willingness and ability of the
parties directly involved in a conflict to abide by
international humanitarian and human rights law and to
rebuild their nation, including its judicial institutions,
for the benefit of its civilians. The international
community, under the guidance of the Security
Council, should continue to meet its responsibilities by
exerting pressure, when required, and should assist in
nation-building to ensure a smooth transition process.

Let me now make a few comments on the new
challenges identified by the Secretary-General, namely,
gender-based violence, commercial exploitation of
conflict and the global threat of terrorism.

First, my delegation has been deeply concerned
about the cases of sexual abuse and exploitation
committed by personnel of the United Nations and
other international organizations. Such intolerable acts
undermine the basic tenets of morality and neutrality
that the personnel of the United Nations and other
relevant organizations are bound by. My delegation
believes that all preventive and disciplinary measures,
including advance and in-mission training and the
establishment of an adequate monitoring and reporting
system, should be implemented in a consistent and
effective manner.

Secondly, the Secretary-General's report sheds
fresh light on the commercial aspects of conflict in the
context of civilian protection. Rivalries over the
control of natural resources often fuel and prolong
armed conflicts, resulting mainly in the victimization
of civilians. In that regard, we acknowledge the
Security Council's efforts to use sanctions to counter
the commercial exploitation of conflicts, as in the cases
of Liberia and Sierra Leone. My delegation also
believes that the efforts of the United Nations in this
field would be further strengthened if combined and
well coordinated with existing mechanisms of a
voluntary nature such as the Kimberley Process on
conflict diamonds.

Finally, rising international terrorism poses one of
the gravest threats to the well-being of civilians. It
further carries the possibility of compounding the
intensity and intricacy of conflicts. In that regard, it is
essential that the international community make a
sustained effort to send a clear message against the
involvement of international terrorism. My delegation
is also of the view that all States Members of the
United Nations, as a part of our counter-terrorism
obligations under Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), should take concrete measures towards that
end.
