Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
I would like to thank you, Minister Kaag, for joining
us today and for convening this important meeting. I
also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Executive Director Beasley for their always cogent
and pointed presentations. We appreciate their ongoing
contributions to the work of the Security Council.

The connection between hunger and armed conflict
is undeniable. The majority of the world's hungry
people today live in conflict-affected States, and that
number is growing. That means people are starving
not because of a drought or a natural disaster, but
because conflicts are preventing food from getting to
those who desperately need it. This is a man-made food
security crisis.

Hunger and war zones quickly turns into a vicious
cycle. Relentless violence, which defines far too many
conflicts today, drives countless civilians from their
homes, fields and livelihoods. Fighters prevent food
from getting to those in need or destroy the markets and
the infrastructure needed to distribute food. This wave
of hunger forces more people to flee their homes, who
often cross borders in search ofways to feed their loved
ones. Or they take up arms to fight back against the
forces that are starving them. Fighting gets worse and
then still more people go hungry. Therefore, conflict
causes hunger and hunger leads to more conflict. This
cycle is devastating, but because hunger and conflict is
a man-made crisis, we have the power to solve it. We
on the Security Council, together with all responsible
Members of the United Nations, can act to keep
civilians from starving. At an absolute minimum, we
must demand an end to medieval and barbaric siege
tactics, arbitrary denials of humanitarian access and
attacks that violate international law, humanitarian
law and human rights law. The connection between
these violations and threats to international peace and
security is also undeniable, and an equally appropriate
topic for the Council.

In South Sudan, the situation became so extreme
last year that famine was declared in certain parts of
the country. The Government of South Sudan and other
armed groups blocked the World Food Programme and
other humanitarian agencies from reaching civilians
with life-saving aid. For years, fighters from all sides
slaughtered and plundered livestock, and they have
assaulted and murdered women and children who leave
internally displaced persons camps to search for food.
Civilians who fear for their lives have chosen to stay
hidden in marshes, eating nothing but plants in order
to avoid being killed by armed groups. Although we
narrowly managed to avert famine last year in South
Sudan, the forecast for the year ahead has only worsened.
The threat of famine will remain as long as the parties
continue paying no regard to the basic welfare or basic
human rights of the South Sudanese people.

In Syria, the Al-Assad regime and its backers have
relentlessly used sieges and starvation to pummel the
civilian population in opposition areas. For years,
the regime has denied even the most basic deliveries
of food aid to hundreds of thousands of civilians in
besieged areas, including right now, in blatant defiance
of conflict resolution 2401 (2018). The Council has
spoken at length about the Al-Assad regime's actions
in Syria, and we will not repeat all the details here.
But as we saw in eastern Ghouta, despite the Council's
demand for a ceasefire, the regime decided to cut off
deliveries of food and medicine and unleash an all-
out assault on the nearly 400,000 people living there.
Denying the people of eastern Ghouta food was a key
part of the Al-Assad regime strategy. This is a barbaric
tactic that any responsible member of the Council must
stand up and condemn. We will not stop working to
hold Al-Assad and his backers accountable for trying
to starve the Syrian people into submission.

Yemen has become the world's largest food security
emergency by number of people in need. Again, the
link between conflict and hunger is obvious. Fighting
has decimated Yemen's economy, which means Yemen
cannot import enough food for the country's people.
Yemen is 90 per cent dependent on imports for food,
so the disruption caused war, quickly leading to a
devastating hunger crisis.

There is no question that all parties must allow
unhindered humanitarian access to help alleviate those
needs. But for Yemen, humanitarian aid is not enough.
Agencies like the World Food Programme cannot
tackle hunger in Yemen on their own. We also need to
protect the support and flow of life-saving commercial
imports of food. If we improve humanitarian access
and facilitate imports, we can start to address Yemen's
dire needs. That is why the United States supported the
delivery of mobile cranes to Al-Hudaydah port, and why
we continue to promote the work of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen.
The United States welcomes Saudi Arabia's recent
commitments to expand the delivery of humanitarian
and commercial goods. We look forward to the plans
for their development with humanitarian partners and
encourage a rapid expansion of access.
Hunger and conflict are also linked in the Lake
Chad basin. The terror of Boko Haram and the West
African affiliate of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) has devastated communities throughout
the region. Their continued terror prolongs the
humanitarian crisis and displacement of millions
who face food insecurity and the very real threat of
famine. The United States continues to work closely
with Nigeria and its neighbours to defeat Boko Haram
and ISIS in West Africa once and for all. But we need
to make sure that the fight does not exacerbate food
insecurity for civilians. That is why we urge Nigeria
and the other Governments of the Lake Chad basin to
step up their cooperation with humanitarian agencies.

A successful response to the crisis depends on
access to the communities in need throughout the entire
region. We reiterate calls on Governments of the region
to do all they can to help secure and maintain that
access. They can also do more to bolster grass-roots
support for the international humanitarian response by
reinstating legitimate Governments across the region
and reassuring the region's people that they have a just
and secure future in their home communities. To echo
our Ethiopian friends, that means the Council needs to
take a more serious approach to conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy rather than waiting to act until a
situation reaches a full-blown emergency.

When conflict is the common denominator for so
many places that are food insecure, this issue must be
on the Council's agenda. The specifics of each conflict
may be different, but we must acknowledge how often
the denial or Violation of basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms are at the root of these conflicts.
If the Security Council is to live up to its mandate, we
must be consistent, principled and strong in demanding
that conflict should be no excuse for perpetuating
hunger, and the prevention of such conflicts should be
our highest goal.

