Ms. Lind (Estonia): I have the honour to address
the Security Council on behalf of Latvia, Lithuania
and my own country, Estonia. We would like to thank
Italy for convening this open debate and to commend
you, Sir, for your leadership on and commitment to this
important issue.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Today the world is facing persistent challenges in
the fight against human trafficking, in particular in
conflict situations. The international community should
confront this phenomenon in the most comprehensive
manner. We are gravely concerned about the alarming
increase of connections between armed groups,
including terrorist groups, and trafficking in persons.
Resolution 2388 (2017), which was adopted by the
Security Council today and which we co-sponsored,
is an important milestone in that regard. Building on
resolution 2331 (2016), it condemns all acts oftrafficking
in persons in areas affected by armed conflict, which
are used by terrorist groups both to terrorize and to
finance terrorism.

We also note with concern the criminal misuse
of information and communication technologies,
particularly the Internet, to facilitate trafficking in
persons. We emphasize the importance of countering
this phenomenon while fully respecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

Trafficking in persons is considered to be one of
the most difficult problems in the context of migration
as well. The fact that women and children are at greater
risk of being trafficked and subjected to forced labour
is recognized in the New York declaration for refugees
and migrants. We welcome the adoption by the General
Assembly, at the high-level meeting in September, of
the political declaration on the implementation of the
Global Plan ofAction to Combat Trafficking in Persons
(General Assembly resolution 72/1). The declarations
show the political will to end human trafficking, and
now we need to start their implementation.

The nexus between situations of conflict and human
trafficking, facilitated by the absence of the rule oflaw,
means that human trafficking can exacerbate conflict
and foster continuous insecurity. The exploitation of
vulnerable people, especially women and children who
find themselves in a situation of conflict, by traffickers
is appalling. It is imperative to investigate, prosecute
and convict the perpetrators of human trafficking
crimes and to put an end to impunity.

The focus on prevention is pivotal and is central
to the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. Together with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, it advances sustainable
and inclusive development in order to address the root
causes and vulnerabilities. We also need to find ways
to actively combat the demand for trafficked people for
exploitation in the destination and transit countries. As
long as there is a will to pay criminals and a demand
for such purposes as sexual exploitation, forced labour
and slavery, we cannot put an end to human trafficking.

Finally, we fully support the central role of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the
global fight against trafficking in persons, particularly
in providing technical assistance to Member States
to implement the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. In that context,
we reiterate the call of the European Union for more
cooperation at the United Nations level and emphasize
the role of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons in ensuring that efforts to fight
against human trafficking across the United Nations
system are coherent.

