I thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting and I also thank Special Representative Zerrougui and Ambassador Abarry for their valuable insights. I would like to begin by commending the actions of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) that have enabled the protection of civilians and the continuation of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, despite the coronavirus disease pandemic and the increased violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Many armed groups have not responded to the call for a global ceasefire and continue their attacks. This violence will continue to require a rapid, robust and effective response from MONUSCO, in particular from its rapid reaction force and force intervention brigades, together with the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. MONUSCO is reporting a significant increase in the number of human rights abuses and violations, which reached 2,140 last quarter. This highlights the challenges facing the Mission and possible plans towards its exit from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The gradual transfer of MONUSCO's responsibilities has to ensure that there are no setbacks in the progress made; it must not undermine the safety and security of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The development of the joint transition strategy and its benchmarks must be conducted together with the main humanitarian partners and other international and national civil society organizations. This would help ensure that the strategies and activities of various stakeholders are aligned, and that the activities supported by MONUSCO will not be disrupted. Strong cooperation with the Congolese authorities must tackle the large number of human rights violations, which remains a significant problem. Accountability for such violations must be established in order to avoid the prevalence of a culture of impunity and build trust in the country's security forces. Strengthening of rule-of-law and of justice institutions is a critical component of efforts addressing the root causes of conflict. The challenges facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain numerous and diverse: armed group violence and its links to the illicit trade of natural resources, floods and the Ebola virus disease, now in the west of the country, in addition to the pandemic. I would like to end my statement by commending MONUSCO, the Congolese authorities and all partners for their continued commitment to establishing peace in the country.
