Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank all the briefers 4 Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock,
UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore and
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014) - for their informative
interventions. I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths, Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and to express our
appreciation for the tireless work of all United Nations
personnel in Yemen.

I would first like to address the situation in
Al-Hudaydah. We welcome the initial redeployment
from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa,
which is the first step towards the implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We encourage the
parties to seize this opportunity to build trust and
ensure the swift implementation of all agreed phases
of the redeployment. The parties must deliver on their
obligations under the Stockholm Agreement without
further delay, in full cooperation with the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement.
We expect them to enable the Mission to perform its
tasks, as mandated by resolution 2452 (2019), without
impediments, and to guarantee its freedom of movement
in Al-Hudaydah. We also welcome the opening of the
road leading to the Red Sea Mills, which is critical for
humanitarian efforts.

We commend the fact that, since the signing of
the Stockholm Agreement, the levels of Violence in
Al-Hudaydah governorate have decreased. However, we
are greatly alarmed about the surge of violence across
other Yemeni governorates, causing mass displacement,
a high number of casualties among civilians and severe
impediments to humanitarian access. All parties must
first and foremost ensure the protection of civilians,
including the most vulnerable groups, such as children
and persons with disabilities, and must fully comply
with international humanitarian and human rights
law. All violations should be investigated and those
responsible must be held accountable. We also strongly
condemn the attacks carried out by the Houthis against
Saudi Arabia.

Poland is also greatly concerned about the deepening
humanitarian crisis that has just been described to us,
which recently has been exacerbated by the resurgence
of the cholera epidemic and the outbreak of diphtheria.
We are particularly disturbed that children under the
age of 15 account for nearly half of all the new cases of
cholera and that about a quarter of the reported cases
involve children under the age of five.

That is why the humanitarian response in Yemen is
so vital to the survival of millions of Yemeni citizens.
The parties must immediately allow and facilitate the
flow of humanitarian and commercial imports, including
in-country shipments of fuel. We urge them to lift all
bureaucratic restrictions, ensure the timely issuance of
visas, speed up customs clearances and enable the swift
and unhindered movement of humanitarian convoys.
Any form of denial of humanitarian access, diversion
of resources or interference in humanitarian operations
is unacceptable. We would also like to emphasize the
need for humanitarian assistance to be gender- and
age-sensitive and to ensure that the particular needs
of persons with disabilities are addressed in the
humanitarian response.

The developments on the ground show how pressing
it is to find a comprehensive political solution to the
conflict in Yemen and to restore stability throughout all
its governorates. The resumption of consultations with
the participation of all segments of Yemeni society,
including women and youth, is the only way to bring
about an end to the crisis and alleviate the suffering of
the Yemeni people.

We reiterate the importance of the swift and full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, which
was designed to build confidence and to prepare the
road for a comprehensive political process. The progress
of the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement
must now be followed by the parties' engagement in
political dialogue. We strongly support the Special
Envoy's tireless efforts to find an inclusive political
solution, and we call on the parties to participate in
future talks in good faith and without preconditions.

