Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to join my colleagues, Mr. President, in

expressing appreciation for your presence here to
preside over the Security Council and lead this debate
on the most tragic pandemic that humankind has
experienced. I would also like to convey my respectful
greetings to the President of Nigeria, the Deputy
President of South Africa and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France, who are here with us today. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and extensive report (A/65/797) and
Mr. Michel Sidibe, as well as his team, for his
commitment and dedication at the head of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

The figures on the devastating consequences of
AIDS are alarming: 30 million dead and 34 million
living with HIV worldwide is a frightening thing.
Today, however, it is encouraging to hear that
prevention strategies are paying off and that, between
2001 and 2009, the global rate of new HIV infections
fell by almost 25 per cent.

However, the reduction in international
investments at a time when the AIDS response is
having results is of concern. The shortfall in resources
foreseen by UNAIDS for 2015 jeopardizes the
achievement of Millennium Development Goal 6, in
particular the target on reducing new infections.

We hope that the agreement to be reached in the
framework of the high-level meeting that the General
Assembly will begin tomorrow will reflect the urgency
of securing the necessary resources to maintain that
positive trend and to make the goal of achieving
universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and
support by 2015 a reality.

The opposite would be a setback to the
commitments of the heads of State and Government
reflected in the 2006 Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS to ensure the availability of additional
funds for countries to have access to predictable and
sustainable financial resources; to ensure that
international funding is consistent with national plans
and strategies on HIV and AIDS; and to increase
investment in research and the development of safe and
affordable drugs, products and new technologies.

My country is convinced that the fight against
HIV and AIDS benefits from an approach based on
respect for human rights and the safeguarding of
human dignity. It is necessary to redouble efforts to
eradicate the stigma and discrimination that affected
populations still suffer, and that are an obstacle to

11-3654]
controlling the epidemic. It is also necessary to
strengthen sexual education programmes that are based
on respect for human rights and to encourage the
exercise of sexual and reproductive rights with a clear
gender perspective and respect for differences.

That approach should be accompanied by the
adequate provision of quality and timely social
services. Given that the poorest communities are more
vulnerable, preventive strategies should be considered
not only as HIV and AIDS projects, but primarily as
development projects that have a lasting impact on the
epidemic. However, national efforts are not enough
without the technical and financial cooperation of the
international community. The joint work of States and
international cooperation agencies is essential to
overcome the gaps in access that still exist, to address
the most vulnerable populations, to implement
comprehensive preventive strategies, to ensure
adequate supplies for diagnosis and treatment and to
strengthen epidemiological studies.

The Secretary-General notes a reduction in the
number of countries that allow flexible rules in
intellectual property rights standards and an increase in
bilateral and regional agreements that can undermine
the capacities of countries to develop access to
essential medicines. In that regard, bearing in mind that
the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights does not prevent Member States from
taking measures to protect public health, the
international community should reaffirm its
commitment to interpreting and implementing the
Agreement in such a way as to support the right to
protect public health and, in particular, to promote
access to medicines, including the production of
generic anti-retrovirals and other essential drugs to
combat AIDS-related infections.

Colombia recognizes that the magnitude of the
HIV epidemic requires comprehensive and coordinated
action by the international community and that the
actions of the United Nations system to provide a
comprehensive response to the epidemic should
continue to be discussed and agreed within the General
Assembly as the Organization's universal body.
However, in the context of the responsibilities under
the Charter, the Security Council can play an important
role in the promotion and integration of prevention
programmes, treatment, care and support during the
implementation of the tasks assigned to peacekeeping
operations and in ensuring the continuity of such
strategies during post-conflict transition and
peacebuilding processes.

We appreciate the holding of this important
debate as an opportunity to review the progress made
on implementing previous mandates. We also endorse
resolution 1983 (2011) as a strong sign of renewed
political will to improve the global response to the HIV
epidemic, to reduce vulnerability and to strengthen
cooperation to achieve the goal of zero new infections,
zero discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths.

