Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's resolution 2231 (2015), adopted
unanimously in support of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, marks a fundamental shift in the Security
Council's consideration of the situation regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme, with a view towards
resolving the matter once and for all. By creating a new
reality, we are not just turning a page but beginning a
new chapter in the work of the Council. We expect that
all countries will quickly adapt to the new conditions
and contribute to the successful implementation of the
agreement.

The Security Council, and the international
community it represents, has supported a clear choice
to resolve the situation regarding the Iranian nuclear
programme through political and diplomatic means
based on international law - first and foremost the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
A choice has been made in favour of mutual respect,
stability and cooperation. We are pleased that that
decision has been based on a gradual and reciprocal
approach, which our country consistently supported
throughout all stages of the negotiations.

The Council has today confirmed the inalienable
right of Iran to develop a peaceful nuclear programme,
including to enrich uranium, while also ensuring
comprehensive oversight by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). This resolution also guarantees
lifting the burden of sanctions on Iran in the framework
of the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action though a clear and transparent mechanism
that will be made operational through concrete steps
based on confidence in Iran's nuclear programme,
including IAEA verification.

A reliable filter has been created in the framework
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and resolution
2231 (2015) that will guarantee that all disputes and
disagreements that could arise in the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will be subject
to collective consideration in the framework of the
joint commission, with the participation of the P-5+l,
Iran and the European Union. Moreover, the Security
Council maintains a leading role on issues regarding
the implementation of the Plan of Action. During
negotiations we knew that the Plan of Action would be
subject to Security Council approval, and we therefore
gave special attention to ensuring the prerogatives of
this organ and respect for the role of all its members,
including non-permanent members, in taking decisions
that are essential to implementing the agreement. We
are grateful to the IAEA for its readiness to assume
responsibility for monitoring and verification of Iran's
obligations.
We hope that the agreement with Iran will help
other countries of the Middle East and the Persian
Gulf to refrain from destabilizing moves, including in
the nuclear sphere, and to ensure that the region does
not enter a new arms race. We are creating conditions
conducive to the establishment in the Middle East of
a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and to the
search for common approaches among countries of the
Middle East to addressing regional security issues and
uniting their collective efforts in the fight against the
terrorist threat. In a statement following the conclusion
of the negotiations, the President of the Russian
Federation, Vladimir Putin, underscored that Russia
will do all it can to ensure that the Vienna agreements
become fully operational in order to promote the
strengthening of international and regional security,
the global regime of nuclear non-proliferation, and the
mobilization of a broad regional coalition to counteract
the terrorist threat.

We underscore that the work of all the negotiating
teams deserve the highest praise. We commend in
particular the Governments of Austria and Switzerland,
which ensured optimal conditions for guaranteeing the
success ofthe negotiations. We would also like to praise
the consideration of our friends from Kazakhstan, who
organized several rounds of negotiations.

Reaching an agreement to resolve the issues
surrounding the Iranian nuclear programme
demonstrates that where there exists a political will
based on realism and respect for legitimate mutual
interests, the international community can resolve the
most complex tasks. All participants in the negotiations
demonstrated their readiness to engage in collective
efforts. A reserve of trust has been built up that will
be very useful in the course of implementing the
agreement. We hope that this invaluable experience
of collective efforts, unburdened by ideological
geopolitical calculations, will also be used to resolve
other crisis situations where, perhaps, success will be
secured exclusively through joint work. Russia is ready
for this.

