Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The mere fact that the Security Council is meeting twice in
one day to consider Israeli measures against two Arab
peoples is a source of grave concern. That concern is all the
greater when we recall that there is an ongoing peace
process to settle the Arab-Israeli conflict. This began in
Madrid and has thus far resulted in an agreement on the
principles of a historic reconciliation between Israel and the
Palestinians as well as a peace treaty with Jordan. Any
observer of the situation in the Middle East must realize the
gravity of the dangers facing the region as a result of
continuing Israeli attacks to the north, the east and the
south.

Israel is waging aggression by air, sea and land against
Lebanon. This is aggression against Lebanon's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, aggression that extends from Tyre
in the south, to Beirut, the capital, to Tripoli in the north.
Dozens have died, and many more innocent unarmed
civilians have been hurt.

The Israeli Government claims that this aggression is
self-defence and that it is merely a limited measure - or
a "surgical operation" - to eliminate Hezbollah
combatants. Israel has constantly justified its repeated
aggression against Lebanon's sovereignty by invoking the
right of self defence in the face of individual attacks from
southern Lebanon.

It has resorted to that rationale to invade Lebanon,
to attack its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to
continue occupying part of southern Lebanese territory on
the pretext of ensuring northern Israel's security. We must
take a stand against such claims. The facts show that for
the past two decades the Israeli occupation has not
guaranteed security for Israel's citizens. On the contrary,
it has led to further movement towards violent opposition
by those who grew up under the heel of the occupation.
All the evidence points to the fact that individuals have
taken up opposition, extremism and violence as a means
to end Israeli occupation. This is a direct, inevitable result
of their oppression and suffering. Moreover, we can find
no appropriate justification for these intense Israeli raids:
the five-day bombardment of Lebanese population
centres, towns and villages, leading to the death of
dozens, the wounding of approximately 100 and the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Lebanese. Any
fair-minded observer will conclude that these raids have
become an all-out war against an entire people, not
simply against those few who have directed bombs
against northern Israel.

Any armed aggression against a neighbouring State,
whatever the motive, constitutes prohibited aggression.
Yet self-defence too has rules prescribed by the United
Nations and contemporary international law. First and
foremost, under Article 51 of the Charter, there must have
been an actual armed attack. Firing Katyusha rockets
across borders is indeed a proscribed act which must
cease forthwith. This is clear. However, the armistice
agreement between Lebanon and Israel continues
officially to stand; the mechanisms provided for in the
armistice should have been invoked to deal with these
events.

Secondly, the situation should have been put to the
Security Council. Israel and Lebanon are parties to the
peace process, and are negotiating directly on a peaceful
settlement to their dispute on the basis of land for peace.
During these negotiations Israel can raise such issues.
Agreement may be reached between both parties on
security guarantees based not on military hegemony, but
on mutual confidence.

Thirdly, self-defence by States is not a blank cheque
to be used to wage aggression on others. An element of
proportionality is involved. The scale, duration and
objective of military activity must be proportionate to the
reason for such activity.

 

Nor can we consider that Israel was unable to invoke
other means, such as the Security Council or other
channels, to find the means to obtain security. This is
contemporary international law. But, even if we were to
take a step back to the nineteenth century we would find
that the international community had agreed more than 150
years ago to specific terms for the use of self-defence.
Daniel Webster, then Secretary of State of the United States
of America, declared that the right of self-defence implied
the instant and overwhelming necessity for self-defence,
leaving no choice of means and no time for deliberation.
Lacking these conditions, the use of military force is
considered an act of reprisal prohibited by international law.
The Security Council has had occasion to condemn such
acts many times in the past.

Egypt has repeatedly asserted the need to put an end
to Israeli attacks against Lebanese territory and sovereignty.
Today Egypt calls on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility to put an end to those attacks through specific
measures leading to an immediate cease-fire, an immediate
end to military activities and a full Israeli withdrawal to the
internationally recognized borders.

The time has come for Israel to act in a civilized
manner in its relations with Lebanon, recognizing
Lebanon's sovereignty and satisfying the requirements of
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 425
(1978), which calls on Israel to cease its military action
against Lebanese territorial integrity and to withdraw its
forces from all Lebanese territory. In this appeal, we do not
set aside Israel's right - indeed, every State's right - to
demand an end to attacks against its citizens.

The United Nations can play a pivotal role in
implementing security guarantees in southern Lebanon,
either through the Armistice Commission or through the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which
was created by the Security Council under resolution 425
(1978) to ensure complete Israeli withdrawal, to regain
peace and security and to help the Lebanese Government to
regain effective control over the south of the country. We
hope that the United Nations will provide assistance to the
Lebanese Government to deal with the humanitarian needs
arising from the displacement of so many Lebanese from
their homes, towns and villages.

We hope that the Israeli Government will heed the
will of the international community, as represented by the
Security Council, and that it will put an end to its attacks
against Lebanon, so that security and stability, for which
the Lebanese people so bravely continue to strive, will
return despite the difficulties the country now faces.

