Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting on this
very important subject. I would like to start by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Abou
Moussa for the very comprehensive briefings on the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and on United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). I also
want to thank the Special Envoy of the African Union
for the LRA issue, Ambassador Francisco Madeira, for
his very important statement to the Council.

The LRA continues to pose a serious threat
to civilians in four affected countries. We remain
concerned by the fact that attacks against civilians in
LRA-affected areas were again on the rise in early
2012 and that more than 445,000 people are internally
displaced or living as refugees as a result of LRA
activities.

Portugal strongly condemns the continued
violations by the LRA of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including the recruitment
and use of children, killing and maiming, rape, sexual
violence and abductions. We strongly urge the LRA to
put an end to those practices, to release all abducted
persons and to disarm, demobilize and surrender.
We also encourage all States to cooperate in order to
implement the International Criminal Court arrest
warrants for the three remaining LRA leaders in order
to bring them to justice.

The present situation clearly shows that the LRA
remains capable of having a terrible impact on civilian
populations and thus poses a continuing threat to regional
security, notwithstanding the fact that over the years the
group has seen its numbers reduced significantly as a
result of the steps taken by Governments in the region,
with the assistance of the international community.

It is crucial that all actors continue to be engaged
until the LRA threat is removed. In that regard, Portugal
welcomes the regional strategy developed by UNOCA,
in coordination with the relevant United Nations actors
and the African Union, to guide the efforts of the United
Nations, including the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the region, and other stakeholders in support
of international efforts, led by the African Union, to
neutralize the threat posed by the LRA and to address
the impact of its activities in the four affected countries.

The implementation of that strategy is a crucial step
in order to translate the renewed attention given by the
international community to the LRA issue in the past
year into concrete results by attaining the five goals set
in the strategy, including the full implementation of the
African Union-led regional cooperation initiative.

We remain encouraged by the fact that the
four LRA-affected countries have confirmed their
willingness to contribute to the Regional Task Force
and to provide premises for the various components of
the regional initiative. We encourage them to further
strengthen regional cooperation in order to overcome,
with increased support from the international
community, the important challenges that lie ahead
regarding the implementation of the initiative, and
thus succeed in apprehending the top commanders
of the LRA and enhancing tactical coordination,
information-sharing and joint planning.

At the same time, it is fundamental that committed
efforts be deployed by all relevant actors in order
to fulfil the other strategic objectives set in the
regional strategy. These objectives are aimed at,
first, enhancing the protection of civilians; secondly,
expanding disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement activities to cover
LRA-affected areas; thirdly, promoting a coordinated
humanitarian and child-protection response in
those areas; and fourthly, providing support to the
Governments of LRA-affected countries in the domains
of peacebuilding, human rights, the rule of law and
long-term development, thus enabling them to extend
State authority throughout their territories.

Let me conclude with respect to the LRA by
underlining once again the importance of sustaining
the engagement of the Security Council on this issue.
Thus, we firmly support the adoption today of a
Security Council presidential statement, ensuring that
the Council will continue to closely follow this issue.
Portugal will spare no effort to continue to mobilize
the international community and to improve the United
Nations response to this scourge.

Let me now turn to UNOCA, whose work we
believe will contribute significantly to enhancing the
United Nations engagement towards the achievement
of peace and security in Central Africa. We highlight
the importance of UNOCA's continuing its close
coordination with the Economic Community of
Central African States and the United Nations Office
for West Africa on relevant security challenges with a
great impact not only on the West and Central Africa
subregions, but to the entire international community,
including security and terrorism, the fight against drug
trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, and illicit
flows of arms and fighters.

As far as the LRA is concerned, the main issue
linking the two comprehensive briefings we have had
the opportunity to hear today, we welcome the fact that
UNOCA will be responsible for overall monitoring and
reporting on the regional strategy on the LRA. Let me
conclude by reiterating strong support for UNOCA's
innovative efforts addressed at helping to prevent the
emergence of new conflicts, resolving existing ones
by peaceful means, and promoting democratic and
accountable governance in the subregion of Central
Africa.

