The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took at seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
31 May 2010 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which reads as
follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the emergency meeting of the Security Council
which will be held on Monday, 31 May 2010,
regarding the Israeli aggression against the Gaza
aid flotilla on 31 May 2010."

This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2010/268.

With the consent of the Council, I propose to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with rule 2 of its provisional
rules of procedure in response to a letter dated 31 May
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to
the United Nations, and to a letter also dated 31 May
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council, to
be issued respectively as documents S/2010/266 and
S/2010/267.

I wish to recognize the presence at this meeting
of the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha-Rose
Migiro.

At this meeting the Security Council, will hear a
briefing by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I
now give the floor.


