Mr. Cunningham (United States): Just a little
more than two weeks ago, the Council took a very
important step when it adopted resolution 1397 (2002).
Others have referred to its importance. That resolution
contains a number of valuable elements. Among other
things, it calls for an immediate halt to terror and
violence. That call has been ignored by those who
would obstruct efforts to achieve a ceasefire and work
toward peace. The few optimistic signs that developed
in the last two weeks have been endangered once again
by terror.

We should be perfectly clear in our discussion
tonight: it is terrorism - repeated brutal acts of
terrorism - perpetrated against innocent civilians by
those who oppose peace that has brought the situation
to the current extremely grave and dangerous state.
Both Israeli and Palestinian hopes for a peaceful future
are under attack by this terror. As Secretary Powell said
earlier today, once again, terrorism that targets
innocent civilians has dealt a serious blow to the effort
to achieve a ceasefire and to find a political solution to
the crisis in the Middle East. Terrorists have set back
the vision of the Palestinian people for a State that
would live in peace side by side with Israel.

We condemn the acts of terrorism perpetrated by
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs'
Brigades. We reiterate our calls on Chairman Arafat to
bring the perpetrators and their supporters to justice.
All those who support peace must reinforce this
message, from whatever region. There is no other way
forward.

In recent weeks there was cause for some guarded
optimism. Last fall, President Bush set out his vision at
the United Nations for a Palestinian State living side by
side in peace with a Jewish State. We saw positive
reaction to the speech that Secretary Powell gave in
Louisville. The United Nations passed an important
Security Council resolution, resolution 1397 (2002),
which was introduced by the United States. The
resolution went through the Security Council with a
vote of 14 to 0, and only one abstention. This
resolution, importantly, set out a vision for the future
and established an outline for progress. The Arab
Summit in Beirut earlier this week, while it did not
provide a complete solution, laid out a vision that was
put forward by Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia
and was embraced by all Arab nations. We strongly
welcomed that. Prime Minister Sharon in recent weeks
showed flexibility with respect to conditions he had
previously held to with respect to what it would take to
get started on the Tenet work plan. Both sides
welcomed General Zinni's return to get the work plan
started, which would then lead to the Mitchell process
and the political solution and political discussion and
negotiation that all of us are hoping for. Vice-President
Cheney travelled in the region and was prepared to see
Chairman Arafat if circumstances had permitted.
So there was some reason for guarded optimism.
Let us be clear about what has brought it all to a halt:
terrorism on the part of those who target innocent
civilians with the explicit purpose of destroying hopes
for peace.

The United States is gravely concerned at the
very dangerous situation in Ramallah. We deplore the
killing and wounding of innocent Palestinian civilians,
just as we condemn the killing of innocent Israeli
civilians as a result of terrorist attacks. We understand
that Israel has a right to self-defence, but we call on
Prime Minister Sharon and his Government to carefully
consider the consequences of their actions. Chairman
Arafat is the leader of the Palestinian people and his
leadership is now, and will be, central to any
meaningful effort to restore calm. We have made clear
to the Israeli Government that he should not be
harmed.

The Security Council, my Government and the
international community have endorsed a vision of two
States - Israel and Palestine - living side by side in
peace. That vision must not be defeated by a small
minority dedicated solely to death and destruction.
There is a positive way forward, as the Secretary-
General has explained. We must move forward, but the
cycle of violent action and reaction in the Middle East
must stop.

The United States is pressing to bring about a
ceasefire, and General Zinni remains in the region
engaged in that very effort. Despite the events of these
past few days, he will work hard to get the parties to
implement the Tenet security work plan and to move
further toward the resumption of a political process.
We urge both parties to cooperate fully with General
Zinni to put in place immediately a lasting ceasefire
and to take the steps that will bring tangible benefits to
both peoples. That is the only solution to the crisis
before us.

