Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the outcome of the Security
Council mission to West Africa, which we view as an
important signal to parties to conflict that they must
abide by the commitments they have undertaken. We
stress that, in the light of the cross-border nature of
many problems in West Africa, the consideration and
resolution of such problems must be comprehensive
and far-reaching. I turn now to the situations in specific
countries.

To make further progress in the peace process in
C6te d'Ivoire, approaches must be harmoniously
combined on the basis of the provisions of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and the C6te d'Ivoire
Constitution. We welcome the regional summit held in
Addis Ababa on 6 July, and we have hopes for the
results of the contacts among the Cote d'Ivoire parties
to take place at Accra on 29 July. It is important to do
everything possible to end the increased centrifugal
forces operating in the country, particularly during the
preparations for elections. It is also crucial to overcome
ongoing uncertainty with respect to programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
take note of the Government's adoption of specific
measures to put an end to impunity. All those guilty of
human rights violations must receive the punishment
they deserve. Here, we shall attach particular
importance to the final report of the International
Commission of Inquiry to investigate all reports of
human rights violations since the events of September
2002.
With regard to Liberia, we must always bear in
mind that, for practical purposes, Government
authority is limited to Monrovia, and that armed
factions continue to hold sway in other parts of the
country. The international community must step up its
efforts to assist the Government in strengthening State
authority throughout the territory of Liberia. The
elections planned for October 2005 have an important
role to play in stabilizing the country. A timetable for
the political process is needed to ensure that the
elections take place as scheduled, and it must be
unswervingly followed. As to the lifting of sanctions,
this must be closely linked to guarantees of the
irreversibility of a political settlement in Liberia.

In Sierra Leone, the authorities have a great deal
to do as the peacekeeping operation there comes to an
end. The final drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone directly depends on how
effectively the Government can control the situation.

In Guinea-Bissau, constitutional order must be
restored as quickly as possible, through the holding of
elections that adhere to democratic standards. It is
important to make every effort to support positive
trends and not to allow the peace process to be
undermined. Here, it is even more critical that the
international community provide the country with the
assistance it needs.

The current transparency of borders in the region
gives rise to numerous, extremely serious problems and
threats that demand comprehensive study and
resolution taking account of recommendations and
proposals formulated on the basis of joint efforts by
United Nations missions in the region, the Security
Council mission to West Africa and regional and
subregional organizations. In our view, this matter
merits special, in-depth consideration.

