Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan
for convening this open debate.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made this
morning by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group. As a member ofthat group, I would like to
raise a few specific points on working methods related
to peacekeeping, which are shared by ACT members.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
essential for the maintenance of international peace and
security and for helping countries make the transition
from conflict to sustainable peace. Those operations
rely on a particular association among the Council, the
Secretariat and the broader United Nations membership,
in particular the troop- and police-contributing
countries. In order to be effective, the relationship needs
to be very well maintained. Triangular cooperation

between the Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries is crucial in that respect,
even as enhancing the quality of that interaction and
making it consistently dynamic and substantial remains
a challenge. The current context of increasingly
complex and robust mandates, risky situations, limited
resources and high expectations raise the stakes of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and make
the Council's working methods, including meaningful
engagement with the troop- and police-contributing
countries, even more important.

One of the first conclusions reached by ACT
members following a preliminary analysis of this issue
is that the problem is not a lack of tools or agreed
arrangements, but rather that these may not be deployed
regularly or consistently. The Charter of the United
Nations, Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 1353 (2001), and various presidential
statements establish or refer to many of those
mechanisms, including provisions on early consultation
with troop-contributing countries, to be held before
mandate creation and renewal; ad hoc meetings at any
stage, at the request of troop-contributing countries;
information sharing and thematic discussions.

However, there is plenty of room for improvement
in their utilization. Certainly, the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations is one of the key tools
available to improve the interaction between those who
establish mandates and those who implement them, and
to strengthen triangular cooperation. In that regard,
ACT members congratulate the Permanent Mission of
Pakistan, the Chair of the Working Group, on having
convened over the past few months three thematic
discussions, open to troop- and police-contributing
countries, related to very sensitive and critical
topics, such as safety and security, the use of modern
technology, and the transition and drawdown of
peacekeeping operations. The ACT group encourages
the continued development and use of that important
tool, the consideration of relevant thematic issues and
the convening ofmeetings on specific missions open to
troop- and police-contributing countries.

The timeliness and format of consultations with
troop-contributing countries are other important aspects
to which ACT members believe that improvements
have been made but on which further gains can be
achieved, for instance by increasing the regularity and
predictability of convening timely consultations with
troop-contributing countries before the creation or

renewal of mandates. Further, it should be possible to
convene ad hoc meetings at any stage, at the request
of a troop- or police-contributing country, to address
topical concerns, especially in cases where the security
and protection of peacekeepers are at stake.

In addition, all actors involved should work towards
a more interactive and substantive consultation process.
Working methods play an important role in that regard.
The timing of and openness to information exchange,
including timely access to the Secretary-General's
reports, are key ingredients of adequate preparation
for such consultations. More informal settings in
which relevant stakeholders can exchange their views
on a particular mission can also contribute greatly to a
better understanding of the main concerns at stake and
to finding solutions. Opportunities to listen directly
to views from the ground remain a very helpful and
valuable tool that should be used as often as possible.

Those are a few examples of how working methods
can continue to improve the quality of the discussions
and, ultimately, their outcomes as they relate to
peacekeeping and in the framework of the Security
Council. In that regard, ACT members welcome the
latest presidential note S/2013/630 on the enhancement
of consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries, which is aligned with the ideas and objectives
that ACT promotes. ACT members will continue to
remain available and willing to engage in a constructive
dialogue on the matter.

