Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption this afternoon of
resolution 2396 (2017), on foreign terrorist fighters. We
thank the United States for its leadership as penholder
on this important subject.

Foreign terrorist fighters are an international
problem that require an international solution.
These fighters do not consider national borders. The
international community can effectively address
that threat by acting in a coherent manner, including
through the Security Council. That becomes ever more
important as the terrorist threat adapts to become more
dispersed and well networked. The resolution reiterates
our resolve to unite, share solutions and adapt to
changing threats. It is ajoint solution to ajoint problem.

The measures we have adopted today address three
crucial areas.
First, these measures address foreign terrorist
fighters who travel to, from and between areas of
conflict. That allows us to detect and apprehend them,
including through Advanced Passenger Information
and Passenger Name Records (PNR). Today, we have
called for the International Civil Aviation Organization
to work with its member States to establish a standard
for collecting, processing and protecting PNR data to
ensure that this capability is used with respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Member States are
further required to develop biometric data collection to
support our ability to pursue foreign terrorist fighters.
Collectively, the United Nations, Member States and
relevant organizations have a responsibility to support
each other in doing this.

Secondly, these measures address the threat we
face from would-be extremists who are no longer
encouraged to travel to Iraq and Syria, but whose
focus is on conducting inspired attacks in their home
countries. Many of those individuals have used the
Internet for terrorist purposes. That is why we welcome
the focus of the resolution on whole-of-Government
counter-terrorism strategies and on the importance of
working with civil society organizations and industry
to help prevent radicalization. Industry-led approaches,
such as the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism,
are a good example of how industry can play a positive
role in preventing terrorist use of the Internet.

Finally, we would like to highlight the step we have
taken today in pushing forward action on rehabilitation
and reintegration. Those measures address the need to
collaborate with all parts of civil society to ensure that
reintegration is successful.

This is a shared endeavour. We are united in
ensuring implementation, and we remain committed to
working with other Member States to strengthen and
adapt our response.

