Mr. Motoc (Romania): I too wish to thank the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom for the very substantial briefings we heard
this morning.

On security, we know that recent attacks against
Iraqi police and security forces, as well as against
political constituencies, show that destructive elements
are at work against the efforts to rebuild a stable,
democratic and peaceful Iraq. These actions should not
discourage the dynamics of the internal political
dialogue towards the establishment of Iraqi interim
institutions of governance. The security situation
should be addressed as a priority issue to prevent
further terrorist attacks and to avoid any form of
internal friction or tension.

On the political transition, the 15 November
Agreement sets out sequences for the evolution of the
political transition in Iraq, including a clear date for the
restoration of Iraq's sovereignty. The United Nations
fact-finding mission presented in detailed manner the
challenges and ways ahead for a successful political
transition that is owned by the Iraqis. Beyond some
unresolved questions about the structure of a sovereign
Iraqi transitional administration, the mission indicated
unanimity among all Iraqi political constituencies to keep
the 30 June deadline for handover, in their determination
to continue dialogue and consensus-building.

We believe the current situation can be effectively
addressed through a genuine partnership of the United
Nations with the Iraqis, the Coalition Provisional
Authority (CPA) and Iraq's neighbours. The unity and
solidarity of the international community - indeed, of
the Security Council - are of the utmost importance in
helping Iraqis to reach consensus soon on the
mechanisms for establishing an interim Government.
International support is also very important for
improving the internal security environment which is,
in turn, a prerequisite for the conduct of free and fair
elections in Iraq and for ensuring the legitimacy of the
process.

The United Nations should resume its presence in
Iraq as soon as possible in order to also facilitate the
current dialogue and forge political consensus. The
United Nations has the expertise and capacity to assist
Iraq in developing the legal and institutional
framework for holding elections at an early stage.

As for basic services and economic
reconstruction, we are pleased to hear that progress
continues to be made in many areas throughout Iraq, in
particular with regard to infrastructure, rehabilitation
and the restoration of essential services. We especially
welcome the overall efforts to establish a sound
economic framework and the process of reintegrating
the Iraqi banking and financial institutions into the
international circuit. The granting of World Trade
Organization observer status to Iraq on 11 February
2004 was a positive step in that regard. Establishment
of sound Iraqi institutions is of urgent and utmost
importance and will foster new job opportunities, thus
reducing the current level of unemployment.

Focusing on the restoration of law and order is of
utmost importance in creating a fully functioning
judicial system. Equally important is the development
of a strong civil society as the foundation for setting up
representative and democratic institutions in Iraq. We
commend the CPA efforts in that regard.

Romania remains committed to contributing
towards upholding stability and security in Iraq and
continues to be part of the efforts aimed at making the
day-to-day life of the Iraqi people more secure. The
Romanian Prime Minister, Adrian Nastase is currently
visiting Iraq. Romania has offered to share the lessons
it has learned during its own often challenging
transition with the evolving institutions of Iraq in such
areas as the building of democratic institutions and a
market-based economy, the establishment of the rule of
law, and the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Romania pledges the same
commitment to efforts towards rebuilding the Iraqi
economy and looks forward to joining collective efforts
through this vital transitional period and beyond.

