Mr. Koblentz: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to provide a briefing on how advances
in science, technology and international commerce
are increasing the risk posed by the proliferation of
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN)
weapons to non-State actors.

Since resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted, in
2004, it has emerged as one of the most important
tools the international community has to prevent the
proliferation of CBRN weapons to non-State actors.
Since 2004, however, there have been amazing advances
in science and technology, including technological
breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, robotics, 3D
printing, autonomous vehicles, nanotechnology, gene
editing and synthetic biology. Those advances have
created unparalleled opportunities and capabilities
to manipulate objects in the physical world and in
cyberspace, and even our DNA.

The combination ofthese emerging technologies led
the World Economic Forum in 2015 to declare that we
were at the beginning of a fourth industrial revolution.
This new industrial revolution is characterized by its
global scope, an exponential rate of innovation and the
convergence of the chemical, biological, physical and
digital worlds. This new industrial revolution has the
potential to create huge benefits for productivity and for
prosperity and to transform our systems of economics
and governance.

But the fourth industrial revolution has a dark
side. The same scientific discoveries and technologies
fuelling this new industrial revolution have the potential
to be misused by non-State actors to cause harm. Klaus
Schwab, Executive Chair of the World Economic
Forum, warned:

"As this process takes place and new technologies

such as autonomous or biological weapons become

easier to use, individuals and small groups will
increasinglyjoin States in being capable of causing
mass harm. This new vulnerability will lead to new
fears." (The Fourth Industrial Revolution, " Foreign Afiairs, December 2015)

It would be far more preferable to predict how these
emerging technologies could be misused and take steps
ahead of time to mitigate these risks than to wait to
respond after these new technologies are used to cause
harm on a large scale.

I submitted a paper that describes five advances in
science and technology that increase the risk of CBRN-
material weapons proliferating to non-State actors. I
have time to discuss these developments only briefly
this morning, so I will refer the Council to the full
paper for more details.

The first area of concern is unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). UAVs are no longer so expensive or
sophisticated that they are restricted to a handful of
States. Indeed, several terrorist groups, such as Hamas,
Hizbullah and the Islamic State, already fly their own
UAVs. The ability of UAVs to collect intelligence over
highly secure facilities has proliferation risks. For
example, in 2014, unidentified UAVs flew over reactors
in France and Belgium for unknown purposes. Earlier
this year, an unidentified UAV was seen flying over a
United States Navy base that hosts several strategic-
missile submarines. Future versions of UAVs could be
turned into flying improvised explosive devices. These
drone bombs could fly over ground-based defences
and precisely target critical areas of nuclear facilities
or sites that store toxic industrial chemicals. Finally,
UAVs could one day be used to deliver weapons of
mass destruction directly. While these commercially
available UAVs are unlikely to be capable of carrying
nuclear weapons, the low-speed, low-altitude, low-
payload capacity of UAVs is well suited for delivering
chemical and biological agents against civilian targets.

Another emerging technology of concern is 3D
printing, because 3D printers are machines that print
physical objects layer by layer, using special inks made
out of plastic or metal. Because 3D printing is highly
automated, it takes much of the skill out of fabrication.
The versatility of 3D printing has led to predictions that
the market for this technology will reach $30 billion
by 2022. As technology advances, more-capable
machines are becoming more widely available to more
people. Already, amateurs have used 3D printers to
create plastic handguns that can be smuggled through
X-ray detectors and into buildings and secure facilities.
Scientists have used 3D printers to print micro-reactors
that can synthesize chemicals on a small scale. 3D
printers create new opportunities for non-State actors
to engage in do-it-yourself proliferation. If they are
unable to buy controlled items on their own, they may
be able to print them themselves one day.

Non-State actors such as terrorists or criminals
interested in acquiring CBRN materials are
increasingly turning to a special part of the Internet
called the Dark Web. The Dark Web can be accessed
only by using special encryption software that hides the
location and identity of its user. The Dark Web hosts
numerous markets that offer a range of illegal goods
for sale, such as guns, drugs and even chemical and
biological weapons. In 2014, the United States arrested
two individuals who sold the toxins ricin and abrin to
customers in North America, Europe and Asia. Ricin
is a Schedule 1 chemical weapon under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

The global reach and anonymity of the Dark Web
provides non-State actors with new means of doing
business to acquire dual-use equipment and materials.
Most of these markets avoid traditional financial
systems, and instead rely on digital currencies like
bitcoin to conduct transactions. Such transactions are
encrypted, which provides anonymity to both the buyer
and seller. This poses special challenges to anti-money-
laundering and counter-terrorism financing regulations.

There is also a growing risk that non-State actors
could use malicious software, or malware, to conduct
cyberattacks on facilities that produce or store nuclear,
biological or chemical materials. These non-State actors
could be disgruntled insiders, hacktivists, criminals or
terrorists. The widespread use of digital and automated
industrial control systems in such facilities and their
connection to the Internet create special and growing
vulnerabilities. This year, the non-governmental
organization Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI) started
including cybersecurity as one of the measures in its
Nuclear Security Index, and the results were sobering.
It found that 20 countries that possessed weapon-usable
nuclear material or that had nuclear power plants did not
meet even the most basic requirements of cybersecurity.
We should not just be one click away from a cyber-
Chernobyl.

Finally, the last area of scientific knowledge
I want to discuss is that of gene editing, a relatively
new development in the field of the life sciences. In
2013, scientists created a powerful new tool for genetic
engineering called CRISPR, for clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats. CRISPR allows
scientists to modify the genome for practically any
organism more precisely, more cheaply and more reliably
than ever before. The versatility and ease of use of this
tool has given rise to the term "gene editing". Gene
editing is poised to make great contributions to human
health. But at the same time, the United States Director
of National Intelligence has warned that the deliberate
or unintentional misuse of this technology could have
grave economic or national security implications.

Although these technologies differ greatly in many
respects, they share seven key characteristics that
pose a special challenge to the implementation of the
objectives of resolution 1540 (2004).

First, these technologies have dual uses; they can
be used either for peaceful or for harmful purposes.

Secondly, these technologies are disruptive. They
are powerful enough to be able to transform entire
industries, economies and fields of science.

Due to those two characteristics, these technologies
are highly sought after by non-governmental
organizations, corporations and Governments for their
scientific, commercial and humanitarian applications.

The third feature of these technologies is that
of diffusion. Thanks to advances in international
commerce, new technologies can now be diffused
faster and farther afield than ever before.

The fourth feature is that all these technologies
rely to some degree on a digital component that makes
controlling them even more difficult. For example, 3D
printers use a digital blueprint called a "build file" to
programme the machine on what to produce. Such files
take up less space on a computer than a typical television
episode, which means they are easily transferable via
the Internet, email and other means of communication.

The fifth feature is that of decentralization.
Decentralization means there has been a shift in
the global distribution of scientific innovation and
industrial capacity. No longer is that concentrated in
the West; it is now more widely distributed to a more
diverse group of nations around the world.

The sixth feature is deskilling. The level of
expertise needed to utilize these technologies has been
reduced, making them more widely available and more
accessible to a larger group than ever before.
The seventh characteristic is the rise of the do-
it-yourself (DIY) movement. These are amateur
innovators who use open-source platforms to build
virtual communities dedicated to create an application of
those new technologies. There are vibrant transnational
DIY movements devoted to UAVs, 3D printing and
synthetic biology.

The combination of those seven characteristics is
what makes it such a challenge to prevent these emerging
technologies from being misused by non-State actors.
Despite the potential for these advances in science and
technology to increase the risks of the proliferation to
non-State actors, we should also keep in mind that they
also provide opportunities for mitigating those risks and
preventing them from occurring. Unmanned aerial and
ground vehicles can be used to detect CBRN weapons,
for border security and for bomb disposal. Biometrics
and radio-frequency ID chips can be used to improve
physical security and inventory control. Big Data can
be harnessed to improve export controls, and improved
sensors can detect the production, transportation and
use of CBRN weapons.

The international community faces a continuing
challenge of encouraging innovation and maximizing
the benefits of these new technologies, while
simultaneously mitigating the risks that they pose to
international security. I hope the Security Council
will take advantage of the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004), of which this open debate is an
important contribution, to update the resolution and to
take into account the impact of scientific discoveries,
technological breakthroughs and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.

