Mr. Holmes: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council.

Let me take advantage of the presence of the
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to straightaway express my profound
admiration for what Karen AbuZayd and her UNRWA
2
colleagues were able to achieve in the recent fighting,
during extremely difficult and dangerous circumstances.

I visited the area from 21 to 25 January to discuss
the way forward with Palestinian Authority
representatives, the Israeli Government and
representatives of Israeli and Palestinian civil society.
In Cairo I met with Mrs. Mubarak, in her capacity as
President of the Egyptian Red Crescent, and with
Government representatives and the League of Arab
States. I visited Gaza itself five days after the ceasefire,
with the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Robert Serry, to launch the humanitarian
needs assessment. I expected a distressing situation,
but was nevertheless shocked by the human suffering
and destruction I saw.

According to the Palestinian Ministry of Health,
whose figures have not been seriously challenged,
around 1,300 Palestinians were killed and more than
5,300 were injured. Thirty-four per cent of these were
children. In short, 1 out of 215 Gazans was either
killed or injured during the three weeks of this conflict.

While some areas I saw were relatively
untouched, in others virtually every building was
destroyed or full of holes. Twenty-one thousand homes
were destroyed or badly damaged altogether, according
to the Palestinian Bureau of Statistics. At the height of
the fighting, over 50,000 people were displaced in
UNRWA structures, with tens of thousands more
sheltering with families and friends. Widespread
destruction was caused to Gaza's economic and civil
infrastructure. I saw, for example, an entire industrial
and residential area in East Jabalia that had been
systematically bulldozed - an area of at least one
square kilometre. One of the best schools in Gaza had
been reduced to rubble and much of the Al-Quds
hospital in Gaza City burned out. The International
Committee of the Red Cross reports that in Jabalia
between one and two thousand households are now
living in the rubble of their houses. Damage to power,
water, sanitation, medical, education and agricultural
infrastructure was widely visible. I saw a flood of
sewage coming from one bomb-damaged major pipe,
forming a lake on residential and agricultural land,
though thankfully this has now been fixed.

Conversations with a range of Gazans revealed
the psychological trauma, as civilians cowered for
three weeks with nowhere safe in Gaza and nowhere to
flee to, and parents became horribly aware of their
inability to protect their children.
09-22116

In addition to UNRWA, I want to recognize the
extraordinary efforts of Gazan medical teams and first
responders and the national and international staff of
other United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement, despite tremendous risks.
Thirteen local medical staff and six United Nations
staff were killed. Thirty-four health facilities were
damaged or destroyed. Aid workers and premises came
under direct fire on far too many occasions. I saw the
UNRWA compound warehouse still smouldering, and
the OCHA office in the compound of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, where my own staff used to work, damaged
beyond use.

The reckless and cynical use of civilian
installations by Hamas and the indiscriminate firing of
rockets against civilian populations are clear violations
of international humanitarian law. However, even
taking into account Israel's security concerns regarding
the protection of its own civilian population, it is clear
that there are major questions to be asked about the
failure of the Israeli Defense Forces to protect
effectively civilians and humanitarian workers in Gaza.
Given the scale and nature of the damage and loss of
life, there are also obvious concerns about a lack of
wider respect for international humanitarian law,
particularly the principles of distinction and
proportionality. There must be accountability.

But it is also critical to look forward to what must
be done to bring urgent relief. After eighteen months of
closure, which steadily weakened health, livelihoods
and infrastructure, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
before 27 December last year was already very
worrying. My own observation and the preliminary
findings of the assessment suggest that a massive
humanitarian effort is now needed in areas such as
food security, nutrition, water and sanitation, shelter,
essential repairs of power, roads and other basic
infrastructure, rebuilding the health system, rubble
removal, unexploded ordnance and psychosocial care.
As only one example, 1.3 million Gazans - almost 90
per cent of the population - now need food aid.

I will launch a flash appeal on 2 February, as a
prioritized plan for urgent needs. I hope that at least
part of the generosity we saw during the fighting in
provision of food and medical supplies and large
pledges for future reconstruction can be channelled
into flexible financial contributions to this multilateral
09-22116
appeal. But two basic conditions need to be met for us
to do our work.

The first is much freer access for goods and staff.
Israel allowed increased shipments of basic
commodities during the fighting, and has continued
this since. This is welcome. On good days, 120
truckloads of goods get into Gaza. But the normal daily
requirement, including commercial traffic, is a
minimum of 500. Many humanitarian workers,
including most international NGOs, continue to be
refused regular entry.

Moreover, returning to the kind of access
restrictions which were in force before the hostilities
will be neither acceptable nor workable. If aid workers
continue to face rigid limits on their movement and if
essential items such as construction materials, pipes,
electrical wires and transformers, key equipment and
spare parts continue to be effectively banned or only
allowed in infrequently after endless haggling, the lives
of the Gazan people cannot significantly improve. The
power plant, for example, needs almost 500,000 litres
of fuel per day to operate normally. Even under current
arrangements, the average flow is less than half that.

We already see relief goods piling up in Egypt for
lack of ready access. And the wider problems of the
fragile situation were tragically illustrated today.
Following an incident in south Gaza, when an Israeli
patrol was attacked and a farmer killed, all Gaza
crossings were shut down. That stopped today's aid
shipments from going in and stranded part of our
assessment team.

Commercial goods must also be allowed in, and
out, and, most urgently, the cash needed for normal
activity. Gazans do not want or deserve to be ever more
dependent on outside aid. They must be able to work
and trade, to rebuild their economy, to use their
manifest skills, energy and talent and to create hope for
the future, not the despair that can only breed more
violence and extremism.

There are important principles at stake here too,
as the Security Council itself clearly recognized in
resolution 1860 (2009), which paid particular attention
to the unimpeded provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance. Free and full access for goods
and humanitarian staff is something for which we have
battled long and hard in other contexts, such as Darfur
and in Myanmar after Cyclone Nargis. Moreover, Israel
has a particular responsibility as the occupying Power
3
in this context, because of its control of its borders
with Gaza, to respect the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law. It is therefore critical
that new steps are taken immediately by the Israeli
authorities to move to the sustained reopening of
crossing points on the basis of the 2005 Israeli-
Palestinian Agreement on Movement and Access.
Many countries support that. The crossings have to be
opened up not because Hamas wants it or might benefit
from it, but because the Gazans need it.

The Israeli Minister of Social Welfare,
Mr. Herzog, who coordinates Israel's facilitation of
humanitarian assistance, assured me of the Israeli
Government's commitment to work with the United
Nations agencies and the rest of the humanitarian
community to provide emergency assistance to the
people of Gaza. We have agreed to put in place new
coordination arrangements to this end. However, the
Minister also suggested that many categories of items
capable of dual use will raise continuing security
concerns.

Let me emphasize again here the unacceptability
of the status quo ante, with a limited trickle of items
into Gaza continuing the effective collective
punishment of the civilian population, the resultant
counter-productive reliance on tunnels for daily
essentials and further build-up of frustration and anger.
Israel's security worries are understood, but I am
confident that the passage of goods can be arranged in
a way that will meet reasonable security concerns.

The second condition for a successful emergency
relief operation is that we be able to work effectively
with the Israeli authorities, cooperate closely with the
Palestinian Authority and deal practically with those in
control on the ground, without any of the parties trying
to exert political control over humanitarian operations.
For example, Hamas must refrain from any
interference with the movement or distribution of
humanitarian goods. I was encouraged that Prime
Minister Fayyad of the Palestinian Authority made it
clear that meeting immediate needs should be kept
separate from politics, and that the United Nations and
its partners had a unique role to play in this respect.

Clearly the best context for the facilitation of
relief and recovery activities, and the only reliable
basis for long-term reconstruction, is Palestinian
reconciliation, which the United Nations strongly
supports, as the Secretary-General has made clear. In
the meantime, the United Nations will be working
closely with the Palestinian Authority in planning for
longer-term recovery and reconstruction.

After my first visit to the area, I warned of the
growing disconnect between the situation on the
ground, particularly but not only in Gaza, and the
peace process. A year later, the people of Gaza have
continued to exist in what is effectively a giant open-
air prison, without normality or dignity. Their lives
have been put at risk recklessly by indiscriminate
rocket attacks from their midst, which have also killed,
injured and traumatized Israeli civilians in southern
Israel. They have now endured a terrifying assault and
must live with its devastating aftermath.

This is not sustainable or acceptable. It can only
lead to more despair, suffering, death and destruction
in the coming years, and perhaps fatally undermine the
two-State solution we all seek. It must therefore be in
the long-term interests of all parties, including Israel,
to ease conditions for the people of Gaza by opening
the crossings, facilitating the provision of assistance
and allowing them to live, work and hope again.

