Mr. Williams: May Ijoin you, Mr. President, in
expressing best wishes for the future to Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sabliere. I would also like to thank
him for his unstinting personal support for the work of
the United Nations in the Middle East.

Since my last briefing to the Council, there have
been a number of important political developments
giving cause for hope. Most notable is the
re-engagement of the international community and
Israel with the Government of Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad. On 25 June, President Mubarak of Egypt
hosted a summit at Sharm el-Sheikh that included
Prime Minister Olmert, King Abdullah II of Jordan and
President Abbas. On 16 July President Bush made an
important speech announcing a series of measures of
support to the Palestinian Government, leading to an
international meeting in the autumn to be chaired by
Secretary of State Rice. Most encouraging is that, on
16 July, President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert
had a very positive bilateral meeting that touched on
final status issues. That was their first meeting in three
months. Last week, on 19 July, the Quartet met in
Lisbon, together with its new special envoy, Mr. Tony
Blair. Today, the Foreign Ministers of Jordan and
Egypt have arrived in Israel to discuss the Arab Peace
Initiative.

That is impressive diplomatic momentum, but the
positive developments are offset by a problematic and
increasingly complex reality on the ground, where
violence continues. The situation in the Gaza Strip has
stabilized somewhat since my last report. Hamas is in
control of Gaza and has detained political opponents
and those whom it accuses of collaboration with Israel.
At least two men have been killed while in Hamas
captivity, and local Palestinian human rights groups
have made allegations of torture.

BBC journalist Alan Johnston, who had been
kidnapped by the Army of Islam, was released on
4 July. The Secretary-General expressed his profound
relief at the release of Mr. Johnston, who had been held
for nearly four months. Hamas subsequently detained
12 members of the Army of Islam and affiliated Islamic
groups said to be behind the kidnapping of Johnston
and recent attacks on such targets as the American
School and a Christian bookshop.

In this reporting period there were more than 20
incidents of Palestinian attacks, involving 192 rocket
and mortar shells, against the Gaza crossings and into

Israel. The military wing of Hamas has been
responsible for most of the rockets and mortars fired at
the crossings, and it claimed responsibility for 10
attacks aimed towards Kerem Shalom and 5 aimed
towards Erez. However, Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade also carried out attacks against the
crossings. Islamic Jihad was also responsible for most
of the rockets and mortars launched against Israel, with
Hamas claiming responsibility for only one such attack
during the reporting period. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly condemned Palestinian rocket fire, which
targets civilians - causing injuries and damage - and
impedes the flow of assistance to the people of Gaza.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Israeli military actions
continued throughout the reporting period, leading to
52 Palestinian fatalities, including four children, and
109 injured, three of whom were children. Thirty-three
of those fatalities were in Gaza. One Israeli was killed
and 18 injured, including one child. The Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) continued targeted killings in Gaza. In the
West Bank, the IDF carried out almost daily arrest
raids into towns and villages, killing some 20
Palestinians and arresting at least 244 suspected
activists from various Palestinian factions. I encourage
Israel to cease those operations and to hand over
security control of the West Bank to the Palestinian
Authority.

The Hamas takeover of Gaza and the absence of
Palestinian Authority (PA) security forces have left the
crossings connecting Gaza with the outside world
mostly inoperable. The Secretary-General has stated
his concern about that situation and its impact on
economic life, most notably in a statement on 13 July.
He believes that it is essential for the Palestinian
Authority to do everything possible to ensure the well-
being of the Palestinians of Gaza. The United Nations
encourages the PA to work with Egypt, Israel and the
international community to explore all possible options
to operate the crossings.

United Nations agencies have redoubled their
efforts with Israel and the Palestinian Authority over
the past month to facilitate and ensure the continuous
flow of basic humanitarian goods through the Kerem
Shalom crossing. Overall, 65,000 metric tons of basic
food and medical supplies have entered the Strip
commercially or through the United Nations, meeting
88 per cent of the population's basic minimum food
needs.
However, it is clear that humanitarian assistance
alone will not be sufficient to stop the decline in the
economy that is currently unfolding owing to the
interruption of regular commercial flows to and from
the Gaza Strip. The closure of the Karni crossing since
early June has meant that agricultural and industrial
products destined for markets in Israel, the West Bank
or farther afield have not been exported. It has also
meant that materials essential for the production of
industrial goods and for the construction sector are not
entering Gaza. For the United Nations alone, that has
resulted in projects worth $213 million coming to a
halt. The World Bank now estimates that more than 75
per cent of Gaza's factories have had to close
operations and that more than 68,000 workers have
been temporarily laid off. Unless the crossings are
open for imports and exports, the downward economic
spiral will lead to extensive hardship for an already
impoverished Gaza Strip.

It is particularly worrying that very little progress
has been made to resolve the question of approximately
6,000 Palestinians who are unable to move from Egypt
back into the Gaza Strip. I would urge all parties to act
quickly to hasten the return of that displaced
population.

I turn now to developments on the political front.
On 13 July, Prime Minister Fayyad's emergency
Government was reappointed as a caretaker
Government that will continue to function until there is
a vote in the Palestinian legislature terminating its
tenure or until elections are held. The Palestinian
Legislative Council (PLC) has tried to convene on a
number of occasions, but, owing to alternate boycotts
by both Hamas and Fatah, no sessions have been held.
The continued Israeli detention of 45 Palestinian
legislators is an aggravating factor, and we join the
European Union in calling for their release. As a result
of those obstacles, the PLC failed to meet the Basic
Law deadline for a vote of confidence on the
emergency Government, as had been requested by
Prime Minister Fayyad.

On 16 July, President Abbas called for early
presidential and PLC elections. However, there has
been no indication as to when such elections might be
held, and it is not clear how or when the current
impasse will be resolved. I must note that my own
meetings in the region suggest that there are no
immediate prospects for reconciliation between Hamas
and President Abbas's Fatah movement.

The creation of the independent emergency
Government of Prime Minister Fayyad on 15 June,
which was warmly welcomed by Quartet members, has
led to the renewal of direct financial assistance from
the donor community. Prime Minister Olmert has made
commitments to support the new Government of Prime
Minister Fayyad through transferring tax revenues,
significantly freeing movement in the West Bank,
renewing economic and security cooperation and
releasing some Palestinian prisoners. In that regard,
Israel transferred $117 million in Palestinian tax
revenues on 1 July and released 255 Palestinian
prisoners on 20 July. I am pleased to note the positive
and businesslike way in which Israel and the
Palestinian Authority are working together.

In a step that will help Prime Minister Fayyad on
the ground, the PA and Israel also reached an
agreement that led to 178 wanted militants giving up
their arms and signing peace pledges in return for
being removed from Israel's most-wanted list.

I would like to commend Prime Minister
Fayyad's successful effort to pay full salaries to
160,000 PA employees in the West Bank and, in
particular, in the Gaza Strip as well. This is the first
time in 15 months that a full salary payment has been
made to civil servants. It has injected more than $100
million into the Palestinian economy, and its effects on
the daily welfare of Palestinian households were
immediately felt. I should note that salaries were not
paid to the 20,000 members of the Hamas-affiliated
security forces or the 11,000 civil servants hired by
Hamas in the past year.

As part of this positive atmosphere of trust, and
in a step welcomed by the Quartet, President Abbas
and Prime Minister Olmert met on 16 July and renewed
their bilateral dialogue at a very positive meeting. I am
informed that all issues were put on the table, from
prisoners to serious discussion on final-status issues.

In a significant speech on 16 July, President Bush
supported Palestinian institution-building ahead of
serious negotiations towards the creation of a
Palestinian State and announced the intention of the
United States to call an international meeting this
autumn chaired by Secretary Rice, with the
participation of Israel, the Palestinians and regional
States. The Secretary-General welcomed that proposal.
As for the Quartet, it indicated in Lisbon last week that
it was looking forward to consultations as the meeting

is prepared and agreed that such a meeting should
provide diplomatic support for the parties in their
bilateral discussions and negotiations in order to move
forward on a successful path to a Palestinian State.

The process of institution-building will be led by
the former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who was
appointed as Quartet Representative on 27 June. On
19 July, the Quartet welcomed his agreement to be the
Quartet Representative and discussed with him the
urgent work that lies ahead. The Quartet urged the
parties and all States in the region to work closely with
Mr. Blair and encouraged robust international support
for his efforts.

Mr. Blair is returning from the region today after
consultations with Palestinian and Israeli leaders and
stakeholders. His initial visit was to form an
assessment of the current situation before returning to
the region in September to start implementing his
strategic plan ahead of the international meeting in the
autumn. The Secretary-General and our Quartet
partners are all committed to giving Mr. Blair all the
support necessary to ensure the success of his mission.

In that context, we welcome Norway's proposal
to reactivate the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, with the
stated support of President Bush and others in the
international community, to discuss assistance
management, financial support to the PA and
Palestinian institutional reform. The meeting will take
place in New York in September on the margins of the
General Assembly.

Let me turn now to Lebanon. Lebanon continues
to face a precarious political and security situation. The
Council has already been briefed on the two terrorist
attacks in less than a month that targeted the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as well as
on the status of the investigation.

In Beirut, the political impasse remains, with no
tangible shift in the position of the parties. On 14 and
15 July, France hosted a meeting of Lebanese political
figures representing participants in the Lebanese
National Dialogue. That important initiative created a
forum in which basic political principles and
commitments were reaffirmed and participants pledged
to avoid violence in resolving their political
differences.

We support the commendable and continuing
diplomatic efforts of France and those of the Arab

League to assist the Lebanese in achieving consensus.
The Secretary-General's Special Coordinator for
Lebanon has remained in close contact with the parties
and has continued to advocate for a return to dialogue
and for compromises in order to narrow the gaps
between the parties. The Secretary-General calls on
Member States in the region to support the Lebanese
parties in their efforts to reach a consensus.

The Lebanese Army continues its intense battle
against the militant organization Fatah al-Islam in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Nahr el-Bared in northern
Lebanon. The fighting, which erupted on 20 May, has
now claimed the lives of 114 Lebanese soldiers, at least
47 fighters from Fatah al-Islam and an unidentified
number of civilians. On 6 July, two Palestinian
demonstrators died in a confrontation with the army.
The army and certain Palestinian factions have taken
steps to prevent the recurrence of such incidents and to
minimize the risk of violence spreading to other
Palestinian camps in Lebanon.

A major assault was launched on 13 July by the
army against an estimated 100 fighters still remaining
in Nahr el-Bared. In connection with this attack, Fatah
al-Islam fired Katyusha rockets from the embattled
camp on surrounding towns and villages, leading to the
death on 17 July of one civilian.

Israeli air violations of the Blue Line have
continued to occur and, during this period, have
significantly increased. UNIFIL has recorded a total of
271 Israeli overflights during the past month. These
overflights are a violation of Lebanese sovereignty.
The Secretary-General calls upon the Israeli authorities
to make full use of the appropriate tripartite
mechanism that exists with UNIFIL in which to
address issues of concern.

In conclusion, following the collapse of the
National Unity Government, the Palestinian Authority
under President Abbas remains the only legitimate
authority, and I have been pleased to see the quick
response of the international community to deliver
financial assistance and political support to Prime
Minister Fayyad's caretaker Government.
However, it is important that the people of Gaza
not be punished for the Hamas takeover. Re-opening
the crossings to prevent the complete collapse of the
Gazan economy remains a priority. The humanitarian
and emergency response has been an effective short-
term measure, but a solution led by President Abbas is
an urgent necessity. In the longer term, Gaza and the
West Bank cannot remain separated. There is only one
future Palestinian State, and it encompasses both the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

There has been a promising start to the new
relationship of Prime Minister Olmert, President Abbas
and Prime Minister Fayyad. We must encourage the
parties to continue to build confidence through the
fulfilment of their Road Map commitments. Israel must
remove checkpoints in the West Bank as well as
dismantle outposts and freeze settlement expansion.
President Abbas should continue to work to end
violence, disarm Palestinian militias and reform
6
Palestinian institutions. Fulfilment of those conditions
would constitute solid foundations for the international
meeting this autumn, which will hopefully be an
important step to begin bilateral negotiations for a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace.

