Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We welcome the Minister of

State and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste to the Security Council. We thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for his briefing. We are also
grateful to Ambassador Baso Sangqu for his briefing
and for his able leadership of the Security Council
mission to Timor-Leste. We note the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (S/2012/765).

The successful conclusion of the electoral process
in Timor-Leste is a major accomplishment. It is a
sterling example of the remarkable progress made by
the country in the short period since its independence.
We congratulate the leadership and the people of Timor-
Leste on that achievement.

In that regard, we particularly acknowledge the role
of former President Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, under whose
leadership the elections were held. The turnaround in
Timor-Lcste would not have been possible without the
support of UNMIT. We therefore commend the efforts
of the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and of the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq. The Security
Council can take due satisfaction from the fruit of its
involvement in Timor-Leste.

Over the past 10 years, Pakistan has contributed to
three peacekeeping missions in Timor-Leste, including
UNMIT. The last Pakistani formed police unit is due
to depart from the country on 14 November. We are
proud of the contribution made by our peacekeepers
towards the peace and stability of Timor-Leste. One
of them, Ms. Shahzadi Gulfam, was awarded the 2011
International Female Police Peacekeeper Award in
recognition of her outstanding performance as the team
leader of the Vulnerable Persons Unit in Dili.

I would like to touch upon five issues. First, the
elected leadership of the country has expressed its
desire for Timor-Leste to be taken off the agenda of the
Security Council. That message was clearly conveyed
to the Security Council mission by different sections
of the Timorese polity and civil society. The recent
developments, as well as the palpable confidence of the
Timorese, demonstrate that the country stands ready to
assume control of its affairs.

Secondly, in his letter addressed to the Secretary-
General (S/2012/736, annex), Prime Minister Gusmao
notes that Timor-Leste would like to establish an
innovative working relationship of cooperation for
the future that focuses on institutional strengthening
and development. The United Nations can continue to
contribute to the future development of the country.
The future shape of the United Nations involvement in
the country must be decided in close consultation with
the Timorese authorities.

Thirdly, the implementation of the Joint Transition
Plan is proceeding satisfactorily. It is important to
ensure that the transfer of the functions and assets of
UNMIT to the Timorese Government takes place in a
systematic and coordinated manner.

Fourthly, we are encouraged by the economic
performance of Timor-Leste, as noted in the
Secretary-General's report. The country has made
continued progress towards meeting the objectives
and benchmarks of its medium-term strategy related
to socio-economic development. However, it faces
challenges in ensuring sustained improvement in
livelihoods, in increasing employment opportunities
in rural areas and for young people, and in eradicating
poverty. The Government must make efforts to use
the natural resources effectively to promote inclusive,
equitable and sustainable growth in the country.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General's report and the
Security Council mission have highlighted other
challenges, including human resources capacity
constraints, strengthening State institutions and the
national judicial capacity, security sector review and
socio-economic development. The support of the
United Nations and of Timor-Leste's bilateral partners
would be crucial to addressing those challenges.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore the fact
that the international community has played its part
in helping the people of Timor-Leste. That provides a
solid foundation for the Timorese leadership and people
to build upon for a better future of peace and prosperity
for their country.

