Mr. Larsen (Norway): The delegation of Norway
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
substantive report and for the important work
undertaken by Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, as
well as by the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and other actors within the United Nations
system. My Government supports the recommendations
in the Secretary-General's report.

Norway played an active role in the drafting of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, as well as the International Labour
Organization Convention (No. 182) that lists forced or
compulsory recruitment of children under 18 for use in
armed conflict as one of the worst forms of child
labour. We are providing financial and other support to
the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, which
was actively engaged in promoting the Protocol. With
the adoption of the Optional Protocol, our focus will
now turn to obtaining support for implementing its
provisions.

The Machel report helped set the stage for our
policies on the protection of war-affected children
during the past five years. With a view to making
operational the recommendations set out in the report,
Norway has assisted a variety of actors in their efforts
to develop policies in this field.

We have been involved in several conferences on
children and armed conflict in the past few years,
including regional conferences in Africa, in 1999, and
in Asia and Europe, this year, organized by the
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, with the
objective of rallying support for the Optional Protocol
and to exchange views on programming for war-
affected children. At the African conference it became
apparent that there is a need for closer collaboration
between actors in the subregions. Together with
Canada, we have taken steps to mobilize actors in the
subregions. Last April Canada supported the successful
conference in Accra arranged by the Government of
Ghana on war-affected children in West Africa. Later
this year a meeting will be held in Kampala for the
Great Lakes region and the Sudan, with the support of
the Norwegian Government. The focus will be on the
need for closer collaboration and networking between
non-governmental organizations in the field.

Norway has provided support and funding to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
follow-up of the Special Representative's visits to
Guatemala, Sri Lanka and the Sudan.

My country has suggested the demobilization of
child soldiers as a confidence-building measure in the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Partners Forum peace process. Preparations for such a
measure are under way. UNICEF is involved in its
planning.

In our humanitarian policy, we have given a
prominent place to protecting children and other
civilians from landmines, including the need to deal
with the long-term consequences in the aftermath of
conflict and war. As a follow-up to the mine ban
Convention, the Norwegian Government has made a
commitment to contribute the equivalent of $120
million over five years to mine action programmes.

The spread of small arms and light weapons has
exacerbated inter-State and intra-State conflict,
undermined political and economic development,
destabilized communities and devastated the lives of
millions of people. Norway has given priority to
seeking pragmatic and realistic solutions to this grave
problem, which affects children in many ways, as
victims of and participants in hostilities. The
Norwegian experience is that close cooperation among
a broad set of actors is crucial if our efforts are to yield
sustainable results. For our part, Norway will continue
to provide support for efforts at small arms control,
humanitarian assistance and reintegration programmes
that benefit children, including in West Africa. We
have supported the important work of Mali and others
in the Economic Community of West African States on
the issue of small arms. Like other speakers, Norway
believes that the needs of Sierra Leone deserve the
particular attention of the Council and the international
donor community.

Efforts aimed at improving the plight of children
in armed conflict are effective on different levels.
Some of them are undertaken to protect civilians in
general, others to protect children in particular.
Certainly, the Machel report has played an important
role in placing the special protection of war-affected
children high on the Norwegian policy agenda.
Children's rights, and not least the protection of the
rights of children in armed conflict, have gained
increased attention. Much has been done to address
actors at the international level. There is now a
growing realization that in order for change to take
place, subregional and local actors need to be more
involved and further empowered. We are pleased that
this debate confirms the willingness of the international
community to continue to support action at those
levels, too.

Before concluding, my delegation would like to
warmly commend you, Madam President, for your
personal efforts regarding children's rights and for
focusing the Council on this crucial issue. This is
highly valued by my Government.

