Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I very much appreciate the briefing from the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic'.

Spain recognizes the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the regional security
organizations and believes that, under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, this cooperation is
called upon to contribute in a marked manner to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
that context, we think that there is broad manoeuvring
room for cooperation between the United Nations
and the OSCE in the fostering of collective security
in the OSCE region and, in particular, currently, in
contributing to a solution to the conflict in Ukraine,
facilitating humanitarian assistance for the population.

Spain's commitment to the OSCE goes back to
the origin of the organization. We participated in the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and
signed the Helsinki Final Act, the fortieth anniversary
of which we are commemorating this year. More
recently, as members of the Council know, we presided
over the Organization in 2007. I assure Mr. Dacic' that
he can count on the support of Spain in addressing his
priorities, many of which are also our priorities within
the OSCE over which he presides.

First of all, we support the efforts that the OSCE
and its Chairperson-in-Office are undertaking in order
to contribute to a resolution of the crisis in Ukraine.
Spain is aware of the tremendous amount of work that
the Chairperson-in-Office is facing right now as a
result of the clear role he is entrusted with in the current
security crisis, which, I believe, is the most significant
in the OSCE area since the end of the Cold War. Spain
is convinced that the Minsk agreement of 12 February,
which the Security Council endorsed and which includes
an important role for the OSCE - is an opportunity to
move ahead on the road towards a peaceful resolution
to the conflict with respect for the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine. I
should like to thank France and Germany again for
their initiative, which we firmly support.

We also support the worthwhile work of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission, to which Spain will
continue to contribute human and financial resources.
We believe that the Mission must have the resources
it needs at all times. We also very much appreciate
the excellent work of Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini,
Special Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office to
the Trilateral Contact Group. Moreover, we welcome
the importance that the Chairperson-in-Office will give
to continuing the efforts to resolve prolonged conflicts
in the framework of the formats agreed upon in each
case. We think that his vision of favouring small steps
that build trust between the parties is an essential first
phase before addressing the substantive issues.

The fight against terrorism - identified by the
Chairperson-in-Office as one of his priorities - is
another area in which the OSCE can count on our active
cooperation. We are aware of the growing importance
of the transnational threats, such as cyber threats
and organized crime, with its ramifications in drug

trafficking, security and the control of borders. We
would say the same regarding the risk regarding of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In all of
those areas the Chairperson-in-Office will have the
support and know-how of my country.

When it comes to strategies to combat terrorism,
it is essential that we pay particular attention to the
causes and the prevention of violent radicalism. Spain,
along with Turkey, was a driver behind the Alliance
of Civilizations, a crucial tool in promoting dialogue
while fighting against intolerance and radicalization.
The OSCE is participating actively in the Alliance's
Group of Friends. We must extend political support to
the Alliance, but also provide it with the means that
allow it to work effectively.

Spain also has a long tradition in the area of
mediation and the promotion of dialogue. We welcome
the association framework on mediation between
the OSCE and the United Nations. We wish to make
available to the Chairperson-in-Office our experience
and recent initiatives in that area, in particular with
regard to our mediation initiative in the Mediterranean,
which we launched together with Morocco.

On the political-military dimension, Spain believes
that measures to boost both confidence and security are
an essential element when it comes to military security
within the OSCE space. The conflict in Ukraine has
clearly underscored that military transparency between
and among participating States in the control of weapons
is a matter of particular importance in the framework of
European security.

I should like to conclude by underscoring that the
magnitude of the crisis in Ukraine should not let us
forget that many of the threats to security in the OSCE
area come from the Mediterranean. Spain is committed
to fostering fruitful relations and dialogue with its
Mediterranean cooperation partners. This region offers
a great deal of opportunities, but also a great deal of
challenges.

