Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to express to you, Mr. President,
Guinea's congratulations on your country's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July 2004 and on the excellent way in which you are
guiding our debates. My thanks go also to your

predecessor, Mr. Lauro Baja of the Philippines, for the
quality of his presidency.

This public meeting, devoted to considering the
report of the Security Council mission to West Africa
(S/2004/525), offers me the pleasant opportunity to
share with members the appreciation of the
Government of Guinea, and particularly of the
President of the Republic, for the fruitful working visit
to Conakry on 28 June. The intensive exchange of
views that took place that day on diverse and complex
issues undoubtedly attests to both the Guinean
Government's determination to work tirelessly for the
restoration of peace and security in the Mano River
Basin and to the Security Council's unflagging interest
in seeing Guinea consolidate its peaceful and
stabilizing influence in its region and in the West
African subregion.

The holding of the second Mano River Union
Summit at Conakry on 20 May 2004 is also a part of
that context. The final communique, which was sent to
the Security Council for its information, expressed the
resolve of member States to carry out their respective
obligations under the mechanisms established by the
Union. With the Presidents of Mali and of Cote
d'Ivoire as observers, the Mano River Union's leaders
stressed their unshakeable determination to work
together with their counterparts to make the subregion
a zone of peace and stability, conducive to close
cooperation for lasting and integrated development.

We must recognize that West Africa is gradually
emerging from a long, painful period of bloody
conflicts, thanks to the joint actions of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
United Nations system and African and international
partners and, above all, to the political commitment of
various national actors.

In Sierra Leone, peace has become a reality and is
being gradually consolidated. The significant
contributions of friendly countries - including the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland - to that peace process remains etched in our
collective memory. The preservation of those gains
depends on the real capacity of security forces to
smoothly assume the duties of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), but also on the
creation of new pro-growth economic activities likely
to curb the unemployment of young people in
particular and to integrate ex-combatants into a new
dynamic that will prevent a resurgence of crises and
conflicts.

Liberia - not without difficulty, but with real
grounds for hope - has been pursuing the path of
reconciliation and lasting peace since 14 August 2003.
We hope that no effort will be spared to complete the
process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants, to re-establish
civil authority throughout the country and to mobilize
the financial resources necessary for its reconstruction.
In our view, President Gyude Bryant's attachment to
good governance and democracy, as noted in the report,
is an important factor in peace-building in Liberia and
in the subregion. The donor community must take that
into account in order to enable the country's leaders to
attain the agreed objectives.

In Guinea-Bissau, while we welcome the
remarkable progress towards democracy and good
governance made since September 2003, we note that
many challenges remain on the path towards stability.
The immediate provision of financial resources and of
technological and institutional capacities will enable us
to meet those challenges and to implement the
priorities set forth.

Although our subregion is witnessing a general
positive trend, the specific situation in Cote d'Ivoire
remains a factor of concern. Guinea remains convinced
that African wisdom will prevail to enable all the
parties concerned to overcome difficulties and to place
the peace and reconciliation process on a solid
foundation. The subregion's stability depends on that.
The forthcoming resumption in Accra of the dialogue
between the parties to the Marcoussis Agreement,
under the aegis of ECOWAS and of well-known
facilitators, promises new perspectives. That is a
healthy step in the right direction. Guinea, for its part,
advocates preserving the unity, integrity and full
sovereignty of Cote d'Ivoire, a neighbouring and
brotherly country to which we are linked by many
bonds.

Moreover, my delegation would like to stress that
peace-building in West Africa depends, above all, on
good governance and the eradication of transborder
problems such as the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons and the movement of mercenaries and
uncontrolled armed groups. The decision of ECOWAS
to transform its moratorium on the import and export of
weapons into a regional convention will make our joint
action more effective. Here, the international
community's assistance is indispensable.

Experience teaches us that the quality of Security
Council missions hinges on the quality of preparation,
on the time allotted for their completion and, above all,
on the approaches used in discussions with the various
interlocutors. During the preparation and carrying out
of these missions, the Security Council tries to include
on its agenda field visits, which require time. We
believe that such field visits - more than periodic
reports - are new and useful sources of information.
They enable Council members to grasp realities that no
report could describe.

My delegation also believes that in certain cases
the time allotted for missions is so brief that it often
does not allow for an in-depth exploration of all related
issues whose consideration could be decisive in
assessing the situation. It is essential that a Security
Council mission not send a message that is incomplete
or that is not based fully on contacts with the many
social actors and institutional partners on the ground.
Such an approach - which my delegation
encourages- seeks to enrich the results achieved,
having as its sole objective the commitment of the
parties - or the strengthening of their resolve - to
restore peace.

In conclusion, my country hopes that the relevant
recommendations of the Council and of the Secretary-
General will be swiftly followed up - particularly
with regard to the regional scope of decisions and
projects and the reconstruction of the Guinea-
Forestiere area, which continues to host many refugees
and displaced persons - within the framework of
revitalizing and relaunching the Mano River Union.

In the hope that the Security Council will take our
concerns into account, I would like to express once
again our appreciation for the results already achieved
by its mission under the wise and skilful leadership of
Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones Parry. My country, the
Republic of Guinea, is fully prepared to strengthen its
cooperation with all States of the subregion and with
the United Nations to build a better political and
economic space that promotes the flourishing of
African peoples.

