Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I have just two or three brief comments to
make.

First, with regard to my American colleague's
response to the question of the bombing in northern
Syria, which, according to press reports, has killed
many civilians, I will not conceal my surprise at her
remark that the investigations would be conducted
based on information from civil society groups. So
there are no American drones, no American special
forces in Syria, no coalition special forces, no United
States satellites with intelligence capacity, no video
recordings, which are made by all modern-day bombers
when they make a hit. I would not like to believe that the
United States-led alliance is in such a woeful military
state. This reference to civil society makes me think
that we are never really going to know the truth; it will
all be swept under the carpet.

With regard to Ms. Power's assertion that Russia
has never acknowledged or investigated, allow me
to recall that whenever an insinuation arises here,
she immediately starts talking very loudly about
this in the Security Council without even waiting
for corroboration. In fact, investigations took place
immediately, and the very same day or the next day,
at our briefings with the Ministry of Defence, we
demonstrated the unjustified nature of the insinuations
made in the course of the propaganda war surrounding
Syria. I truly hope that the United States-led coalition
will act with similar openness.

Lastly, I would like to make a general comment.
I am not sure whether it is a coincidence or perhaps
intentional that we are increasingly digressing into
the concrete details in the Security Council. There are
two groups that discuss such matters: the humanitarian
group and the group for the ceasefire. In Geneva they
discuss details, but the Security Council is, after all, a
political body. But we are digressing into discussions
concerning Aleppo, the Castillo road and many other
situations. We can discuss that, of course, but what I am
saying is, let us not lose sight ofthe bigger picture - the
root causes of the tragedy and dynamics in Syria.

It all began with an effort to topple a legitimate
Government and promote regime change. At that time,
the idea ofusing terrorists for that purpose did not seem
so bad. Finally, it was understood that terrorists could
take power in Syria, as was the case in Iraq, and then
another huge error was made, namely, the preparation
of the so-called moderate opposition, which was
supposed to fight not with the Government but with
terrorists. Those groups were immediately routed and
went over to the side of the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorists, taking with them the weapons that had been
given to them by the Western sponsors of these reckless
programmes.

Therefore, had the Syrian border been closed
to military convoys - as we have said on many
occasions - and and had the Castillo road been open
only to humanitarian convoys, we would not be faced
with situation prevailing in Aleppo today. If the United
States had made good on its promises, which it has been
making for at least halfa year, to separate the Al-Nusra
Front from the so-called moderate opposition, then we
would not have the situation that is prevailing in eastern
Aleppo and some other areas of Syria.

With all my criticism of the United States, which
I have been unable to avoid, I want to confirm that we
continue to work with the United States as co-chairs
of the International Syria Support Group. It is very
tense, difficult work, and I hope we can soon build
the international community's capacity to combat the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations so
as to radically improve the humanitarian situation in
Syria in combination with political talks whose speedy
resumption we are pressing for.

