I would like to thank Mr. Khan for his briefing. We have closely studied the fifth report of the Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) (see S/2020/1107). Combating terrorism is key to stabilizing the situation in Iraq. It is of principal importance that external stakeholders remain committed to the sovereignty of Iraq and coordinate their actions with Baghdad. In that connection, we welcome the information regarding cooperation between the Investigative Team and the Iraqi authorities. Such cooperation is a central element of the mandate of UNITAD, an international mechanism created by the Security Council in order to support Iraq's domestic efforts aimed at bringing Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorists to account within the framework of its national judicial system. At the same time, we must underscore that, so far, the Investigative Team has refrained from handing over the evidence to Iraqi authorities required to launch legal proceedings against terrorists. Moreover, according to the report, a number of countries are already taking advantage of the work of the Investigative Team. It is our understanding that the Team is waiting for the Iraqi Parliament to approve a special law on international crimes. However, that holding pattern should not negatively impact the implementation of the main part of UNITAD's mandate. I wish to stress that resolution 2379 (2017) does not oblige Iraq to criminalize any particular form of act. Rather, the resolution clearly defines the Iraqi authorities as the main recipients of evidence collected by the Team. We would be very interested to see information in future reports concerning the transfer of evidence collected by the Investigative Team to the local judicial authorities within the framework of existing legislation and legal proceedings. We do not consider it right to give preference to other jurisdictions simply because the legislation of the affected State is supposedly lagging behind. There is no such thing as an ideal legal system. We would once again like to recall the importance of receiving evidence first hand. Above all else, UNITAD should be able to rely on its own capacities and the assistance of the Iraqi Government. Cooperation with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) should serve only as an additional supporting tool. Excessive dependence on NGO-sourced information could result in a distorted image of the crimes committed and steer the activity of the Investigative Team, a body created by the United Nations, to suit the interests of particular organizations and their sponsors. We would therefore appreciate it if the Security Council could be provided with a full list of partner organizations. I will end my statement on a positive note by welcoming the fact that, despite the constraints imposed by the coronavirus disease, the Team's investigative activities are gaining momentum. We acknowledge the know-how and innovations employed by UNITAD to collect and process evidence and hope that, in the near future, we will be able to uncover the true scope and character of crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq.
