Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The Security Council has met month after month for over four years to support the efforts of the Special Envoy to find a political solution pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). The success of that process depends on the genuine will of all parties to find a solution, as well as efforts to make progress on all aspects of the process in tandem. Yesterday, the United Kingdom hosted envoys from the Syria small group, alongside Mr. Nasser Al-Hariri. We were all in agreement that a genuine political settlement remains the only solution to the Syrian conflict, but it is clear to the United Kingdom that the key ingredient to such a solution - the genuine will of the Syrian regime - is missing. After years of hard work by the United Nations Special Envoy to negotiate the composition and rules of the Constitutional Committee, in November we all welcomed the announcement that an agreement had been reached and that the Committee would convene in Geneva. It was a historic moment that would open the door to the entire political process, and yet it is with deep disappointment - despite the best efforts of the Special Envoy - that, after two meetings, the regime is yet again refusing to engage. On other aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), there has been a similar lack of engagement. Despite the Security Council meeting in August to highlight the specific issue of detainees (see S/PV.8593), no progress has been made. At that meeting in August, we set out the immediate steps that the Syrian authorities could take to make an important gesture of reconciliation. We would remind the Syrian authorities of our call for them to immediately release all those arbitrarily detained, to provide lists of detainees and their location to the United Nations, and to grant the International Committee of the Red Cross access to detention facilities. Speaking of humanitarian issues, I found the earlier comments about Western double standards to be rather strange. The United Kingdom has given over $4 billion in humanitarian aid since 2012 and the United Kingdom, the United States and Germany fund over 60 per cent of the United Nations humanitarian response plan across all of Syria, including regime-held areas. Instead, I would suggest that a double standard is when one says that they are concerned about humanitarian issues while bombing the country. The Syrian authorities, emboldened by the support of the Russian Federation, have refused to pursue any course of action other than a military one. They have used the fight against terrorism to justify continued, disproportionate attacks against areas heavily populated by civilians and to justify attacks against civilian objects such as schools, hospitals and marketplaces - a practice of which the Council demanded the immediate cessation in resolution 2254 (2015). Right now, despite the announcement of various ceasefires, air strikes continue in Idlib where, according to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, more than 358,000 people have been displaced since December. It is outrageous that we continue to talk about attacks against civilian targets in the north-west, despite the repeated concerns expressed by the United Nations, members of the Council and the ongoing investigation of the Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Kingdom reiterates that all parties, including those around this table, must uphold international humanitarian law and further calls for the Commission of Inquiry's findings to be made public. The only hope for Syria is for the regime to reverse its behaviour and commit to a political process that promotes reconciliation and avoids further needlessconflict, repression and death. Their Russian protectors must get the Syrian authorities back to the table.
