Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor once again. I
would like to respond to the comments made by my
colleague the Ambassador of the United Kingdom.

Asking questions is not one sided. It is her right to do
so, and I will answer them. But I asked many questions
that went unanswered. Those were key questions, which
could have reduced the length of this discussion and
could have stopped at number 62, rather than getting
up to 100 reports. That would have happened ifI had
received genuine responses to the many unanswered
questions that I have raised on numerous occasions.

First, the Syrian authorities were asked to support
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), whose representative is present in
the Chamber. OCHA is working in Syria pursuant
to resolution 2139 (2014). After its adoption, we, as
the Government of Syria, started to implement the
humanitarian response agreement, together with
OCHA. We renew that agreement every six months.
Thus, OCHA, which talks about supplying aid to
millions of Syrians, could have offered nothing ifit were
not for the support of the Syrian Government, which
endorsed the humanitarian operation. OCHA, then, is
not acting alone on Syrian territory, but rather with the
agreement and assistance of the Syrian Government,
which gratefully allowed it to provide assistance to
millions of Syrians. That operation has been ongoing
since 2014. It is nothing new.

Secondly, I would like to turn to the White Helmets.
There are many Western media and political reports
that elucidate the truth about the establishment of that
organization, led by a British intelligence officer whose
name we shared with the Council. If that organization
were truly a humanitarian one, its workers would not
have been smuggled through Israel into Canada, the
United States and certain European countries. Why do
those humanitarian White Helmet workers have to be
smuggled through the Golan and then Israel? If they
were truly White Helmet humanitarian workers, why
did they go to Israel and the Syrian occupied Golan?
Four hundred terrorists have been smuggled through
Israel to Western countries.
Thirdly, resolution 2133 (2014) prohibits the payment
of ransoms to terrorists and rejects negotiations with
them. Those who say today that the Syrian Government
must implement a ceasefire with the terrorists in Idlib
are speaking in contradiction to the provisions of
that resolution, in which the Council decided not to
negotiate with or pay ransoms to terrorists. However,
the regime in Qatar has paid ransoms scores of times
to the Al-Nusra Front in the Golan, Aleppo and Idlib.
Those present know the old stories, but in the Golan,
when the Al-Nusra Front took members of the Fijian
and Philippine units hostage, Qatar openly paid
them ransoms of €35 million with the knowledge of
the Secretariat.

My colleague the Ambassador of Germany
said that everybody here must uphold international
humanitarian law. Yes, we too believe in upholding it.
However, I call on the Ambassador of Germany and
my other colleagues to first uphold international law
and the provisions of the Charter before upholding
international humanitarian law because the former
prohibit interference in the domestic affairs of a State
Member of the Organization. Respect for the law cannot
be selective.

We respect international law, the provisions of the
Charter, international humanitarian law and human
rights law. We also respect the law on the protection
ofjournalists so as not to annoy my British colleague.
We respect a journalist who upholds his profession and
its rules and who wishes to visit a country to cover
events. Such a journalist must request a visa from the
authorities of the country he or she wishes to visit. He
or she must go to the country's Embassy and obtain a
visa and authorization, rather than illegally entering
the country through its borders with neighbouring
countries to cover terrorist activities then getting killed
by a terrorist missile. Everyone knows that. The French
authorities are well aware of that.

The safety of our armed forces was compromised
in order to recover the journalist's body that my British
colleague spoke about and hand it over to the authorities
of her country in Beirut. The French authorities know
that. They know the identity of those who brought the
journalist's body to them. The Syrian Government
again put its own security forces and army in jeopardy
to protect United Nations personnel and accredited
journalists in Syria. Those who wish to behave like
Hollywood actors will pay the price.

