Mr. Tesch (Australia): Mr. President, the
Australian delegation is pleased to see you in the chair
and is very grateful for the opportunity to speak briefly
on this very important matter. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Dhanapala for his introduction of
the Secretary-General's report on small arms, which we
consider very important and timely contribution to
international efforts to combat the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.

The report usefully identifies ways in which the
Security Council, in fulfilling its role in maintaining
international peace and security, can help to control
and eradicate the illicit small arms trade, building on
the 2001 United Nations Programme of Action.

All of the report's recommendations are
important, but some stand out for Australia as being of
particular merit. Reflecting our extensive experience in
dealing with post-conflict situations in the South and
South West Pacific, Australia strongly endorses
recommendations 7 and 8, encouraging the inclusion of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
activities in Council mandates and budgets for
peacekeeping operations. We also strongly endorse
recommendations 5 and 11, calling for the strict
enforcement of all Council resolutions on sanctions,
including those imposing arms embargoes, and for
effective monitoring mechanisms to oversee the
rigorous and effective application of embargoes. It is in
these two areas in particular - inclusion of DDR
activities in peacekeeping mandates and rigid
enforcement of arms embargoes - that the Council can
make a practical and positive impact on international
efforts to combat the illicit small arms trade.

Australia also commends the report's recognition
of the important role of strengthened national export
control measures in ensuring effective regulation of
small arms exports. Effective national export controls,
including end-use certification, are the first line of
defence against illicit transfers and help to prevent
exports that may start out as licit ending up in the
wrong hands.

While the role of the Council is important, the
prime responsibility for combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons lies with Member States.
The 2001 United Nations Programme of Action
provides a comprehensive and dynamic framework for
Member States to follow in combating the illicit small
arms trade at the national, regional and international
levels.

Good progress has been made in promoting
regional-level cooperation in particular, as indeed we
have heard from a number of speakers today. The
provision of capacity-building assistance to States with
development needs is an important means of enhancing
regional cooperation. Australia is strongly committed
to continuing to assist countries in the South Pacific
region to combat the problems posed by small arms,
through the institution of better governance and
accountability. We have been actively involved in small
arms disposal processes in Bougainville and the
Solomon Islands, as an element of broader peace-
building efforts there. Australia is also working closely
with Japan to organize a second small arms workshop
for Pacific Island countries, following a successful
inaugural workshop we hosted in 2001.

In the lead-up to the biennial meeting on small
arms in mid-2003, Australia urges Member States to
renew their efforts to implement the United Nations
Programme of Action. We must maintain a strong
collective resolve to address effectively the
humanitarian and security dimensions of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, as identified in
the Secretary-General's report.

