Mr. Thiebaud (France)(interpretation from French):
For a year now, France, together with its European Union
partners and many other countries, has given its full
military, political and economic support to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina signed at Paris on 14 December 1995.

Much progress has been made. A considerable task
remains to be accomplished. The Conference held at Paris
on 14 November 1996, which brought together for the
first time the Foreign Ministers of the principal countries
involved in the process and the newly elected Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, made it possible to mark a
new stage in the process. A plan for the consolidation of

 

the civilian aspects of the peace process was adopted to
cover a period of two years, during which the international
community is ready to maintain its efforts for the recovery
of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the condition that the
authorities of that State fully respect their commitments.

On the basis of the priorities for action very
specifically defined at Paris with the full agreement of the
parties, the London Implementation Conference, meeting
from 4 to 5 December, developed a detailed 12-month
programme that will be carefully followed. At those two
Conferences, the terms of a moral contract, reiterated in the
draft resolution, were concluded between the international
community and the new authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The primary responsibility for implementation
of the peace process falls to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves, who, over the next two years,
must assume a growing share of the responsibilities borne
or coordinated today by the international community.

If these authorities do not honour their commitments
and do not participate actively in the reconstruction of their
civil society, they will not be able to expect the
international community or the major donors, first among
them the European Union, to continue to assume the
political, military and economic burden of efforts to
implement the peace process and to reconstruct the country.

In that context, France will support the draft
resolution. The text authorizes the establishment of the
Stabilization Force, which will take over from the
Implementation Force (IFOR) for a planned duration of 18
months, which should ensure a safe environment for the
activities of the international community during the
consolidation period of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement. This text more generally reflects the agreements
reached between the international community and the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina on how to approach
the coming two years.

Among the main points, I will mention four: the
commitment of all the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to participating without reservation in the
establishment of a democratic Bosnian State, which will
require the implementation without delay and in good faith
of new common institutions; and the obligation to cooperate
without reservation with the International Tribunal for the
prosecution of crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia,
which will entail - in particular for all the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina - the obligation to surrender all
persons indicted. The responsibilities of the parties is very
clear on this important point and was the subject of specific
reference in the Conclusions of the Paris Conference, in
which the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
recognize the link that the international community may
make between their cooperation with the Tribunal and
assistance in the reconstruction of the country.

As regards the reaffirmation and strengthening of the
substantial role of the High Representative, the experience
of the past year has confirmed his centrality in the
effective implementation of the Peace Agreement. In
officially confirming his powers to coordinate
international action, interpret the Peace Agreement and
counsel the parties, we will give the High Representative
the means to play the full role as an initiator and monitor
that is essential to the success of the consolidation plan
over the next two years. Beyond the mechanisms, the
office of the High Representative depends on the high
calibre of the incumbent. France wishes to take this
opportunity warmly to congratulate Mr. Carl Bildt for the
work he has already done.

Finally, in agreement with the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, a more active mandate should be
defined for the International Police Task Force. In this
area, however, the primary responsibility for progress will
once again fall to the Bosnian parties, whom the
international community is prepared to encourage and
assist but cannot and should not replace.

It is for all of those reasons that France will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

