Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
I should like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, and to thank him for his important
statement. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, for his clear and
detailed introduction of the Secretary-General's report
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET).

My delegation welcomes the significant progress
that has been made in Timor-Leste during UNMISET's
consolidation phase. That progress is reflected in the
establishment of stable institutions, the holding of the
first local elections, the adoption by Parliament of a
number of legislative measures, and the
implementation of steps to resolve the problem of
former combatants.

Timor-Leste has continued to make progress in
establishing its institutions and the rule of law, thanks
to the commitment and resolve of its leaders and the
people of Timor-Leste. With the assistance of
UNMISET and bilateral and multilateral aid, the
capacities of the public administration and judicial
systems and of the security bodies have expanded and
become stronger. We are pleased that relations between
Timor-Leste and its neighbours have improved
steadily. In that regard, we particularly welcome the
good relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We
call upon them to expand their bilateral cooperation in
order to resolve outstanding issues, including the
important problem of border demarcation. We also
hope that an agreement will soon be concluded
between Australia and Timor-Leste with regard to the
exploitation of mineral resources in the Timor Sea.

We note from the report of the Secretary-General
that many tasks in important sectors are yet to be
completed. In that regard, we believe that international
assistance remains critical to the long-term security
and stability of the country, as well as to its sustainable
development, especially in the areas identified by the
transition working groups - including in border
management and control, the training of a professional
police force, the development of State institutions and
respect for democratic governance and human rights.

Given the conclusions made by the Secretary-
General after a review of all the recent developments,
Timor-Leste has not yet reached the critical threshold
of self-sufficiency. International assistance therefore
remains vital. My delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to maintain
UNMISET, with reduced personnel, for an additional
period so that it may complete its tasks and build upon
the progress already achieved.

It is incumbent upon the international community
to continue to lend its assistance to the development of
Timor-Leste and to participate in its economic
reconstruction. We are convinced that, thanks to the
efforts of the Government and people of Timor-Leste,
along with the support of the United Nations and the
international community, Timor-Leste will continue to
make progress in nation-building.

