Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I am
sorry about the unorthodox order of my presentation.

May I join those colleagues who have welcomed
Minister Zebari's presence with us and, in particular,
the words he addressed to us today, which were very
powerful and moving. I think this is an occasion for all
of us to see, rightfully in this Chamber, a representative
of Iraq deliver that sort of message.

We are also particularly grateful to Lakhdar
Brahimi for what he has done and the key role he
played in actually facilitating the production of what
has been described as the best possible outcome
achievable. What we now need is the maximum
support of the international community and for all of us
to support Iraq, its Government and its people.

I particularly welcome Minister Zebari's very
strong endorsement of the draft text on the table. I read
very carefully the comments he made on it and I was
struck that the points he emphasized are points which
the Council has addressed and which, I believe, are in
the process of being fully reflected in the text that is
before us. It is right that the text should emphasize that
full sovereignty, without any qualification in the
security dimension or elsewhere, will pass to the
people of Iraq and to the Government which is now
coming into being. It is right that the United Nations
should take on the leading role in the political process.
The Minister put forward very clearly the view of the
incoming Government that the multinational force is
necessary, that it is needed and that it is wanted.

It is on that basis - the prior condition for the
presence of the force to continue - that this Council
should give a fresh mandate for that operation to
continue. But it should do so in a way that
demonstrates that the force will operate in partnership
with the Government, that there will be a process set in
train and that both the draft resolution before us and
the letter which we expect very soon from the Prime
Minister of Iraq will set out precisely how the
Government wants the force to operate. This
partnership should be based on an understanding that a
national security council should tackle the big issues
and should work to get agreement on precisely how the
force should carry out certain operations and the broad
strategic direction for the operation of the multinational
force.

Minister Zebari laid stress on sovereignty, but
none of that process is inconsistent either with Iraq's
having full sovereignty or, at that same time - as the
Minister recognized, and I hope colleagues heard this
very clearly - with the troops having the right of self-
defence and the detailed implementation of operations
resting under the military command of the
multinational force. That is my understanding of the
partnership. I am pleased that the Minister seems to
have exactly the same perception of that and that it
should come through very clearly in the draft
resolution which we will adopt quite soon and in the
letter which actually sets out, as I said before, the
Government's wishes - that is to say, Iraqi security
forces answering to the Minister's Government.

In the view of the British Government, however,
if consent for the multinational force is withdrawn,
then the pillar on which the force is based also falls. It
would be clear that the force could not continue, but
that is not the emphasis that any of us wants to put on
it. The Minister has rightly put it in the positive - the
positive that Iraq needs and wants this force and that
that is why we have a partnership.

The partnership has to go much wider. It is what
the international community must now do to rally
behind Iraq and to support Minister Zebari and the
courage that he and is colleagues are displaying to take
Iraq through this interim stage, through elections and to
end of a political process. I think the United Nations
can do more, give him every support in that endeavour
and wish him every success with it.

