Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to note your presence here today, Madam
President, and to warmly welcome you among us. I
would also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Elliot
Ohin, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Togo. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Tekeda Alemu for
their briefings.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Madam President, on the work
of your delegation in holding the presidency of the
Council for the month of April, in particular that of our
dear and respected friend Mr. Eugene-Richard Gasana.
We would also like to say how much we appreciate
everything the Rwandan delegation is doing on a daily
basis as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council.

By way ofintroduction, I would like highlight three
points.

First, we are glad to see the imminent adoption of
the draft presidential statement with the conviction that
it is an important result of the work of the Council.

Secondly, we would like to point out that African
conflicts and subjects, as is well known, account for the
majority of the meeting time of the Council. I would
also point out that it is also true that a great deal of
progress has been made by most African countries,
the African Union and other subregional organizations
in the prevention of conflicts, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in questions of development and in the
protection and promotion of human rights, democracy,
the rule of law and constitutional order.

The third point I would make is that, given the
fundamental principle of sovereignty, the primary
responsibility for peace and security in Africa is the
responsibility ofAfrican countries themselves. It is their
peoples and their Governments that must peacefully
resolve conflicts and deal with the deep-seated causes
of those conflicts.

At the same time, Argentina is a firm believer in
the importance of the support that the African countries
should receive from the international community and
the United Nations. Such support should be based on
a policy not of intervention but of multilateralism, and
should lead to cooperation and complementarity, not to
new forms of colonialism.

Since we have been asked to focus on the structural

aspects of preventing conflicts, there are, in our view,
five aspects that are key to tackling the possible causes of
conflict. First are justice and the fight against impunity
as factors in preventing conflict. We know there can
be no lasting peace withoutjustice. Argentina, from its
own experience, is convinced that combating impunity
helps to prevent conflicts, unite society and strengthen
democracy, since suchjustice sends a clear message that
serious crimes will not be tolerated. In that context, the
role of the international ad hoc tribunals established by
the Council has paved the way for a new phase, an era
of accountability, one that is another step on the road
to a universal fight against impunity. In that regard,
the International Criminal Court is unquestionably
one of the most notable achievements of multilateral
diplomacy. Since it was established, a little more than
10 years ago, it has become the centre of the criminal
justice system for the international community. We feel
that the emerging international criminal justice system
is the present and future true and legal path of "never
again" for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The reference in today's draft presidential
statement to the international criminal justice system is
simply a reference to the International Criminal Court,
which is why Argentina regrets that it was not possible
to actually name the Court in that statement.

The second aspect is the regulation of the arms
trade. The peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations represent a cost of $7 billion a year, while the
estimated cost of armed conflict worldwide amounts to
$400 billion yearly. In the case ofAfrica, it is estimated
that armed violence costs $18 billion annually. As the
Secretary-General pointed out, 60 years of United
Nations peacekeeping operations have cost the
international community less than six weeks' worth of
current military expenditures. That demonstrates that,
without adequate regulation of international transfers
of conventional weapons, the human and financial costs
will continue to be immense. That is why the General
Assembly's adoption, on 2 April, of the Arms Trade
Treaty (resolution 67/234B) represents a historic step.

Thirdly, there are the economic, social and
environmental aspects. We need a comprehensive
approach to the effective prevention of conflicts.
One such aspect can be found in the related issues of
climate and security. Years of unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption have inflicted significant
damage on the natural equilibrium of our climatic
system. While it is true that dealing substantively with
the issue of climate change falls within the purview of
another area of the Organization, I would also like to
recall here the principle of shared but differentiated
responsibility. The industrialized nations bear the
major part of the responsibility for avoiding the
outcome represented by the most pessimistic forecasts
of the impact of climate change on our countries. The
international community should continue to work
for the development of African countries so that that
region, which will be seriously affected by climate
change, will possess the means necessary for mitigation
and adaptation.

Concerning food security, about 1 billion people
around the world are currently suffering from hunger.
In the past four years, Africa was the only region where
the number ofhungry people increased, from 175 million
to 239 million, which, with almost 20 million more
added, amounts to almost one quarter of its population.
Is that the fault of Africans? Argentina believes that
world hunger is not the fault of the world's peoples; it
is not the result of volatile food prices, as some would
like us to believe, but the result of poverty and the
unfair distribution of wealth. Prices that are being
kept artificially low by protectionist international
agricultural trade and subsidies from developed
countries are one of the principal reasons, affecting
vast areas of the world. That is why we believe that
the solution should be centred around increased food
production with access for more people.

Another fundamental issue that Argentina believes
should be addressed is financial speculation, through
the application of adequate, balanced regulations and
instruments - something that is greatly needed by
African countries and those in Latin America and
the Caribbean. Briefly, concerning the current global
economic and financial crisis, I would also like to say
that African, Latin American and Caribbean countries
are united in demanding changes to the international
monetary and financial system. Only substantial
change to the rules, structure and operations of the
International Monetary Fund and other institutions can
ensure that the monetary system is compatible with the
goals of a sustainable world economy. The financial
system cannot continue to operate as though nothing
had happened. We are being given the same recipes that
led to disaster before in poor and developing countries,
and today they threaten social cohesion and the quality
of democracy in developed countries.

Briefly, concerning human rights, I would like to
highlight the importance of the Council's inclusion of
the gender perspective and the equality of women in
peacekeeping operations in terms of the prevention
of violence against women and children and their full
participation in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution. We also feel that it is essential
to maintain and strengthen development assistance and
the capacities of democratic States. In that context, we
believe that the protection of the rights of children and
providing young people with equal opportunities and
conditions are crucial.

Fifthly, concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes, Argentina firmly believes that any method
that settles disputes peacefully is also worth using for
settling conflicts. In that regard, we stress the special
role that the Charter of the United Nations entrusts to
the Secretary-General in the area of good offices and
mediation, as well as the obligation incumbent upon
all Member States to consent to the peaceful resolution
of disputes.

We have great respect for the fraternal nations of
Africa with regard to issues that my country believes
affect them, situations where peace in Africa is
constantly threatened. We stress the importance of the
African Union's growing participation through various
mechanisms in helping to settle conflicts affecting
Africa. The United Nations should not impose formulas
that claim to be a rigid road map for our peoples while
representing the interests of only a few.

Given that most of the situations being considered
by the Security Council have their origin in Africa,
Argentina considers that, in any Security Council
reform, the issue of the representation of the African
continent in this body is particularly important. It is
also essential that we rigorously implement the arms
embargoes and request States to seek to ensure that
their citizens or companies avoid violating those
sanctions. Similarly, the fundamental debate on the
scope, mandates and nature of peacekeeping operations
must be considered in the light of the experience gained
in Africa. There are many challenges, but undoubtedly
we are on our way to finding and establishing the rules
of the game for a more fair, egalitarian and balanced
world.

